First of all, I thank Stuart McMillan for bringing the issue to the chamber. I have to say, though, that I regret the tone of some of his comments. I do not imagine that he does, but I certainly do. When I attended Holyrood magazine’s recent food conference, I noted that the debate shifted to an issue that was not part of the programme: the extreme contrasts in Scotland with regard to food. The Parliament often has debates on Scotland’s food and drink sector and celebrates how good our export figures are or the excellence of our produce. However, there are people in Scotland who are living in food poverty, and we must address such extremes. Food poverty is increasing across the UK. Indeed, the Trussell Trust’s briefing makes it clear that the number of people whom it supports has increased dramatically. Benefit changes have undoubtedly pushed families and individuals into situations where they can longer feed themselves or their households. For many people, the benefit cuts have been punitive. Moreover, emergency food is often needed because benefit payments have been delayed or because of difficulties and delays in the transition between different payments. Surely those in the chamber who support the welfare changes cannot support a welfare system that is dysfunctional and failing in its administration. For those who are living comfortably, a few days’ delay in their income will make little difference, but for those who are poor and living on the margins of society, such delays can have a big impact. The CAS briefing shows that more than two thirds of clients who needed a food parcel were experiencing issues with the benefits system. However, if we see that as the only reason, we cannot fully address the problem. Those who work in the field have cited redundancy, the low-wage economy, zero-hours contracts, mental health problems and crisis situations as examples of the other pressures that people are facing. Income is key to addressing the issue. Wages and benefits have not kept pace with the increase in the cost of living, which includes the increase in food prices. Indeed, Barnardo’s briefing says that between 2007 and 2012 food prices rose between 19 and 47 per cent. Such figures also contribute to the debate on how we can make food affordable while still providing a fair income to the producer. Last week, the Parliament debated the common agricultural policy. Many of our farmers receive public money to produce their excellent produce and, although they provide multiple benefits for our environment and rural economies, we simply cannot get away from the fact that lots of people in Scotland cannot afford to buy that produce. It might be difficult for some to imagine that the cost of a family meal could be beyond a person’s budget but, as Kez Dugdale pointed out, some people are in a desperate situation. Food banks have had to create kettle packs for people who have no cooking facilities or money to pay their energy bills. There has been a growth in food banks in my own region, with six now open in Fife. When I visited the Trussell Trust in Dundee, I spoke to Ewan Gurr about the organisation. I also recently attended the launch of Kirkcaldy Foodbank and would like to recognise the hard work of the churches and faith groups across Kirkcaldy that came together to create it. Support from the community and local businesses has been strong, but the demand puts pressure on communities. Yesterday, the local papers reported that Glenrothes food bank had run out of food and was unable to provide support to people. There are also food banks in Leven, Dunfermline, Cupar and Anstruther—indeed, they are all across the kingdom, from poor to affluent communities. From my visits to food banks and from talking to volunteers, I have seen that the creation of food banks is a community response to the increasing poverty that people see around them and that it is a charitable act. However, I have also seen that people do not accept that it has to be this way. In his recent and deeply regrettable comments on food banks, Iain Duncan Smith looked to deny their reality, but if we accept their reality we can deal with the issues that have given rise to the need for them. We should support food banks but our aim, through measures such as a living wage, a functioning and fair welfare system and better pay and conditions at work, must be to see the end of them.

We live in an increasingly complex world. Global trade and communications have changed so much about the way we live and the nature of the challenges that society has to face, so a response to the growth in the trade and popularity of new psychoactive drugs must address those issues. The combination of legal and illegal substances in new psychoactive substances, the international nature of their production, the fact that sale is on the internet, and the struggle of our knowledge and education to keep pace with growth in availability are all challenges that we face in preparing an appropriate and effective response. The Scottish Drugs Forum briefing states that “an adequate response will be multifaceted and involve local, national and international initiatives and co-operation.” This is not an issue that Scotland can address alone. It is difficult to identify the scale of the problem in Scotland. We have little information on the prevalence of new psychoactive substances, although I recognise the on-going work that the minister outlined in her opening statement. I recently met Clued Up Project, which is a drug and awareness project in Kirkcaldy that was set up almost 18 years ago. It provides substance misuse support and information to young people under the age of 25, as well as employability services to those over the age of 18. In my discussion with the project about its work, one of the most striking issues was the growth and popularity of legal highs. We discussed the challenge of the growing prominence of new drugs and how organisations such as Clued Up provide services, support and advice. Having worked in alcohol misuse and illegal drug taking for many years, and having, therefore, a lot of knowledge in those areas, I know that the growth of new drugs presents challenges in providing accurate information as well as in identifying appropriate support and health services. I was interested in the most recent Scottish schools adolescent lifestyle and substance use survey, which suggests that use is not that common among young people and is having little overall impact. That is difficult to establish; this is an area that is developing quickly and the growth in internet sales makes it difficult to establish some figures. Clued Up is carrying out its own survey of young people to try to establish the prevalence of new psychoactive substances in Fife. The survey launched in December and Clued Up has already received more than 200 returns. Initial analysis shows that more 12 to 18-year-olds have heard of what they recognise as legal highs, and have a higher level of knowledge than 19 to 25-year-olds. The problem has the potential to grow, which perhaps gives us an indication of where services need to be focused. Alcohol and drug partnership budgets are weighted towards pharmacological treatments, with less emphasis on prevention and early intervention work. Although some of the evidence around the use of more commonly problematic illegal drugs suggest that concentrating resources in those areas is appropriate, increasingly evidence is being gathered by those who work in the field that shows that legal highs are a growing problem, in which young people are more engaged and for which they are clearly the target market. That suggests that refocusing of some support services is needed. Alongside specialist support services, schools play a vital role in educating young people on the issue as well as in supporting young people with the drug issues that they face. We need to reflect on whether there is adequate training and awareness raising among teachers. We have to ask whether we have appropriate and sufficient services to deal with growing use, and how we should address the perception of acceptability and legitimacy. Figures that Crew 2000 collected over the 2013 festival season suggest that almost 10 per cent of reported drug use was of new drugs. Brighton opened the first legal-high clinic to try to raise awareness of the dangers of abusing such substances and to help people to quit their addictions. Leeds now offers a similar service. From the evidence that was collected by Crew 2000 we see common education challenges. There are difficulties in providing accurate information and advice on new drugs, and there is difficulty in understanding the effects of multiple drug use, in understanding appropriate dosage, and in identifying and addressing dependency issues. The evidence also highlights that new drugs are popular in settings in which there are drug-testing regimes because detection methods cannot keep pace with the production of new substances. So-called legal highs are just drugs that are not yet regulated by law, often because they are so new that not enough is known about them to decide whether regulation is needed. That makes establishing a public health response to them pretty difficult, but it is important that we challenge the myth that “legal” means safe. One of the biggest challenges is about how to deal with growth in production and use of new psychoactive substances. To move a substance from a legal class to an illegal class often looks like the solution, but the market is lucrative and innovative. Replacements are soon created, marketed and sold while legislators struggle to keep pace with what is happening. The chemical codes of banned substances can be changed quickly to make them legal again. In 2011, for the third year in a row, a record number of substances—49—were detected for the first time throughout Europe. The pace of change in, and the variety of, the products means that suppliers maintain the ability to sell them in retail outlets. That is a growth area in Scotland and throughout Europe, as members from Angus highlighted. However, online sales, about which other members spoke, also increase products’ availability and present marketing opportunities that are different from those that are provided by the high street retail sector. In one year, the number of online retailers has doubled to at least 639 online shops. Online sales are extremely difficult to tackle, and that is not something that the Scottish Government can do alone. We need also to explore how we can close loopholes that allow the products to be sold and marketed in high street shops, in particularly in terms of planning and labelling for human consumption. However, online shopping presents a whole other set of challenges, and we should recognise that it is clearly the growth retail area. The UK Government review is due to report on regulatory and legislative measures in the spring. The continuing culture of and—we must acknowledge it—popularity of illegal drug taking suggest that even if we increase the number of banned substances, the challenges to public health and wellbeing will not go away. Therefore, as a priority, we must support the agencies that work in communities throughout Scotland and which are at the front line of addressing the continuing challenge.

As we all recognise, farming plays an important role in Scotland’s economy, society and wellbeing. Our agricultural sector not only produces food for our country and beyond but contributes to the vitality of our rural communities. With CAP reform, we have an opportunity before us to ensure that the support, which is public money, is directed to areas where it will deliver the widest public benefit. That must be at the centre of the Scottish Government’s deliberations as it comes to decisions about how the resources are allocated in Scotland. When we consider what happens with some of the current subsidies—subsidy being given to land that is not actively being used; highly profitable businesses receiving significant sums of public money while others receive no or little support even though it could be argued that they provide as much if not greater community and social benefit; and new entrants being excluded from support even though they are the future of the sector—we can see that we have an opportunity to deliver a fairer system that is clear about what it values. Of course, that is not easy. A good case can always be made on why a business or an organisation should receive subsidy and what the impact of any changes to its subsidy would be, but choices will have to be made. However, we must remember that this is public investment and that we are facing significant challenges in ensuring the viability of some rural communities, tackling food poverty and achieving our environmental targets for the climate, water and biodiversity. We need meaningful reform. I turn to Labour’s amendment. During our previous debate on the common agricultural policy, the Parliament was united on the issue of convergence uplift. As one of the four signatories to the cross-party letter to Owen Paterson, I will not defend the coalition Government’s decision. It was the wrong decision. However, I cannot take the cabinet secretary’s view that separation is the answer and that, until then, any attempt to hold a review within the UK is futile. Within the EU, Scotland has a low per-hectare average. If payments are calculated by different measures such as per farm unit or per employee, Scotland compares far better. However, per hectare is the accepted, chosen measurement, and Scotland’s calculation is the reason for the UK’s additional support. During the previous debate on the CAP, we all agreed that the UK Government should recognise the challenge of Scotland’s distinct and diverse agricultural needs and transfer the full convergence uplift to Scotland. That it did not do so was a great disappointment not just to everybody here in the Parliament but to the farmers and rural communities across the country that will miss out. However, as we enter today’s debate, it would be a mistake to look back at that decision and use it to further political agendas, particularly around the constitution. We owe it to our rural communities to look forward and not just have an open and frank discussion on how we implement this CAP, but take a longer-term approach. For that reason, we should not be dismissive of any potential review that the UK Government proposes. NFU Scotland has a written commitment from Owen Paterson that a review of the internal allocation of CAP funds will be concluded by 2017. That the review will not change the current budget is regrettable, but it is perhaps understandable given the changes in funding arrangements that may have to take place at its conclusion. The cabinet secretary is mistaken simply to dismiss the review. He may be sceptical that such a review will take place—certain farmers might be, too—but we cannot put our agricultural sector on pause and just hope that everything works and sorts itself out. The Government must start working towards a review, complete the move from historical to area-based payments and hold the UK Government to undertaking its promised review. This area is not a political football to be used during a debate on the constitution. It is about the future of the livelihoods of farmers and rural communities the length and breadth of Scotland. The onus is now on the Scottish Government to make the change from historical to area-based payments. The current consultation on direct payments represents a significant step forward, and that is to be welcomed.

I am sure that the member’s point, which is about the importance of activity, will be focused on during the debate. I will come on to make some comments on that. The movement from historical to area-based payments can deliver a fairer distribution between large farms, which are often our most economically viable farms, and those that need the subsidies to survive and contribute to their local economy. To have a thriving farming sector, the sector must be varied and must include smaller farms and high nature value farming. We need appropriate timescales for that. I was pleased to hear the cabinet secretary’s comments about the Irish tunnel model. That model would result in entitlements from historical funding being retained decades after allocations were announced, which would be unacceptable. The Scottish Government has argued for convergence across the EU and the UK. We need such principles to be applied to the distribution of funds in Scotland. I welcome the consultation that is taking place, but the cabinet secretary must hear a broad range of views. NFU Scotland will have legitimate concerns about how changes are implemented, but there is an appetite for redistribution to areas that need support most and where evidence shows that that would provide the greatest public benefit. For payment regions, we need something that is as simple as possible and is fair. Guarding too much against maps being too complex runs the risk of maps being simplistic and possibly less effective. We have the opportunity to address slipper farming, which has for too long been a negative aspect of CAP payments. It is vital to end that practice as soon as possible and to take all appropriate action to ensure that no further loopholes can be exploited. It is important that all CAP payments are as transparent and accountable as possible. We are not talking just about farming businesses and food production. Agriculture is one of Scotland’s biggest sectors for carbon emissions. In 2011, agricultural and rural land use accounted for 20 per cent of Scotland’s total emissions. The agricultural sector can do more to contribute to meeting our climate change targets, along with our biodiversity targets. A stronger move must be made towards sustainable farming, which will benefit not just our farmers but our rural communities and the wider population. The CAP was supposed to deliver for the environment, but it is agreed that it has been disappointing on that so far. Greening is the key policy that is designed to deliver for the environment and we have opportunities to maximise what it can deliver. There is the prospect of equivalent practices for meeting greening targets, which could lead to the use of practices that suit Scotland’s needs and priorities. Which of the equivalent practices does the cabinet secretary believe would best achieve those priorities? Is he minded to allow greening requirements to be met through the three standard greening measures or equivalent practices? We need greater environmental effort. Some may point to the greening aspect of pillar 1, which is welcome, but as arable farming makes up only 18 per cent of our agricultural area it is clear that the benefits from greening will be limited. The transfer between pillars 1 and 2 is therefore important. NFU Scotland called for a 5 per cent transfer, but Scottish Environment LINK and others called for the full 15 per cent. The advantages of a boosted pillar 2 are clear. I appreciate that the cabinet secretary was pulled in two directions, but there are benefits for the farming sector in a boosted pillar 2. Pillar 2 funding largely stays in the agricultural sector, but the money is more targeted and objective focused. The LEADER programme for rural communities also gets a small share of the funds, but it can deliver so much for community sustainability and it provides a clear public benefit. We should see more support for that. It was disappointing that the Government decided on a 9.5 per cent transfer between pillars 1 and 2, in comparison with 12 per cent in England and 15 per cent in Wales. Given the Government’s commitment to climate change and biodiversity targets and to delivering sustainable development for rural communities, I was disappointed that we did not go beyond 9.5 per cent. How will the cabinet secretary use degressivity and capping—if he is minded to use them—to ensure further funds for pillar 2? As the consultation document says, that could provide anything upwards of €1 million per year and potentially between €5 million and €10 million per year. I am interested in hearing further comments from the cabinet secretary on that. We languish close to the bottom of the list for spending on agri-environment schemes, as we spend only €39.90 per hectare, in comparison with the EU 27 average of €235 per hectare. That is partly because of the overall amount that Scotland receives from the UK and because of Scotland’s slower response to the programme and to engaging in the agenda, but it is also because of decisions that the Scottish Government has taken on how to cut the cake. Comparable countries such as Ireland, Slovenia and Finland, which also have large areas of low-intensity land, spend significantly higher amounts on agri-environment schemes, while spending similar amounts on less favoured areas. The cabinet secretary has difficult decisions to make, and it will not be possible to please everyone as he seeks to strike the right balance. However, this is an opportunity. We want reform; we do not want to end up with the status quo. We must set realistic timescales, which prioritise the benefits that can come from change. I move amendment S4M-08857.2, to leave out from “agrees” to end and insert: “acknowledges cross-party representations to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs for the full convergence uplift to come to Scotland and expresses deep disappointment at the UK Government’s final decision on budget allocations; notes the proposed commitment from the UK Government to conduct a review of budget allocations throughout the UK; believes that this review must be transparent and based on objective analysis; notes that, while the Welsh Government transferred 15% and the UK Government transferred 12% of pillar 1 funds to pillar 2, the Scottish Government transferred 9.5%; believes that this limits the potential for delivery of the Scotland Rural Development Programme and targeted agri-environmental initiatives and is significantly below the 15% maximum called for by environmental organisations, and supports the ongoing consultation process that must result in the implementation of reform that best suits the needs of farmers, rural communities and the environment.”

Does the member accept that, if there were to be greater transfer between pillar 1 and pillar 2, the funds available in pillar 2 would be largely available to the farming sector, which would be the main beneficiary of that funding?

Will the member give way?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its response is to the air pollution monitoring results for 2013. (S4T-00582)

It is estimated that nearly 1,600 people die prematurely each year in Scotland as a direct result of exposure to poor-quality air, with air pollution contributing to heart attacks and lung disease. It is clear that it is a serious issue. However, although local authorities have the lead responsibility they do not necessarily have the levers to ensure that they can deliver. We need greater leadership from the Scottish Government and a firm commitment from it on when communities will be able to be confident that the air that they breathe is not harmful to their health. As the minister will know, we are currently breaking the legal limits in a number of areas. When will that be reversed? Will the low-emissions strategy commit to a timescale to improve Scotland’s air quality?

In his first reply the minister said that emissions have fallen since 1990, but that is largely attributed to the closure of steel plants rather than a reduction in poor air quality in urban areas. In 2010, transport emissions accounted for 24 per cent of Scotland’s total emissions but in 2011 for over 25 per cent. Overall, transport emissions have increased since 1990. There is also worrying research that shows that deprived areas have the highest levels of poor air quality. Does the minister share my concern that the active travel campaign is helpful as far as it goes but that there needs to be greater emphasis on reducing traffic congestion in urban areas and on ensuring that we have the right levers in place to make that happen? Does he think that that should include a clear commitment to addressing air quality in the final national planning framework 3 and Scottish planning policy?

I am pleased that the cabinet secretary acknowledges the cross-party campaign in calling for Scotland to receive the uplift. What representations has he made to the UK Government on the terms of the review of the budget allocations within the United Kingdom? Does he accept the importance of Scotland moving from historic payments to area-based payments in order to achieve that and move forward with the review?

I am pleased to speak in this debate on Fife Gingerbread’s teen parent project, which is based in Kirkcaldy. I welcome the guests to the gallery and thank David Torrance for securing the time to have the debate. Fife Gingerbread is a great organisation that runs a number of projects and services for families across Fife. Established as an association for one-parent families, it has worked in Fife since 1987, and during that time it has gone from strength to strength. A positive, down-to-earth group of people work for the organisation and always make people feel welcome if they visit any of their projects. Fife Gingerbread co-ordinates a number of projects including Dads Rock and the new pimp my purse project, which David Torrance is very keen on, and it is a keen partner in the Levenmouth gateway project, the official launch of which I was delighted to attend last year. Fife has a good record of positive partnership working and Fife Gingerbread is often found at the heart of that. This evening the focus is on Fife Gingerbread’s excellent teen parent project, which is running in Kirkcaldy. I congratulate it on securing almost £50,000 from the Big Lottery young start initiative, which will support the project for a further year. The award of that money is a credit to Fife Gingerbread’s hard work and dedication and the positive results that it is getting from that work. Before I became an MSP I worked for the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and I know from the experience of its members how much work and time has to go into funding applications, as well as the level of detail that often is required. Although the one-year funding is very welcome, it will not be long before the teen parent project has to start to look for the money for next year. We need to ensure that funding for the voluntary sector supports the sustainability of projects and that the maximum amount of an organisation’s time is spent on delivery and not just on securing its financial future. However, the Big Lottery’s support provides stability for another year, which is very much to be welcomed. We know that Scotland has one of the highest teen pregnancy rates in western Europe and that Fife’s rates are higher than those in the rest of Scotland. As Mary Fee and others have described, the reasons for teenage pregnancy are complex and often unique to each individual. Appropriate sexual health education and access to services are important for every generation, not just teenagers, but services can be variable for young people, depending on where they live or which school they go to. I took part in a schools panel debate in Kirkcaldy last year, and the teenagers in the hall were very positive about the new services that were being offered in their schools. It is important that young people have choices and that their decisions are informed. We should not ignore the fact that some young couples make a positive decision to start a family young. However, like those from any other age group who start a family, they should have access to appropriate support and advice when needed. Being a teen parent can be challenging. Young parents might face changes in their relationship or finances, and there is the possibility of disruption to their education, whether that is at school, college or university. They might have to review their accommodation options. The younger someone is, the more likely they are to have fewer available resources. Also, there are the additional financial pressures that anybody experiences in starting a family. Of course, having a new baby is a wonderful thing and teen parents should be supported to be able to enjoy that experience and give the baby a good start in life. The teen parent project provides good advice and support for young parents on a range of issues. It recently supported the open me campaign, on the importance of opening intimidating-looking mail. The teen parent project provides a positive, welcoming and inclusive forum for support. Before the debate, I looked at Fife Gingerbread’s submission to the Health and Sport Committee’s inquiry into teenage pregnancy. The comments of young mums on the project sum up why it is so valuable and deserving of support. The young mums said that they would only go to groups that were appropriate for their age and designed for their age group. They said: “The groups are the best. Just being able to get out the house and away from your partner. Seeing other young parents and getting to talk to them and let the children play.” I give the project all the best wishes for the future and I am pleased to recognise its good work.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what support is available to touring exhibitions. (S4O-02723)

The queues of people that who were outside Parliament to see the great tapestry of Scotland show what a fantastic project that was. I am pleased to see that it is about to go on tour, and I am calling for the tapestry to come to Fife—I suggest that the newly refurbished Kirkcaldy galleries would be an ideal venue for it. What analysis has the Scottish Government made of the economic benefit that such touring exhibitions can bring to a local economy and how much they contribute to local arts programmes?

Will the cabinet secretary outline the implications of the United Kingdom Government’s revisions of the energy company obligation in terms of their impact on the delivery of Scotland’s climate change targets and fuel poverty targets?

2. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met the Royal College of Nursing Scotland and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02688)

A survey that the RCN published last week shows that more than half our nurses work more than their contracted hours. Some 58 per cent said that they are under too much pressure, which led to 55 per cent saying that they are unable to deliver the level of care that they would like to deliver. That is against a backdrop of a 21 per cent decrease in student nurse numbers since 2009. Although the increase of 100 places for the forthcoming year is welcome, it still represents a decrease of almost 17 per cent. What steps will the cabinet secretary take to monitor workforce planning at board level and ensure that it is a Government priority to have a sufficient supply of nurses in the future in order to alleviate the pressures that nurses are working under?

I welcome today’s debate in advance of the end-of-year fishing negotiations. It gives us the opportunity to speak in the interests of Scottish fishing and to demonstrate the lead that Scotland is taking in delivering sustainable fisheries. Of course there is much more progress to be made, but the level of co-operation between the fishing sector and environmental organisations such as RSPB Scotland and WWF is encouraging. Scotland’s fishing sector employs in the region of 5,000 people in the catching sector and supports key employment in supporting sectors. The fish processing sector can be vulnerable and although our produce is sent all around the world, we could do more to support our sector at home by increasing seafood consumption. Despite being an island, we are not big consumers of our produce and there could be greater promotion of seafood. This year, I supported Sainsbury’s switch the fish campaign to promote more sustainable consumer choices, and it is encouraging to see the extent to which our supermarkets support seafood. However, more can be done. For example, I would like greater emphasis to be placed on seafood on school menus. The health benefits of eating fish are clear and more could be done to promote it as an affordable and sustainable part of the Scottish diet. Our coastline and seas produce world-class produce, and we have a responsibility to ensure that there is a legacy for future generations. The industry has a significant base in Scotland but operates throughout the UK, with a common regulatory system and a UK network of harbours and fish processors. It is also an industry in which onshore operations and exports are dependent on Europe. The resource is shared, and the end-of-year negotiations are key to achieving sustainable management. The lack of a resolution to the continuing difficulty with north-east Atlantic mackerel, which has been caused by the unacceptable behaviour of Iceland and the Faroes, will again delay decision making on key North Sea stocks. The situation is becoming increasingly intractable. More and more, sanctions are becoming the only option, which is not a situation that anyone wants. It is not helpful to our fleets to have such delay and uncertainty, and it is bitterly disappointing that another year has passed without a resolution to the situation being achieved. The fishing opportunities for 2014 need to be completed as soon as possible to provide some certainty, not just to the fleets, but to the onshore sector that is dependent on their business. On the setting of North Sea cod quotas in the new year, it is important that the Scottish and UK Governments put forward a strong case to roll over the quota and not to implement the planned 9 per cent cod recovery plan cut. The cod fishery is one of our most valuable—its value is in excess of £20 million. The cod recovery plan was a response to concerning stock levels, but it needs to be reformed. Last September, the European Commission produced proposals for a new plan, but since then there has been a lack of action. The cod recovery plan is inflexible and, perversely, risks hindering conservation measures. It proposes a 9 per cent cut, but the scientific advice indicates positive stock recovery, points towards the sustainability of a rollover and identifies the potential for the quota to be revised. We can be proud that the Scottish sector has been at the forefront of developing sustainable fishery measures. In a mixed fisheries sector, that is challenging. Conservation credits and the cod catch quota scheme have been developed successfully, with the focus on the reduction of discards. In responding to the demands of a mixed fisheries sector, there needs to be flexibility in the discards plan. The upcoming proposals for discussion on effort control or days at sea are equally important. The wrong decision could have the effect of increasing discards, which we are all united in trying to address. As the briefing from WWF and the RSPB states, although the scientific advice indicates that a rollover plus up to a 10 per cent increase in quota could be implemented, there are risks attached to any increase. Any arguments for an increase in quota must involve a strong commitment from the industry—and evidence to show—that discard avoidance is increasingly being achieved and that removals and discards will not increase. Good progress has been made on cod recovery, and that cannot be put at risk. Going into the December negotiations, the focus will be on the west coast fisheries, nephrops and monkfish. Some of the headline figures for agreement present challenges for the Scottish sector. Although there is a proposed increase in the northern hake quota by 49 per cent and 20 per cent for the west coast, proposed cuts of 5 per cent for west coast haddock, 20 per cent for west coast whiting and 25 per cent for west coast and North Sea monkfish are all on the table. In addition, a 10.5 per cent cut in North Sea nephrops—or langoustines—is proposed alongside a reduction of 8.5 per cent in the west coast fishery. Those are challenging proposals, which are driven by the move towards achieving maximum sustainable yield and the forthcoming discard ban. That was always going to be difficult to achieve in a mixed fishery. Although the upcoming negotiations do not address the implementation of the discard ban, it is starting to have an impact on quota setting. The conditions are challenging for the west coast and, as the WWF-RSPB briefing sets out, a greater emphasis must be placed on the need to build a vision for the west coast fleets that moves towards sustainable, high-quality catches of a mix of species. Cod needs a chance to recover, but it is still being caught and discarded. As much as possible, we need to eliminate cod capture in smaller-mesh fisheries and make sure that it is selected out in larger-mesh fisheries. Those measures will play their part in helping to deliver a better, more secure future for fishing communities that rely on that sector. The discard ban will require effort and planning. The public outcry over discarding at sea was understandable, but we must ensure that the ban does not lead to an increase in onshore discarding. Minimising bycatch is essential, and Scotland has been at the front of new technology. However, investment is needed in science and manufacturing. A lot of good work is going on in our universities and colleges, but we need to ensure that there are strong commercial opportunities and that knowledge transfer takes place. As the cabinet secretary said, regional decision making will be key to the success or otherwise of a discard ban. We need a commonsense, flexible approach with a deliverable timescale that responds to the demands of a mixed fishery. The Scottish Fishermen’s Federation makes a pragmatic argument that that must lead to an increased quota, but any move in that direction must be balanced with the priority of maximum selectivity and discards minimisation. That detail needs to be ironed out. As this year’s negotiations take place, we will move into the implementation phase of the reformed common fisheries policy. Although the headline principles have been established, much in relation to how they will be achieved is to be determined. Today, the Scottish Fisherman’s Federation raised concerns about the final decisions on regionalisation and maximum sustainable yield. I seek assurances from the cabinet secretary that we will have meaningful regionalisation and that it will be possible to test that properly. Labour’s amendment recognises the importance of regionalisation and of reducing discards, issues that provide the backdrop to decisions that are being taken at the December Council of Ministers meeting. I move amendment S4M-08540.3, to insert at end: “; as part of the ongoing implementation of the reformed common fisheries policy, supports the drive toward regionalisation in European fisheries management, and believes that every effort must be taken to ensure that Scotland’s fishing industry is ready to implement the discard ban”.

I thank Elaine Murray for securing the debate. I first met Food Train volunteers and staff in the Scottish Parliament at a lunch time event. When I spoke to volunteers from Stirling, which is in my region, as well as older people who use the service, they were all so positive about their experience and said how much they valued it. It is remarkable that such a simple service—one that arose from the need for older people with reduced mobility to get their food shopping done regularly and freshly—can deliver so many benefits. The health benefits of staying at home for as long as possible and retaining a degree of independence are clear. I was interested to read that all service users are company members with a vested interest and democratic say in shaping the charity and its objectives. The level of involvement in the charity gives the people who use the service more of an investment in it and in its future. The regular interaction and friendship given by the volunteers is invaluable. We know about the 15-minute care visit—statutory services are under such pressure. Third sector organisations such as Food Train can help to relieve some of that pressure, as well as provide a preventative service offering care and support. There was a recent report about older people and loneliness. Age UK says that half of all people aged 75 and over live alone, and one in 10 people aged 65 or over say that they always or often feel lonely. That is more than a million people. We are familiar with some of the reasons for that. Families live further away from each other. People experience bereavement. Neighbours are around less. However, that is often a way to criticise modern society. That is not good enough. Not all communities or families are the same, and loneliness touches many people. I do not think that societal change is enough of an explanation, and anyway, what is important is how we respond to those circumstances. Society has changed and will always change, but with new models of care and an understanding of the huge variations in older people’s needs, we can improve expectations and opportunities. We must be alert to malnutrition among older people. For people who have previously fed a family, perhaps cooking for one or two people can often feel like more bother than it is worth. As Elaine Murray said, recent research from the International Longevity Centre—UK found that around 10 per cent of people over the age of 65 suffer from malnutrition and dehydration. That equates to around 89,000 older people in Scotland. The research found that malnourished people saw their general practitioner twice as often, had three times the number of hospital admissions, and stayed in hospital for three days longer than those who are well nourished. Older people who have a relationship with organisations such as Food Train, which values food and its importance, can help to address that issue. With six Food Trains across Scotland, its growth is a testament to the effectiveness and quality of the service. Securing funding is always vital for voluntary sector provision, of course. The motion highlights the support of over £500,000 from the Big Lottery Fund for Food Train in Dumfries and Galloway. Securing such support is a valuable part of its work and is important in enabling it to keep the service affordable. Stirling Food Train, which started in November 2011, has an on-going programme of fundraising from bag packing to car boot sales, textile recycling and its sponsor-a-box scheme, which encourages individuals or businesses to sponsor a Food Train box for £10 a year. I congratulate all those who contribute to that scheme. Key to the success of Food Train are the volunteers—Bruce Crawford talked about the volunteers in Stirling—who do the shopping and deliveries in a friendly and caring way. That was why I was particularly pleased to see Stirling Food Train presented with the volunteer friendly award. It was the first voluntary organisation in Stirling to be presented with that award. Food Train is a great organisation, and I am very happy to recognise its contribution. I hope that it will continue to grow into the future.

The Scottish Government has published draft regulations for a single-use bag levy, which mirrors Welsh regulations. Northern Ireland’s levy exempts hot food. The European Union recently announced proposals that are very focused on reducing plastic bag usage. What is the cabinet secretary’s view of arguments for increasing the exemption within the schedule to include paper bags that would be used for takeaway food?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions the Minister for Environment and Climate Change has had with the Minister for Housing and Welfare regarding the environmental benefits of measures to tackle fuel poverty. (S4O-02583)

Although measures such as shine on Fife and the green deal are welcome, they do not suit every household or property type. Speaking to energy action groups, I have found frustration that there is a lack of funding for smaller measures, such as energy-efficient light bulbs, draft excluders or chimney balloons. Such measures do not cost much but can be beyond the means of low-income households. Will the minister consider giving greater flexibility to the use of the climate challenge fund, so that people in need can access small measures, which can make a big difference?

Establishing the national parks was one of the early achievements of the Scottish Parliament. The legislation was steered through by Sarah Boyack, who was then a Labour minister. I am pleased that she is taking part in this evening’s debate. This year is the 10th anniversary of the creation of the two national parks: Loch Lomond and the Trossachs, and the Cairngorms. The path to establishing national parks was long. Cairngorms was first proposed in the 1931 Addison report and it took devolution to deliver the legislation and have Scotland join the global national parks movement. The 3,500 national parks across the world recognise and protect areas of outstanding natural beauty. They strengthen international reputation and demonstrate a long-term commitment to the natural environment. Indeed, the Scottish model of national parks interests people from all over Europe, as they can see that working in partnership can deliver real change and an important focus on joined-up management across conservation, the visitor experience and rural development. We know that although Scotland has much to offer—wild mountains, pristine rivers and lochs, ancient forests, stunning coastlines and islands that are rich with wildlife and history—we also face challenges in protecting and enhancing our biodiversity, getting the right balance between different interests so that the environment is not compromised, and using land, one of Scotland’s strongest resources, in a way that works in harmony with communities and supports sustainable development. I thank those members who supported the motion and enabled the debate to be held. I introduced the debate to help concentrate minds on where we go next. Two parks is surely not the end of the process, and the report, “Unfinished Business: A National Parks Strategy for Scotland”, which has been prepared by the Scottish Campaign for National Parks and the Association for the Protection of Rural Scotland, gives a strong case for further designation. I thank those organisations for their work in this area. I also thank Ramblers Scotland for the briefing that it prepared for the debate. Our experience of existing national parks shows that they can bring a wide range of environmental, social and economic benefits. The four aims of national parks, which are established in the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, are: “to conserve and enhance the natural and cultural heritage of the area, to promote sustainable use of the natural resources of the area, to promote understanding and enjoyment (including enjoyment in the form of recreation) of the special qualities of the area by the public, and to promote sustainable economic and social development of the area’s communities.” I recently sat next to Grant Moir, the chief executive of Cairngorms National Park, at a Scottish Council for Development and Industry dinner on the rural economy. I heard about the good work that Cairngorms National Park is doing, as well as some of the unavoidable challenges that it faces as the lead authority for the area. We can see how national parks can respond positively to some of the key challenges for our rural areas, such as the economy, employment and sustainability. They are a driver for growth: the Cairngorms area has survived the recession well; it has low unemployment, a growing population and good growth. Cairngorms National Park recently launched the make it yours campaign with Cairngorms business partnership, through which businesses will come together to work on an innovative and interesting approach to promote the national park brand. National parks deliver on nature conservation, and the Cairngorms nature action plan shows the way forward for delivering on the 2020 challenge on biodiversity—and all of us in the chamber know how challenging that will be. National parks are also a showcase for how sustainable development can be delivered on the ground. If members want to know where they can see cutting edge and innovative solutions that are being developed to take on the tricky issues in rural Scotland they need look only at our national parks. There is no dispute that the establishment of the parks is a good thing. The question, after 10 years, is what is next. In 2009, the Scottish Government carried out a review of the two existing parks, but the remit was fairly narrow, with a focus on the existing roles and composition. Stage 2 of the review was dropped and the opportunity to have a broader discussion was lost. In addition, although the review proposed the establishment of a national strategy group chaired by ministers, that has not materialised. Perhaps the minister will say whether such a strategy group will be forthcoming and, if so, what the timetable for that will be. I agree that a national group would be helpful and would enable discussion on a forward strategy. We know that we are in a time of financial constraint and the national parks authorities face a significant cut in next year’s and the following year’s budget. It therefore might seem unreasonable to call for further national parks, but a strategy group would allow opportunity for future planning, to set the forward path and to be clear on Scotland’s aspirations for national parks. The unfinished business report recommended a list of areas that are believed to be suitable for designation and set out the criteria used to identify the areas. We are some way off reaching an agreement on whether more parks are needed, never mind determining where those parks might be, but some interesting examples are included in the report. Designating the Cheviots would be an extension of the Northumberland national park. The border between Scotland and England runs along the ridge of the Cheviot hills and although the southern flank is in the Northumberland national park, the northern side has limited protection through areas of great landscape value designation. However, it can be argued that the Scotland side is more impressive—such an argument would not be a difficult one for the minister to make. That could be the first cross-border park in the United Kingdom; it has the potential to extend all the benefits of international attraction, tourism and marketing, as well as conservation interests across the border. The unfinished business report also argues for a coastal marine national park. That was the sense of direction prior to 2007, after which the focus on broader marine issues shifted and led to the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010. In recent evidence to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee about climate adaptation, concerns were raised about Scotland’s soft coastline and the need for greater strategic support for coastal partnerships. I ask the minister to comment on whether he sees a future for a coastal and marine national park and how that would complement other designations. The report also highlights the potential for a national park in Galloway that would encompass the national forest park, which is one of only four dark skies parks in the western world. Other members may want to highlight other areas for discussion. Next year, we will commemorate the 100th anniversary of the death of John Muir, the central figure in the worldwide national parks movement. Although the debate may move on to what should or could be designated, designation is complex and community consent and support is vital in going forward. The establishment of the boundaries is also complex and, while effective governance and management are essential, they can be tricky to get right. However, this debate is not about the detail; it is, I hope, the start of a debate on how we go forward and positively progress national parks for the future of Scotland.

I, too, have had meetings with John Mayhew and others who are interested in the issue. My impression was more that they were keen for the debate to be on the table. On the order of designation for the proposed national parks, the report states: “We consider that a pragmatic approach should be taken”. I do not get the impression that the SCNP and the APRS are calling for all seven proposed national parks to be designated; I think that they are asking for a decision for the long term and a commitment that there will be future designations, with perhaps some concentration on the order of them.

I thank the cabinet secretary for an advance copy of his statement. I share his frustration and disappointment that Scotland is not to receive the uplift in full. We agreed across the political parties that there was a valid argument for Scotland to receive that money because of our current low per hectare share. I believe that the UK Government has made the wrong decision on allocation. CAP reform is necessary and convergence is a key part of that reform. Although in proposing a review the UK Government appears to recognise the importance of that, the distribution of the funds within the UK will do nothing to deliver convergence within the UK and it is a missed opportunity. However, although I share the cabinet secretary’s disappointment, I do not come to the same conclusions about Scotland’s role within the UK. The Scottish National Party can give no guarantees on what a negotiated entry into the EU would mean for Scottish farmers and the support that they would receive now and in the future. That debate will continue over the next year, but after today the cabinet secretary needs to work with the UK Government to map out how we achieve convergence within the UK. The review, which he has been very dismissive of, is key to that. There is an opportunity to adopt a Scottish approach and to push for key asks around objective criteria, independent scrutiny and reduced timescales. Is he able to agree to that approach?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has had with the Minister for Housing and Welfare on food bank provision. (S4O-02533)

I recently visited Dunfermline Foodbank, and this week I heard about increasing demand at the Levenmouth Foodbank Community Support Project. Although benefit changes and delays are a key driver of demand, volunteers report that people with mental health issues are presenting for support. The report on health inequalities that the Scottish Government published last week showed that there is a bigger impact on mental wellbeing in areas of deprivation, which is where inequalities are increasing. The Scottish Government has rolled back some of the anti-poverty programmes that were in place. What plans does the minister have to target resources more effectively to address health inequalities?

The cabinet secretary will know that I recently wrote to him about concerns over Victoria hospital’s patient care. I thank him for the reply that I received. Given the concerns about A and E and the missed targets in Fife, is he confident that NHS Fife is in a robust position for the winter months and the challenges that are ahead?

5. To ask the Scottish Government when it will respond to the Audit Scotland report “NHS financial performance 2012/13”. (S4O-02526)

NHS Fife is not only one of the national health service boards that received brokerage to break even last year but one of the five health boards that are underfunded according to the NHS Scotland national resource allocation committee target allocation. NHS Fife received brokerage of £1.4 million this year and £1.1 million last year and Audit Scotland is raising concerns that it will prioritise paying back the loan rather than investing in services, while NHS Fife continues to be underfunded by £12 million according to the NRAC formula. What steps are being taken to deliver funding parity for NHS Fife? When does the minister expect that to be achieved?

The situation is not about Scotland being an independent member state but about Scotland having to negotiate a position in the EU, and the cabinet secretary cannot give Scottish farmers any guarantees about what funding would look like at the end of any negotiations. We are discussing an imminent decision that will be in place until 2020. The cabinet secretary has supported a significant transfer from pillar 1 to pillar 2. Does that position depend on Scotland receiving the full uplift?

10. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports Fife’s economy. (S4O-02481)

Fife has a number of major towns and their high streets are a vital part of our economy and communities. The UK Government is consulting on planning rules to encourage a change of use from retail to residential. To follow on from Nigel Don’s question, I welcome the fund that was announced earlier this week. Will the Scottish Government take steps to overcome the identified barriers, such as the restrictions on the selling of long leaseholds over shops and the 20-year limit on residential leaseholds?

Has the cabinet secretary approached the UK Government to discuss the possibility of calculating the 8 per cent on the UK’s share rather than just the Scottish share?

This is an opportune time to have a CAP debate, and we should not miss the opportunity to discuss the key issues. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s press release this morning and the way in which he has addressed the debate this afternoon. He began to lay out some of the key issues that face us in Scotland. This morning, my daughter got ready for her school harvest service with the poem about all the farmers working hard. It is important to recognise the huge contribution that farmers make to our food production and security, land stewardship, and our rural and national economies. There are significant on-going debates about food affordability and accessibility and how we reconcile impressive export growth figures with growing food poverty at home. Regardless of who receives more, or where Scotland is in a subsidy league table, farming receives significant public resources in return for a number of public benefits, some of which compete. It is important not to lose sight of that in this debate. Our focus is on how we implement the changes and try to get the best deal for those who receive the support, but we also need to ensure that we get the best deal for consumers and the wider community and economy. At the start of the process, the European Parliament identified food security as key, but that was alongside rising energy prices, climate change, environmental protection, land abandonment and the economic crisis as the set of challenges that a reformed CAP must respond to. I am not convinced that what we have before us meets that challenge. If Scotland is to respond effectively to those issues, implementation has a lot to deliver. Labour’s amendment focuses on the complex matter of the choices that we have to make in Scotland. In this phase, the decision making lies with the Scottish Government. After a pretty protracted period of negotiation, we now face a fairly tight timescale for introduction. The Scottish Government will soon consult on the issues but, as the Scottish Environment LINK briefing says: “Government clarity on objectives and desired outcomes is essential here if a ‘bun-fight’ between different farming sectors—beef versus arable versus dairy—is to be avoided.” At committee last week, the cabinet secretary laid out three options for the transfer from historical to area payments. I have previously cautioned about using the Irish tunnel model. We now have agreement on the principle of a new entrants fund. That fund is very welcome, and we should prioritise its introduction in Scotland. Perhaps in light of that, there is more room to have a more gradual approach towards convergence. However, there is a risk that the Irish tunnel model will slow reform too much and that, while it cushions the change for some, it will mean that others who are in need of support will have to wait much longer. The cabinet secretary talked about securing the Scottish clause. It would be good to have some clarity on the Scottish clause. The end of slipper farming has been a key aim of the reform, but it looks as though there is a risk that other loopholes will be created. Unintended attractions could be created that encourage some land to become eligible for pillar 1 support. The flexibility of setting a minimum stocking level seems key to the policy being effective. Will the cabinet secretary say a bit more about what the current understanding is? His press release this morning talked about “minimum activity levels”. Is he confident that that will address the issue? The cabinet secretary is fond of per hectare average comparisons. They are accurate, and I support a fairer distribution of funds throughout the EU and the UK and accept that that is the measure that is used, but those comparisons also fit the cabinet secretary’s preferred narrative. We know that the situation is much more complex than that. We can recognise how the situation came about. The payments are historical. Scotland’s 1.5 million hectares present unique farming challenges and we have worked with a system that has heavily rewarded productivity, but has not sufficiently recognised what Scotland’s less favoured farming areas deliver. The Scottish Environment LINK briefing highlights the importance of high nature value farming—I think that a few of us were at the RSPB parliamentary briefing earlier. Average per hectare calculations give a distorted picture. They mask significantly different payments. Therefore, when the cabinet secretary makes claims about farmers being £6,000 a year better off, that is really not the whole picture. The matter is not as simple as average per hectare payments. What does the figure tell us about recipients in East Lothian, who receive an average payment of over €125,000 per hectare, whereas the Highland region receives an average of just over €34? It does not tell us very much. If we look at other measures, such as per holding or per worker—that is surely an important measure if we are looking at public benefit—we will see that Scotland and the UK are much higher in the EU league tables. Scotland even receives more than the rest of the UK on some of those figures.

I accept that that is the formula that is used, but the story behind it is much more complex. It is not just about providing a fairer formula throughout the EU and the UK; it is about the decisions that Scotland will make to ensure that we have a fairer distribution within Scotland. The EU works with a per-hectare measure that one could argue is as valid as any measure, but it is not the only measure that we can look at and make comparisons with. The UK uplift is largely down to the nature of historical payments in Scotland. We are behind England on that, as changes have already been made to area-based payments in England, which have had an impact on the figures. The questions now are about how we can get a fairer, more equitable distribution of funds throughout the UK; how we can achieve a commitment to convergence from the UK Government, with a clear timetable; and how we can get a level playing field operating throughout the UK. That debate would be of more benefit to Scottish farming than a protracted negotiation into the EU. We often hear the assertion that we would see significant additional CAP funds from independence. In a debate before he became a minister, Paul Wheelhouse even claimed: “when Scotland becomes independent, the full economic benefit of convergence between member states will be delivered to Scotland automatically.”—[Official Report, 18 January 2012; c 5396.] Yet, increasingly, we see the terms of Scotland’s EU membership being questioned. The SNP claimed that it would be automatic, but it now acknowledges the need for negotiations.

That is not the situation that we face. The SNP proposes that we go into the EU as a new member state and there are concerns about the negotiations that would have to take place. What would that mean for Scottish farming? Could the SNP guarantee that payments to farmers would continue during any negotiations? Recent examples show that new member states, including those that joined in 2007, have had their direct EU payments phased in gradually, which would be disastrous for Scottish farming. I will move on to an area on which there is more agreement between us. I agree with the cabinet secretary that Owen Paterson needs to listen and respond positively to the debate. We need an equitable solution for the UK. I accept that it is a challenging negotiation for the cabinet secretary, but he will also have to deliver on the degree of redistribution that he argues for across the EU and within the UK. He must start to be clear about what level of support will be available to farming in Scotland’s more disadvantaged areas. There have been suggestions that the maximum degree of modulation from pillar 1 to pillar 2 will take place and, as the Liberal Democrat amendment highlights, that decision will have to be made quite soon. We support arguments for greater funding in pillar 2 to deliver an effective SRDP. Some people in the farming sector have raised concerns over the impact that that degree of modulation will have on pillar 1, but we need to consider our commitment to meet our environmental challenges. If we were to boost the agri-environment schemes, which have previously been cut, we could deliver benefits for both. Last week, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report clearly set out the global challenges. We know that the farming sector in Scotland has a pretty significant environmental impact, with emissions from agriculture and related land use accounting for some 20 per cent of total Scottish emissions. The example this week of John McKenzie from Dingwall, who is running a carbon neutral flying business with all the energy generated from his farm, demonstrates the commitment and innovation that exists out there to improve performance. Currently, we have no statutory measures placed on the sector and there is some way to go. It is essential that we use incentives and good practice, but we need to see more action in that area. If we could boost the funds in pillar 2, that would go some way towards helping that. The other significant area is how we implement degressivity. We need much more transparency around payments and a better explanation of how public benefit is gained from some of the large farm payments that are being made to profitable farms. The payments must be justifiable. I recently spoke to a senior figure in food and drink, and they said that the most innovative of produce, the most diverse business models and the most modern farming often come from younger farmers who have received no public subsidy but who are, nonetheless, growing businesses and have the potential to do more. The new entrants scheme will ease matters—I know that the cabinet secretary agrees that part of the solution must be to look at land availability and tenancies if we are to improve the lot of new entrants—but we must also be prepared to focus resources on where they provide the greatest public benefit. On that issue, Alyn Smith MEP commented this week that he was “disappointed the agreement didn’t go further on capping: we have simply not addressed popular concerns on this issue, and when everyone is having to tighten their belts it’s only right that the nation’s wealthiest farmers should as well.” It is now up to the cabinet secretary to address the issue and to indicate where he thinks that the balance should lie and what is proportionate and fair. We need to be clear about our priorities for implementation. We would be better spending our time today on that significant debate and sending a clear message to the UK Government about delivering a fairer funding deal throughout the UK than on making referendum arguments that have little reference to the CAP deal, which is determined now until 2020. I move amendment S4M-07892.3, to leave out from “and welcomes” to end and insert: “and believes that the focus must now shift to implementing the latest CAP agreement to best meet the needs of farmers across Scotland, including new entrants, reward active farming and support rural businesses and communities, as well as protect and enhance Scotland’s environment; recognises the tight timescale for introduction and calls on the Scottish Government to provide clarity on the transition from historic to area payments, the level of modulation from Pillar 1 to Pillar 2 and the future Scottish Rural Development Programme as soon as possible, and calls on both the Scottish Government and the UK Government to ensure that a mature dialogue is maintained in the implementation of the current agreement in order to deliver a fair outcome throughout the UK.”

Will the member take an intervention?

The current situation with opencast mining is a complex issue. Unfortunately, there are no easy answers. The precariousness of the industry must be addressed, and the challenge of restoration must be at the very heart of that process. This week, the Scottish Government announced that it has granted consent to MeyGen Ltd to develop the largest tidal turbine array in Europe and the first commercial project off these shores. Scotland has great potential to have a successful marine renewable energy industry and a renewables-focused energy sector. Our future energy needs must be met by a low-carbon economy, and we support Government and industry efforts to grow that side of our energy economy. However, we need to be realistic. We are in a transitional phase. Our current and short-term energy demands need to be met. Coal is still part of our energy mix, not least when we have Longannet coal-fired power station to feed, which produces energy for 2 million people a year. We need to get the balance right between investing in the plant to provide energy security and improve environmental performance, and shifting our dependency to more sustainable long-term energy delivery. Regardless of whether we support opencast coal, we cannot deny that the opencast coal sector has made a contribution to the Scottish economy. It is estimated to have supported around 4,500 direct and indirect skilled and well-paid jobs, primarily in economically depressed areas: 75 per cent of Scottish Coal’s direct employment was in rural areas such as South Lanarkshire and East Ayrshire, where alternative employment opportunities could be limited. We should not underestimate the impact that the demise of deep coal mining had on those areas, but although Scottish opencast coal output has been in the range of 5 million tonnes to 8 million tonnes per annum over the past 10 years, with a third of the UK’s total opencast coal production in 2010 being mined in Scotland, the industry has been facing increasing pressures. The influx of cheap overseas coal, particularly from Russia, has made it increasingly difficult to compete in the market and to make the economics of the activity in Scotland stack up. The recommendation by the ORR on track access charges for rail freight added further pressure to the sector. The subsequent proposal to take coal out of Glenmuckloch on the local road network rather than by rail is causing great concern for the local community. The inability of the sector to absorb or adapt to any kind of pressure, even in an uncertain economic climate, indicated that all was not well. Although the collapse of Scottish Coal earlier this year has been the headline story, for MSPs across the chamber who represent areas in which opencast mining takes place, the sector has been vulnerable for a while. In my region, ATH Resources underwent a number of restructurings, with staff either being made redundant or having to work in a very uncertain situation, until the company collapsed earlier this year. My colleague Helen Eadie, who represents the area, will say more about the on-going concerns, but the community deserves to have confidence that environmental concerns, including concerns about mine water pollution, will be dealt with. It is welcome that the Coal Authority has accepted responsibility for managing water discharge, but the site, like others, is still waiting for a permanent solution, and communities are stuck in limbo. It is vital that such situations are resolved as soon as possible. I know that Fife Council is working with partners to secure a solution for all the Fife sites, and that it takes restoration extremely seriously. Other colleagues will talk about the situation in East Ayrshire, which is desperate. The Scottish Government must respond to those concerns. After this year’s bad news, we are in a period of uncertainty in which it has been important to respond quickly to the pressures and to work together to provide a route through this time. We recognise the calls for an independent inquiry, but we believe that, at this point in time, we need to be focused on addressing the immediate challenges. Labour is focused on the employees and the need to secure future employment opportunities, and to highlight restoration and associated environmental concerns. Elaine Murray and I accepted an invitation to participate in the opencast coal task force, which has provided a forum to discuss the broad challenges facing the sector and take forward some immediate concerns around aspects such as training, restoration and the purchase of assets. There is a case now for adopting a more strategic response to the situation. If the task force is to serve a long-term purpose, it needs to adopt a more scrutinising role for the sector. The minister’s announcement today of a consultation on more effective regulation is welcome, but there are opportunities to improve the system at the moment through the Scottish planning policy. The task force has also considered a limited application of state aid. Will the minister give more details today on the potential for some form of compatible aid, particularly where it could support environmental protection? I thank RSPB Scotland and Friends of the Earth for their briefing paper, and the Scottish opencast communities alliance for its paper. The challenge of restoration is huge, and the criticisms of some of the agreements are justified. However, we must recognise that the situation does not always fail and that there are some positive examples of restoration. The restoration of sites is part of planning consent, and restoration bonds were put in place to cover the costs, if necessary. Part of the work of the task force has been in establishing whether the bonds are sufficient for meeting restoration costs. It is fair to say that the picture across Scotland in that regard has varied. It has been estimated that the shortfall across Scotland may be £100 million or more. A combination of factors has led to that situation, but we must ensure that there is accountability and responsibility going forward. We cannot have a situation in which communities that have lived alongside an opencast site cannot have confidence in restoration. In addition, as the RSPB has highlighted, if restoration does not happen at mines that fall within European sites protected under a habitats directive, that could be in breach of European Union wildlife law. Recently, the Court of Session accepted an application by the administrators KPMG to divest the assets of liability for restoration costs. I understand that the Scottish Government, along with SEPA, Scottish Natural Heritage and local authorities, is appealing that decision. The issues of the viability of uncommercial or low-productivity sites and their future, as well as the risks of their being abandoned, was addressed at the first meeting of the task force, with SEPA raising its concerns. The task force wrote to KPMG raising concerns over cherry picking because of fears about the future of the less lucrative sites. How do we address the future for those sites? What about the restoration of sites that are not attracting commercial interest or which have an inadequate bond? Local authorities are not in a position to carry the burden of significant restoration work. It is fine to say that companies must meet the responsibilities—I agree fully that they must be pursued relentlessly—but we must be realistic about the bankrupt state of some of the sector. We need to have credible solutions. The RSPB and Friends of the Earth have rightly raised concerns that opencast coal is not the only sector requiring restoration bonds. Landfill sites and future unconventional gas works will face similar challenges, so it does not look like a problem that will go away. There are calls for a moratorium on opencast development. In the current circumstances, I am not convinced that a formal moratorium is necessary. Local authorities are well aware of their responsibilities and the challenges that they face in dealing with existing sites, without having to approve future work. The leader of Fife Council, Alex Rowley, said recently: “Given the condition of the industry and the worldwide drop in coal prices and our experience here in Fife and indeed across Scotland I am saying that we have to be very careful with any future consents.” Alex Rowley raised the issue of bonds at the most recent meeting of the Scottish coal task force, which the Scottish Government set up, and asked the coal companies present whether they would be able to raise adequate bonds on future sites. The answer was plainly no. There is a real understanding across the local authority sector that local authorities must be extremely cautious because in some cases they are living with previous bad experience.

I am sorry, but I am really pushed for time. The member will have a chance to sum up at the end of the debate. Opencast coal has been controversial, as energy projects often are. We have recently had debates over proposed unconventional gas and biomass projects. We must be confident that the regulatory system is robust enough and fair to all interests and that there is accountability for decision making. Scottish planning policy 3 is being finalised, with five new principal policies covering sustainable economic growth, sustainable development, engagement, climate change and place making. In light of current events, that must be robust and meet the justified concerns of communities. The final draft that the Parliament considered recently did not address adequately the concerns that we are now seeing around future applications and it did not provide the necessary confidence for community protection and restoration, as well as for any developer’s responsibility. Regardless of the regulatory review, the Scottish Government must revisit Scottish planning policy in the light of current circumstances.

Do I have time, Presiding Officer?

I welcome that. I hope that Derek Mackay will look carefully at our amendment and recognise where we identify weaknesses in opencast restoration. The Scottish Government recently established the Scottish Mines Restoration Trust, which is well intentioned, but there are concerns about the lack of detail on how it will work. It is an independent organisation that was formed to help to facilitate the process for communities and other stakeholders that are involved in dealing with the legacy of opencast coal sites. Its role is to offer advice, expertise and—when appropriate—funding to facilitate plans to restore derelict sites. The trust is not a grant-awarding body and its funds are limited. It is not yet clear what advice or sources of funding it can offer. It has been recognised that restoration offers the potential for job creation. The process could have multiple benefits for communities. The trust has said that an innovative or creative approach is needed to using the resources that are in place for each site, but it is unclear how that will operate. Until a project is under way, it is perhaps difficult to appreciate how the process will work, but that does not provide the confidence that is needed for all partners. I look forward to the debate. I will move the amendment in my name as a positive contribution to the way forward in the interests of communities, our environment and meeting our future energy needs. I move amendment S4M-07712.2, to leave out from “to preserve” to end and insert: “including relevant trade unions, to preserve employment in open cast coal mining and address challenges of restoration; welcomes moves to identify improvements in the regulatory regime of the industry including appropriate protection for communities and the environment, and, in light of concerns about restoration and remediation of sites, calls on the Scottish Government to address this issue in the final Scottish Planning Policy so that local authorities are given clearer guidance to enable them to address this issue when considering whether to give planning consent for proposals.”

3. To ask the Scottish Government when it is meeting Cluff Natural Resources and what matters will be discussed. (S4O-02374)

I thank the minister for the update. He will be aware of Cluff’s proposals in Fife. Concerns have been raised by the local communities, along with environmental organisations, regarding underground coal gasification proposals for Largo Bay and Kincardine. With international pilot testing resulting in the contamination of local water, does the minister share my concerns over potential mine-water pollution in Fife? Is he confident that sufficient and robust safeguards are currently in place under the regulatory regime?

I am pleased to be having this members’ business debate, and I thank all the MSPs who supported the motion. I also thank the Dogs Trust for its campaign to promote compulsory microchipping of dogs across the United Kingdom. The Dogs Trust, which is the UK’s largest dog welfare charity, has two rehoming centres in Scotland—one in Glasgow and one in West Calder. I was pleased to visit the West Calder centre earlier this year to see its facilities and learn more about its work and the valuable role that it plays in rehoming dogs. In the past year in Scotland, the organisation has rehomed nearly 2,000 dogs. At West Calder, I also had the opportunity to learn more about microchipping and its benefits. The benefits of microchipping are widely recognised. A recent YouGov poll for the Dogs Trust suggested that 82 per cent of adults in Scotland are in favour of the introduction of compulsory microchipping for dogs. Public support for the introduction of such a change is important, and those figures are very encouraging. Principally, microchipping enables a lost or stray dog to be quickly reunited with its owner. It is a permanent method of identification—collars and tags can be removed or lost, but a chip is permanent. Many owners already take the decision to have their pet microchipped. It encourages responsible dog ownership and can lead to the owner building a relationship with advice services, who can then support their decision to own a dog. Why should microchipping be compulsory? Why not leave it up to the individual owner? Part of the reason is that owning a dog is often not a decision that impacts only on the individual. Although there are many responsible dog owners across Scotland, MSPs will know from their mailbags that irresponsible dog ownership, whether that means dog fouling, stray dogs or noise pollution, can be detrimental to our communities. This week the Dunfermline Press, one of my local newspapers, highlights problems with dogs running off their leads and causing problems in public parks. Instilling a responsible approach to ownership can help to address some of those issues. For dog wardens and other local authority workers who have to deal with those issues, microchipping enables easy identification of owners in order to tackle the problem. For example, in a recent survey of local authorities and environmental health officers across the United Kingdom, the Dogs Trust found that, although Scotland has one of the lowest numbers of stray dogs, there has been a decrease in the number of strays that are quickly reunited with their owners. On average, 12 dogs are picked up in Scotland every day. Microchipping assists their rapid return, allowing wardens to emphasise to dog owners their responsibilities and, where appropriate, that straying dogs are not acceptable. In addition, under current arrangements, local authorities carry the significant burden of kennel costs for stray dogs. Increasingly, that service is being delivered in partnership with a private provider whose costs have to be negotiated. Although costs can be recovered if an owner is identified, when we look at Scotland’s relatively poor reunification figures, we can see that that is not always an option. The delay in reuniting a dog with its owner means higher costs for the owner. Compulsory microchipping would reduce costs for the local authority as well as for the owner recovering their pet. I have welcomed support from Fife Council for this proposal. The council has taken a proactive approach to responsible dog ownership and recognised that compulsory microchipping is a beneficial tool that makes it as easy as possible for owners to look after their dogs and be responsible within their communities. The permanent nature of microchipping can act as a deterrent to dog theft. Approximately 3,500 dog thefts were reported across the UK last year, which is up by 17 per cent on the previous year. Microchipping is consistently given as the top deterrent for theft. Of course, we are dealing with criminal activity and, depending on the reason for the theft, it might not be enough of a deterrent, but it gives a disincentive to theft. Compulsory microchipping can also lead to easier identification and the subsequent arrest of owners who are guilty of animal cruelty, as well as supporting actions to address dangerous dogs. In Scotland, dogs can be required to be microchipped if they are the subject of a notice that has been issued under the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Act 2010 or under the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991. However, that can happen only once a dog has been identified as a threat. If microchipping was compulsory, owner identification would be quicker and the workload and costs for local authorities would be reduced. If, as in the rest of the UK, we were to decide on a system of microchipping before first change of hands, that would mean that all puppies could be traced back to their breeder, which would help to tackle puppy farming and reduce the incidence of infectious disease and inherited defects from which many dogs can suffer. I recognise that there are questions of cost effectiveness. Microchipping typically costs around £20 to £30, which is a one-off cost that covers the dog’s lifetime. Although some people might find it difficult to find that money, owning a dog costs money through food bills, vet fees or grooming costs. In the overall picture, therefore, microchipping is affordable. To address the concerns that there might be about the cost to the owner, the Dogs Trust is working closely with local authorities throughout the UK and it offers microchipping for free.

The scheme down south is operated by a private provider so the cost of maintaining the database falls on the dog owners. That issue would be explored fully in a consultation. The Dogs Trust is committed to ensuring that no dog owner will be financially unable to get their dog chipped. Since compulsory microchipping was introduced in Northern Ireland, the Dogs Trust has chipped approximately 100,000 dogs for free and is running a number of partnerships with local authorities and housing associations in Scotland. Owning a dog is not cost free; there are costs involved. A responsible dog owner has to accept the responsibility of meeting those costs. Concerns over compliance are held up as a reason not to opt for compulsory microchipping, but international experience suggests that the levels of non-compliance are moderate and the benefits of compulsory microchipping outweigh the concerns over non-compliance. Evidence from countries that use a compulsory system indicates clear welfare benefits, particularly in respect of increased proportions of stray dogs that are returned to their owners. Microchipping by itself is not enough, of course. Owners need to register the microchip and keep their details up to date. We would need a robust system with compatible databases. Since the YouGov survey results, we have seen a positive change of direction by the Scottish Government. Northern Ireland introduced compulsory microchipping in April 2012, and its experience so far has been positive. Following consultation, in February the UK Government announced the compulsory microchipping of all dogs in England by April 2016, and the Welsh Government has announced the compulsory microchipping of all dogs by March 2015. Scotland must not be left behind. That is why the Scottish Government’s announcement that it will consult by the end of the year, having previously resisted that, is welcome. Perhaps the minister can say when the consultation will be launched. Following the consultations in the rest of the UK, the consultation can practically be lifted off the shelf. We could even introduce compulsory microchipping before the UK Government and see Scotland taking a lead on the issue, rather than playing catch-up.

Will the member give way?

There is certainly a need for discussions on the distribution of the red meat levy. However, if we are looking for a solution, we surely need to understand how the situation has come about. The availability of abattoirs in Scotland and competitive trading in livestock are key factors. What can the Scottish Government do to make available more viable options in Scotland?

I am pleased to speak in today’s debate on Scotland’s historic environment. I will spend some time highlighting Fife’s assets as an illustration of Scotland’s historic environment and the challenges that we face in ensuring a legacy for future generations. First, however, I will make some comments about the historic environment strategy. Last week, the legislative programme brought forward the proposed merger of RCAHMS and Historic Scotland. There will need to be robust scrutiny of the merger. National Museums Scotland has raised some concerns about the collections, and there are questions to be answered on preserving expertise and on funding. As my colleague, Patricia Ferguson, said, charitable status could lead to competition for limited funds. Charities such as Archaeology Scotland already do a great deal of work on community engagement through schemes such as the highly successful adopt a monument programme. September is Scottish archaeology month, with events across Scotland being staged by volunteers and professionals to showcase local action and knowledge. It would be a concern if the proposed merger threatened the viability of some smaller organisations. The consultation on the strategy is vital. As we have seen with other examples, such as the recent biodiversity strategy, consultation provides the opportunity for debate and improvement. However, the current draft strategy seems to suffer from issues that are similar to those about which concerns were expressed at the start of the biodiversity strategy process. The concerns are that the draft strategy is too ambiguous and vague and that there is a need for greater direction, clearer priorities and better focus—for a detailed action plan rather than a commitment. As the consultation document recognises, the care and promotion of Scotland’s historic environment are broad responsibilities, and the need for a clear strategy that sets the future path is important. The strategy can send a clear signal of the value and the importance that we all place on this resource, but it also needs to be supported, in our policy making as well as financially. Care of the historic environment is often underresourced and, in the current financial climate, is vulnerable. I welcome the document’s recognition of that, but we are still a bit short on answers. We also have to be realistic about some of the challenges. The natural environment is not static and, in addition, we have the challenges that are presented by climate change, which the document recognises. When Parliament passed the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, it recognised the threat of future coastal erosion. Climate adaptation measures are essential to the maintenance of our historic environment. It is important that any strategy that highlights our environment, whether historic or otherwise, plays its part in achieving our climate change targets. That illustrates how important it is that the Scottish Government ensures that tackling climate change is a priority of all Cabinet members. The recently finalised report on proposals and policies 2 was met with a degree of disappointment and a lack of confidence. However, although the Scottish Government’s draft strategy highlights the threat of climate change to our historic landscapes, particularly in our coastal regions, it does not fully recognise that Scotland has failed to meet its first two annual targets on emissions, nor does it offer a strategy for how we can contribute towards reversing that trend. If we continue along that path and fail to achieve the step change that is needed, the strategy will struggle to succeed. Scotland’s historic environment has the potential to contribute more to Scotland’s economy and communities. In many cases, visitor numbers have increased, and tourism plays a significant role in our economy. Last week, I was at a Scottish Council for Development and Industry event that emphasised the importance of natural Scotland to our economy, in terms of not just visitor numbers but our environmental wellbeing, and the increasing attraction of our natural environment as a sympathetic business location. When we look at future economic drivers and areas where we can envision growth, we can see that there is often a clear advantage in having a clean, diverse and attractive environment, and our historical environment has a role to play in that regard. We are talking about a partnership of the public, private and voluntary sectors as well as private owners, a fact that is recognised by the document and which presents some challenges. The Wemyss caves in Fife are an example of the type of challenge that we are facing. The caves should be recognised as being of national importance. They are designated as a single scheduled monument, but they illustrate the complex ownership and responsibility issues that are often faced. They are located on the Wemyss estate, so they are in private ownership. Fife Council has been the lead financing body over recent years, but that has had its challenges. The caves have been vulnerable to vandalism, neglect and coastal erosion, which have compromised the quality of the caves and the drawings. That part of Fife’s coast is experiencing considerable coastal erosion. We have lost 30m of the coastline since 1974. As the cabinet secretary recognised in her response to a parliamentary question, the protection and management of coastal areas is Fife Council’s responsibility. However, coastal erosion is a difficult and complex issue, and no practical and cost-effective solution has been found to date. Although there has been engagement with Historic Scotland over the years, responsibility has largely rested with Fife Council, and we need to recognise the financial limitations for local authorities in carrying the full responsibility for some of these sites.

I was aware of the cabinet secretary’s upcoming visit and was about to give it a positive mention. Earlier, the cabinet secretary talked a bit about active citizenship. The Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society is a good example of a group of enthusiastic volunteers who recognise the value of the historic environment and campaign to preserve, protect and promote it. The society was formed in 1986 to highlight the importance of the caves while campaigning for their preservation. It continues to promote the caves and to work hard to encourage others to take an interest. It brought a petition to Parliament in 2000 and has had recent success with its regular guided tours. I understand that the cabinet secretary is due to visit the caves soon. The society is working on a visitor centre and now has an education liaison officer in place, who has already engaged with Coaltown of Wemyss primary school. The drawings on the caves are a unique picture of Scotland’s past, depicting early Christian imagery, Pictish symbols and Viking representation. The story that they tell enriches the history of Fife’s coast and the communities that settled and traded there. The carvings connect modern generations to history in a way that textbooks cannot. They bring riches to our communities and have the potential to generate greater international interest. However, they also illustrate the complexities of partnership working, working with limited resources, and the often unpredictable nature of working with the natural environment—not to mention, for the caves, the challenge of holding back the tide. That is an example of the challenges that there can be in working with our historic environment. It is welcome that a working group has been established for the Wemyss caves—that emphasises the importance of getting partners around the table. We need to look for smart, modern solutions, be clear about what is important and be prepared to invest. Long-term management of our assets is the only way in which we can attempt to overcome significant challenges such as coastal erosion or climate change and realise the full potential of our environment. It is vital that the strategy is robust enough to meet such challenges.

I thank the minister for the advance copy of the statement and the documents, although, with the information running to more than 400 pages, this afternoon does not lend itself to proper scrutiny of this long-awaited and important document. Coming on the back of two missed emissions targets, there is a high expectation that RPP2 will get us back on track. The minister has repeated his excuses for the missed emissions targets, and has again claimed that we will meet the 2020 target, but we are clearly at risk of missing interim targets and increasingly playing catch up, making each subsequent target harder to reach. RPP2 cannot be a plan to miss future targets; it must deliver on opportunities for better housing, more transport options, better air quality and sustainable growth. It is not true to say that Parliament’s support for the targets was dependent only on the EU target increasing. Certainly, that would make achieving them easier, but our targets were so radical and world leading because we were committed to delivering progress by this Parliament. Stop Climate Chaos Scotland’s response to RPP2 was that all policies and proposals had to be implemented, as well as the EU moving to a 30 per cent emissions reduction target, if Scottish climate change targets were to be met. Analysis suggests that the 2027 target would be achieved with policies and proposals alone, but that all earlier targets would be missed, which would make future targets more difficult to achieve. RPP2 repeats claims that 2027 targets will be met, but can the minister say what changes been made that will deliver earlier action and achieve interim targets? The draft did not contain a single Scottish Government policy to reduce emissions from transport, and Scotland continues to exceed air-quality targets. Can the minister say what transport proposals have been changed to policies, so that we can make progress, particularly with regard to achieving modal shift, which is one of the biggest challenges within behavioural change, given that emissions from transport have stayed the same over the past 20 years? What does the minister mean when he says that the basis on which the Parliament set the targets has changed significantly, and that that is something that the Scottish Government will keep under review?

The cabinet secretary’s announcement reignited the debate on the right to buy. What steps will the Scottish Government take to secure the rights of existing tenants, including tenants who are on limited partnership leases or who are going through rent reviews, to ensure that they will not be adversely affected while the debate takes place?

The Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill has been quickly delivered through Parliament, and I am pleased that we are concluding the process before recess. We all understand the unintended consequences that transpired from the 2010 act, and we know why the bill is necessary. Of course, the minister cannot guarantee that there will be no further challenges, but the Parliament must be as confident as it can be not only that the problem of owner-occupier decrofting has been resolved, but that, as we move forward, we can be confident in our crofting legislation in general. While we spend time bemoaning its complexity, we should not forget that crofting legislation can impact significantly on people’s livelihoods and resources. As Peter Peacock stated during the passage of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill: “With the passage of every successive bill on crofting, it is almost inevitable that regulation becomes more complex.”—[Official Report, 1 July 2010; c 28191.] The complexity not only of this amending bill but of crofting law in general is known to many—if not all—members in the chamber today. Many stakeholders have used the bill process as an opportunity to express their frustration with crofting law in general and to discuss issues that are wider than those that the bill covers. Although the bill deals with an issue that is time sensitive, I welcome the minister’s comments on where the Scottish Government will go next on crofting. Tavish Scott summarised some of the key issues that need to be addressed, and it is important that the discussion on crofting continues after today. We must carefully consider the evidence that was raised in committee by experts and stakeholders during scrutiny of the bill. We have been made aware of one unintended consequence of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010, but we should not be complacent in believing that further challenges in the field of crofting legislation will not come to light. For example, the definition of the term “decrofting direction” and the issue of protection of access to crofting land have not been fully addressed, nor have the complexities that arise if one of a group of multiple owners decides to decroft. The Scottish Government’s head of crofting services indicated that the multiple ownership issue may affect up to 700 people, so it is clearly not an insignificant problem, and I hope that the minister can address it. There are some 18,000 crofts throughout Scotland that house more than 33,000 people. Nearly 70 per cent of our national natural reserves and 60 per cent of our sites of special scientific interest lie within the crofting counties. Crofters bring many benefits to our country, but they face many challenges too. Those challenges are economic in nature, and as a Parliament we should do all that we can within our powers to help crofters. Jayne Baxter spoke earlier about the importance of rural communities. As I mentioned in the stage 1 debate, there is potential, with the active discussion of common agricultural policy reform and agricultural support, to provide greater support to crofting communities through the changes that will be made to the Scotland rural development programme. As we move from historic payments to area-based payments within the CAP, we must ensure that those opportunities are sought and found. We have heard today from members on all sides of the chamber just how vital crofting is to some of our remotest communities, and we are aware of the benefits that it can bring. Those communities work the land and ensure its sustainability for future generations. For that to continue, crofting must be viable, and we must answer the big questions, which are not about how laws should be drafted or redrafted, but about how we support crofts and rural areas. Earlier this month, a global meeting took place in Indonesia of la via campesina, which is a movement of more than 180 peasant organisations that together boast 200 million members in more than 80 countries. The Scottish Crofting Federation is a member, as is the newly formed land workers alliance in England. Crofting has been around for generations, but that new movement values what small-scale farming can achieve and contribute. Although it is a global movement, it presents a vision for western farming and an alternative vision of what United Kingdom agriculture could look like in future: a vision that values farming’s huge social and cultural dimension. Large-scale farming certainly produces food, but so does small-scale farming, often with less environmental impact and greater community investment. In Scotland, we must look at targeting resources, in particular towards our less favoured areas. We must also consider the use of agricultural support, rural development mechanisms and greater support for housing in order to support and grow communities. We need more joined-up rural development in crofting, tenant farming, land reform and farming in general. We need greater decentralisation of jobs in the economy. Crofting faces many challenges in this country but it has faced many challenges throughout its history. When we look at international examples, we can see that it has support and a future.

I am pleased to take part in the debate. Hydro power provides energy and jobs to many rural communities, and it can also play a significant part in Scotland meeting its future climate change targets. I attended the recent dinner at the Scottish Renewables hydro conference to celebrate the 70th anniversary of hydro power in Scotland, which the minister talked about. That was a great way of recognising the contribution of hydro and how it has developed, as well as providing a forum for discussion of the future challenges. As other members have said, Tom Johnston was a visionary. The establishment of the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board revolutionised the Highlands by using the power of nature to generate power and bring the modern world to parts of Scotland that it had not reached. It was an early renewables sector and the technology was recognised for its importance, but the significance of its future contribution to addressing climate change and to sustainable energy were not imagined. At the conference in May, it was fascinating to hear about the early pioneers when, on the same day, it was announced that work on the Glasa hydro scheme is to begin later this year. That will be the largest hydro scheme to be built in the UK in the past five years. The minister mentioned pumped storage and the need for clarity on future UK Government policy, which is important. In the move to a low-carbon economy, pumped storage has a crucial role to play. It is the only commercial-scale technology that can store electricity in large quantities, and we know that that process is key to a balanced energy policy with sufficient base-load. It is only when we go back to the early years of hydro and consider that only one in every 100 crofts had electricity at the time of the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board’s inception that we can fully understand the size of the task that the new body had to undertake. Now, with more than half Scotland’s 145 hydroelectric schemes located in the Highlands and Islands, we can see how successful hydro power has been for the area. Agriculture is often at the centre of the rural economy, but the right training and investment mean that renewables can bring significant numbers of jobs to those areas, which strengthen links with locals and keep young families and workers from moving away to find employment. In discussions about the importance of hydro to rural economies at the recent conference, the point was highlighted that such schemes often offer more sustainable, longer-term employment from the construction of infrastructure through to maintenance and operations than other energy projects might. The employment numbers might seem small if we consider them in an urban setting, but they can often contribute significantly to the viability of rural communities. Total hydro generation capacity in Scotland is about 1,500MW. Although hydro’s once rapid growth has slowed, new major development opportunities are in hand, and scope has been identified for thousands of smaller schemes. At one point, hydro power was the main contributor in Scotland’s drive for renewable energy and, although it has since been overtaken by wind power, it still produces about 12 per cent of Scotland’s electricity. We need to ensure that a package of renewables options is available across Scotland, to build on our strengths and opportunities. Despite the recent announcement that Scotland has, for the second year, missed its annual emissions target, we can recognise the role of hydro in a low-carbon future. The Minister for Environment and Climate Change will update members next week on the redraft of the second report on proposals and policies. When the draft report was published earlier this year, it attracted some criticism for its overreliance on proposals and for not containing enough policies. However, if a significant redraft of RPP2 is to be achieved, the minister will have to do that with the help of his colleagues from other portfolio areas, including the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism. With that in mind, it would be interesting if, in his closing remarks, the minister could give his views on the redrafting process for RPP2 and on how he believes that hydro power complements other forms of renewable energy in ensuring that the Government can meet future targets. There should be further investigation into the viability of potential schemes and their benefits in helping us to achieve future targets. Despite the rise of wind energy, the chance to truly radicalise our energy market and promote community ownership has largely been missed. Many people in the renewables sector who work in Scandinavian countries, where community ownership is expected, say that the key to expansion in Scotland concerns greater capacity and expert support to communities in order for them to be involved in the process and to see that as a possibility for them. My colleague Ken Macintosh spoke of community ownership. The land reform review group will look at community ownership in relation to renewables in particular and its clear potential as a vehicle for tackling inequality and delivering sustainable growth. We can lift the barriers that stand in the way of communities that wish to develop renewables.

Those are welcome comments from the minister. When I speak to people in the sector, the feeling seems to be that there is quite a gap between a community that would like to be involved in a project and the end point of it being involved, which requires a certain level of expertise, including business expertise. There seems to be a need for more consultancy support and capacity building to get communities to that level. A small hydro scheme could generate power to 150 homes—it could revolutionise energy consumption. It has many benefits, such as helping the country to get back on track in meeting our climate change targets, providing green jobs and playing its part in tackling fuel poverty. Through companies working together with the community or—as the minister said—through communities taking forward their own projects, smaller-scale energy schemes can benefit a local area and the country at large. That has happened in certain cases, particularly in Scandinavia, and that could be explored and developed further as we continue to try to meet our future renewable energy targets. As we look to the future, the development of hydro power in Scotland faces challenges. Others have highlighted the range of issues that Scottish Renewables raised in its briefing, but I will highlight the concerns about the SEPA 100kW checklist. I have been contacted by a constituent who runs a business installing micro-hydro power stations. Of course we must protect Scotland’s environment—SEPA has a crucial role to play in that and its efforts need to be recognised and supported. However, the application of the 100kW rule seems to be unnecessarily limiting the development of micro-hydro and community schemes, and there is a need to move to more proportionate but robust controls on development that consider each proposal’s merits. My constituent’s points were that hydro schemes with a capacity that is greater than 100kW typically cost more than £500,000 to build and so are often out of the reach of small farmers, crofters, householders and many communities and that virtually all the rivers and burns that run close to populated areas have the potential for sub-100kW schemes, but SEPA’s implementation of the ministerial statement rules out viable development of those resources. However, sub-100kW schemes are more likely to use local trades in their construction, to be locally or community owned and to use Britain-manufactured machinery. I am happy to write to the minister with further details on those issues, but it would be good to hear his initial views this afternoon. The debate has been an excellent opportunity to reflect on Scotland’s progress on hydro power and to address some of the future challenges. Hydro was revolutionary in the 20th century and we must now ensure that it can play its part in the 21st century.

Following the publication of the commission’s report in April, the Scottish rural schools network said that it seemed likely that the end of the moratorium would mean that a considerable number of closure proposals would come forward in the succeeding months. Given the cabinet secretary’s comments on the shared desire of the Government and local authorities to improve the quality of closure proposals, what assurances can he give parents and communities that any proposed changes, including the setting up of an independent decision-making body, will meet the decision timescales that some rural communities might face?

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on its 2011 climate change target. (S4T-00390)

The failure to meet the second emissions target is deeply disappointing but perhaps not surprising. The failure to meet the 2010 target was dismissed as being the result of a cold winter, and the failure to meet the 2011 target is being spun as a complicated data change. The minister says that we are still on target for 2020, but the adjusted baseline from 2010 data makes the target more difficult. We are relying on circumstances rather than firm policy and leadership. Over the past 48 hours, the minister has received a volume of messages calling for improvements to RPP2. Will the revised RPP2 clearly demonstrate which policies have been introduced to compensate for the Government’s annual missed targets?

In scrutiny of RPP2, the parliamentary committees confirmed Stop Climate Chaos’s analysis that we will meet all our annual targets only if all the policies and proposals are implemented and the European Union increases its emissions reduction target to 30 per cent. Will the revised RPP2 address the reliance on the EU emissions target? Under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, the Scottish Government must give a formal report when an annual target is missed. The report on 2010 was wrapped up into RPP2. Will there be a formal report on the 2011 target or will it just be wrapped up? It is not really good enough to include the formal report in RPP2 when it is due within a week.

I thank the cabinet secretary for an advance copy of his statement. Last month’s agreement on the basic regulation of the common fisheries policy is to be welcomed. Good progress has been made on discards and the regional control of fisheries and, if the measures are implemented sensibly, they will benefit Scottish fishing and help to secure a sustainable future. In the UK, the cabinet secretary has played his part, but I also welcome the work of the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union in securing sensible agreement. Ensuring that fish stocks are at a healthy level is beneficial not only to the environment but to our fishing industry. Achieving maximum sustainable yield, via the best scientific advice, is vital to ensure a sustainable future. Although the final agreement contains a strong commitment to follow scientific advice and an end to overfishing, there is no clear deadline for when full stock recovery will be achieved. How will the regionalisation element of the CFP aid stock recovery in Scotland? Will clear timetables for the achievement of full stock recovery be set at a regional level or will that be limited by multi-annual plans?

I thank all those who worked on the stage 1 report, which was done quickly. I know that the committee has a very busy work programme, and we all support its efforts to resolve the recent problems as soon as possible. The committee’s stage 1 report highlights the challenges in taking evidence within such timescales. The complexity of the evidence that the committee received and the desire of many stakeholders to talk about wider issues with the 2010 act and other crofting legislation have been highlighted. At the time of the statement, it was identified that 179 crofters had already decrofted and 60 were in the process of decrofting. I welcome the updated numbers for the current picture. At the beginning, the minister gave real-life examples of people who have been impacted on in the current situation. That emphasised the need for swift action. The situation has added to the financial pressures for those crofters, and it is good that we are on track to provide legal clarity before the summer recess. That is particularly important for those who have been caught by this set of circumstances and those who have planning permission that is running out. There has been a period of uncertainty, and there has been uncertainty in the committee. As other members have highlighted, there was a debate on whether the bill is necessary. The crofting lawyer Brian Inkster, who has been mentioned a few times, argued that the matter could be resolved in a different way, while the chair of the Scottish Crofting Federation, Derek Flyn, supported the bill as the right way forward. In conclusion, there was an agreement that the bill is the way we should proceed, and we support efforts to resolve the issue as quickly as possible through the bill, which is subject to stage 2 scrutiny. The experience has lessons for the future. Like Jayne Baxter, I looked back at the stage 3 debate on the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill. She has already quoted what Peter Peacock said then, but I will repeat his final line. He said that if the bill “passes on to the statute book, it could be held up as a warning, not an example.”—[Official Report, 1 July 2010; c 28193.] Members’ contributions this afternoon on the complexity of the bill have raised questions about how we should go forward on crofting legislation. There were concerns about the scrutiny of the 2010 bill at the time, and we abstained with the Liberals in the final vote as an expression of our concerns. We recognised the Government’s intentions, but we had concerns about the implementation of the bill. I would rather that we did not return to the legislation so quickly. Many made the point in evidence at stage 1 that there is perhaps a need to look at the 2010 act as a whole to guard against any future flaws or unintended consequences that may come to light. There have been concerns about future unintended consequences or anomalies.

I appreciate the complexity of crofting legislation and the fact that the 2010 act is dependent on previous acts. It would be good if the Government could provide more detail on its thinking on the issue. As Rhoda Grant described it, we need support for an action plan. It would be good to know that the minister is working constructively with the committee on how we make progress on the broader issues. The committee’s stage 1 report asked for a clear timetable for that. We all recognise the complexity. However, particularly with the 2010 act, the Parliament did not make a unanimous decision, and some parties expressed concern about the scrutiny that was carried out at that time. Frustration has been expressed during the debate. Rhoda Grant suggested that we should repeal the 2010 act and Nigel Don went so far as to suggest that we repeal all crofting legislation and start from the beginning. That reflects the complexity and the frustration that members feel, which arises from their experience with their constituents. Tavish Scott talked about consolidation, although it has been recognised that simply bringing together all the provisions might not lead to simplification. Whether we look at consolidation or codification, there is certainly a need to consider how we progress on the matter. The committee made a number of recommendations in its stage 1 report, which members have highlighted. There are concerns that the bill as drafted is unnecessarily complicated. Rob Gibson, the committee convener, talked about the bill being overly complicated. There might be a need to lodge amendments at stage 2 to avoid future difficulties with legal interpretation. The minister says that he believes that the level of complexity in the bill is necessary to provide the clarity that is needed, but I encourage him to consider the issue in a bit more detail at stage 2 and to work with those who suggest ways to simplify the bill. The committee also highlighted the definition of the term “decrofting direction” and the protection of access to crofting land as issues that need to be addressed at stage 2. There are significant other outstanding issues on crofting, many of which have been highlighted by members. It is sometimes difficult to know how widespread those difficulties are. One is the definition of the term “owner-occupier crofter”; another is the complexities that arise when there are multiple owners of distinct parts of the same croft, which we know potentially involves about 700 people. Rhoda Grant raised further concerns with the minister relating to unintended consequences over who cultivates a croft. I encourage the minister to correspond with Rhoda Grant on that. As Rob Gibson said, crofting law is complex. It has developed over generations and centuries and is not down to only one act. However, we are currently dealing with the 2010 act, which changed the definition of a crofter so that crofters who have bought their crofts—which they have been able to do since the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 1976—have the same rights or conditions of occupancy as crofters who remain tenants. As others have said, crofting law has been described as “a mess”. Jamie McGrigor has been around for longer than I have but, last night, I read that a croft is often described as a small piece of land that is surrounded by legislation, which I thought was a good description.

That is a good example of how long we have all been involved with the issue. If Jamie McGrigor was involved in politics in 1948, that perhaps shows the generational gap that exists between us. In evidence to the committee, Derek Flyn said: “More than a century ago, a textbook said that crofting law was more complicated than the tax laws. Every time there is a reform, it is always stated that crofting law is to be simplified but, every time, we get another layer on top of what has gone before.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 15 May 2013; c 2198.] We have intricate, complicated and historical legislation, in which it seems that proportionality has been completely lost. The committee asked the Government how that could be addressed and asked “how it plans to ensure crofting law is as clear, competent, consistent and fit for the 21st century as possible.” The committee took a sensible approach. It had to balance the need for speed with the need for accuracy, in recognition of the pressing need to rectify the anomaly that prevents owner-occupier crofters from applying to decroft. However, the committee acknowledged the need for full scrutiny at stage 2, to guard against the introduction of further complexity and the potential for unintended consequences. Tavish Scott talked about a crofting couple who are involved in legal complexities when their time and effort would be better spent in getting on with doing what they do. Although we have focused on the bill today, the broader point is that no legislation will resolve the challenges that crofters face, which are economic and not regulatory. Some 18,000 crofts in Scotland house more than 33,000 people, and a large proportion of Scotland’s natural heritage and designated sites—nearly 70 per cent of our national nature reserves and more than 60 per cent of our sites of special scientific interest—lies within the crofting counties. Last night, I was at RSPB Scotland’s high nature value farming event, at which there was a discussion about how to support crofting and vulnerable farming. It was argued that there needs to be a clear link with productivity, which was interesting. CAP reform and agricultural support are actively being discussed. In the context of the move from historic to area-based payments and the changes that we can make to the Scotland rural development programme, there might be opportunities to provide greater support to crofting communities. There were interesting exchanges on Twitter last night—as there always are. The site @ScotVoices highlights a different Scot every week, and this week it was Donald Macsween, from the Western Isles, who is a crofter. Various issues have been discussed, such as absenteeism, which people said is now easier to detect and deal with. During the passage of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill in 2010, Peter Peacock made a perceptive comment about absenteeism. He said: “the bill—for example, in being tougher on absenteeism and neglect—seeks a regulatory action to what is essentially an economic question. If crofting provided more of a living and there were more economic strength and diversity in our crofting areas, we would probably not need to debate absenteeism.”—[Official Report, 1 July 2010; c 28191.] Dave Thompson talked about a proposal for a local abattoir. It is about having the modern infrastructure that can support crofting communities and ensure that they are sustainable. Neglect was discussed on Twitter last night. Neglect blights land that has the potential to be worked and damages crofting communities, landscapes and biodiversity, but it is difficult to address. How is neglect monitored or judged? More action might be needed in that regard. The increasing cost of crofting leases was also mentioned. The comment was: “My 7 acre croft cost approx £5k nearly 10 years ago. 2.5 acre croft next door for sale just now, looking for £10-15k”. How do we make crofting not just economically viable but accessible to people who want to croft? As Angus MacDonald said, crofting is a difficult life and it is not often that a crofter can sustain their way of life without having more than one job. Crofting has been and remains a critical means of sustaining and retaining populations in some of our more remote communities. There needs to be a focus on legacy building. In the recent BBC programme “Hebrides: Islands on the Edge”, crofting was discussed. The programme did a good job of helping people to understand crofting. We saw how local schoolchildren are learning crofting skills in a scheme that is proving popular and is offering a means of legacy building and connecting the community with crofting. We know the benefits that crofting can bring. Crofting communities are strong and work collectively to work the land and keep it for future generations. We must work together to ensure that crofting remains viable. This is an essential debate about how we solve a fairly technical problem, but the bigger question is how we support crofting and economic development in rural areas. We need more targeted resources in the less favoured areas, through agricultural support, rural development mechanisms and support for housing—that relates to our debate on land reform yesterday. More joined-up rural development policy and greater decentralisation of jobs in the economy would do much to support rural communities and crofting. Those are the real challenges that we face.

Rod Campbell MSP told The Courier: “To people in North and East Fife, local justice means attending court in North and East Fife, not Dundee.” Does the cabinet secretary agree with that remark, particularly as the movement of business from Cupar to Dundee will mean that it is moved from the Fife and Forth Valley community justice authority area into an entirely separate area, which has huge implications for managing offenders?

Does the minister agree with Jim Hunter that the Government should be directly involved in the work of the review group? Will he consider increasing the number of members of the group from the current three in order to address the concern that the group has insufficient expertise to address some of the most complex issues?

I am pleased to open this debate on land reform, which has been brought forward by Scottish Labour. Under devolution, a Labour-led Executive introduced the first truly reforming land legislation in Scotland. Public access, national parks, farming tenancies, the crofting right to buy and the extension of rights to community ownership were covered. The aims behind the policies were to modernise land laws, encourage the diversification of ownership and create opportunities. The Scottish Parliament supported those aims, and I would like the Parliament to regain those ambitions. Scottish Labour is prepared to listen to radical and innovative solutions and to progress policies that will make a difference and move forward the land reform agenda. We know that 432 individuals own half the land and that a mere 16 people own 10 per cent of Scotland. Some might argue, “What is wrong with that? Why should we be concerned about ownership, when what matters is what happens on the land?” However, the two aspects are inextricably linked. We cannot create a more socially just Scotland without tackling land ownership. In our aim to create a fairer use of land that provides more opportunities for more people and in which public subsidy is used for the greatest possible public benefit, we will support bold solutions with the aim of promoting greater equality and ownership, as we recognise the economic and social benefits that that can bring. The Scottish Government launched the land reform review group with a wide remit, which was to “Generate, support, promote, and deliver new relationships between land, people, economy and environment in Scotland”. That suggested that the Scottish Government shared that ambition. When the First Minister announced the LRRG’s establishment in July last year, he said: “I want this review to deliver radical change for both rural and urban areas, developing new ideas which will improve current legislation as well as generating even more innovative proposals.” We support the establishment of an expert group. Delivering on land reform will never be easy. The experience with the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003, elements of which are still being challenged, shows that that is often not an easy path for politicians to tread. It generates strong emotions and challenges vested interests. An expert independent group can provide expertise and knowledge to make recommendations and push the agenda forward. However, the interim report has been met largely with disappointment and criticism from land reformists because of the group’s lack of expertise in many key areas, the decision that it took to narrow the remit and the dearth of radical proposals or options for further development. Community Land Scotland welcomed aspects of the report, but it had significant concerns about the direction of travel. For example, it said: “We have concerns that the interim report’s description of more people having a ‘stake’ in the land is limited almost exclusively to communities having a greater say in land use, not the economic ‘stake’ in the land we think is vital in developing more resilient and sustainable communities.” Yesterday, there was a powerful statement from Professor Jim Hunter, who was an original member of the LRRG. He said: “If the Scottish Government are serious about land reform, Ministers and the government machine more generally must be involved directly in the work of the group ... As it is, we’re now six years into an SNP Government which has so far done absolutely nothing legislatively about the fact that Scotland continues to be stuck with the most concentrated, most inequitable, most unreformed and most undemocratic land ownership system in the entire developed world.”

To be honest, I am disappointed by that intervention, because I thought that we agreed on the need for radical land reform. The member will know how difficult it is to make progress on that. I am saying today that we will work with the Government on the issue. We are prepared to look at radical solutions, and there is time in this Parliament to deliver on them. Perhaps the strongest criticism this week came from the Scottish Tenant Farmers Association, whose chairman, Christopher Nicholson, said: “I fail to understand how this review of land reform can take place without considering land tenure ... An opportunity is being missed for the LRRG to highlight to the Government the need to address best land use and tenure in Scotland in the next decade and beyond ... There is now a strong and justifiable mood of cynicism amongst tenant farmers that they have been sidelined and an opportunity is being missed to provide vision and direction for this neglected rural community of Scotland.” In response to the group’s report, the minister, Paul Wheelhouse, looked to be supporting the group’s decision, because he said: “I now very much look forward to the next stage as the LRRG move into the second phase of its work looking at radical options for community land ownership before the final report in 2014.” It is right that the minister recognises the group’s work, but does the Government share our disappointment at the narrowing of its remit? The group will no longer look at farming tenancies, the Crown Estate, common good land or land value taxation.

I do not accept that, and I will comment on the forum. Until the publication of the report last week, tenant farming was to be part of the review. However, the group announced that it was passing that buck to the tenant farming forum. Caught on the back foot, the cabinet secretary proposed another review, which raises the question why the group was pursuing the issue of farming tenancies if there were other plans for the debate.

I am sorry, but I am really pushed for time and I want to make a few further points. The review that the Scottish Government proposes looks pretty narrow: it is about passing proposed legislation and scrutinising it, and not much else. Perhaps the Government wants to give more detail today about who will conduct the review, what it will look at, what the timescale is for action and whether it will deliver on the reform for which there is an appetite. There is clear recognition of the need for additional tenancies and for better, more secure and longer tenancy terms than at present. The interim report recognises that that aspect of rural Scotland is clearly problematic and requires sensitive and expert attention, then passes the debate to the tenant farming forum. The forum has its uses, but it is a place where nothing is done without consensus. Given that the balance of power is so skewed, I would argue that compromise cannot deliver the change that is needed. When the Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill went through Parliament, even though the committee involved recognised the merit in extending succession rights, the debate was shut down because of concerns about the need to maintain confidence and consensus in the rent review group. However, once that reported, tenant farmers were left again with significant concerns. On the big questions, the forum is therefore going round in circles. Landowners hold most of the cards, but we know that the world can be changed, as it was at the beginning of the previous century, and that the tide is turning that way. Do the current arrangements, dominated by private owners of estates, serve the long-term interests of the country by enabling a vibrant agricultural sector? That is one of the big questions that need to be answered. The LRRG’s narrow remit and the restrictive debate of the tenant farming forum are not allowing the debate to happen. Tenant farming should be part of the wider land reform debate, and it would benefit from a more holistic approach.

I apologise, but I am really pushed for time in this short debate. The Government’s amendment highlights the group’s independence. However, although it is independent, the LRRG was established by the Scottish Government, which appointed its members. With only one original member left and the group now losing the confidence of stakeholders, the Government needs to be clear about how it plans to retrieve the project, how seriously it takes the group and what the expectations are. We can compare the LRRG with the Sewel group that was established in 1997, which had 10 members, a heavyweight group of experts, clear objectives and political direction. In contrast, the LRRG has lacked political direction and the group’s experience and knowledge have narrowed since it was established. There has also been a degree of naivety in the group’s approach: the number of visits to estates has not gone unnoticed. There has been an active campaign by landowners, who often see any discussion of land reform as a threat. Of course, landowners are entitled to contribute to the debate, and I welcome their contribution, but it is not the group’s job to hear those who shout loudest or who are best resourced. A lot of consultations are going on at once, and the narrowing of the focus raises concerns about cohesion on the land reform agenda. I acknowledge the group’s work. The decision to focus on community land issues is an opportunity, and Labour urges the group to be bold and to make proposals to expand community ownership options, including the right to buy in cases when there is not a willing seller but acquiring the land can be shown to be in the public interest. I know that the First Minister is to address Community Land Scotland’s annual general meeting soon. If the Parliament agrees to the motion, what better demonstration of radical and bold policy could there be than if the First Minister were to support the policy, so that progress can be made in Parliament? We need to move the debate forward. We need a refocused LRRG and clear political direction. We have the powers to make the change. I hope that the Parliament will today affirm a commitment to radical and bold reform and that we will start to demonstrate that commitment. I move, That the Parliament notes the publication of the Land Reform Review Group’s interim report; recognises that the Land Reform Review Group was appointed by the Scottish Government to offer a “radical review of land reform”; believes that ownership of land is an economic and social issue; recognises that the Scottish Government has the power to deliver further land reform now; supports greater diversification of land ownership in Scotland, and calls on the Scottish Government to demonstrate a commitment to radical and bold land reform.

I welcome the minister’s announcement of the group’s expanded membership. However, I note that it has agreed quite a narrow remit. Will there be a chance to have another look at that?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

The minister mentioned the closure last week of the opencast mine at Muir Dean in Fife. There are significant environmental concerns about the site. Although the bond is in place, it might not be sufficient. Although the SMRT has been established, it is not clear how it would address situations such as that at Muir Dean. While we are waiting for a solution, how will sites that are currently in limbo be maintained and secured, and how will communities be protected? We are already hearing reports of pollution concerns regarding Muir Dean.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made with the educational psychologists workforce planning group. (S4O-02143)

In evidence to the Education and Culture Committee yesterday, Carolyn Brown from the Association of Scottish Principal Educational Psychologists described significant cuts in educational psychologists in the past three years as taking us “back to square 1”. Under previous Administrations, we saw an increase, but under this Government we have seen a decline. Is the cabinet secretary satisfied that the current number of educational psychologists is sufficient to meet demand, considering that we are now practically back to the staffing levels of 2001, when the Currie report was published?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with NHS Scotland regarding the decision to cancel the Dunfermline-based Sheds Hairdressing’s contract to provide hairpieces. (S4O-02132)

The cabinet secretary might be aware that if the contract is cancelled, the service offered in Fife will be greatly diminished and clients will be left with the options of having to travel or using mail order, which are either inappropriate or not possible for many. Although disabled access is the issue that has been highlighted, the salon itself is compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 and has clients’ confidence and trust. Although I appreciate the cabinet secretary’s response with regard to the Scottish Government’s role in the matter, I urge him to do all that he can to reverse the decision.

The bill has been an attempt to address some of the issues surrounding wild fisheries and the aquaculture sector. Although the debate is an opportunity to reflect on what has been agreed, it is also—as other members have highlighted—the time to turn to questions of implementation and what happens next. Following the initial consultation, a number of contentious issues were not taken forward in the bill—for example, carcass tagging and salmon netting rights—but they must be addressed, and the future work streams that others who are involved in wild fisheries and sustainable aquaculture have highlighted are essential. As the minister said, 98 per cent of fish farms are signed up to good practice, which raises the question whether the bill is about consolidating what already happens rather than addressing some of the key issues that Alex Fergusson highlighted. We have a growing aquaculture sector that makes a significant contribution to Scotland’s economy nationally and locally. It is a business that provides employment in rural areas—more than 6,000 people are employed, often in long-term, skilled jobs. The amendments on training were welcome. We recognise that people work in difficult conditions, and that standards of training and health and safety must be high. Achieving the target of increasing the production of all farmed fish by 50 per cent from a 2011 baseline by 2020 is ambitious. If we are to achieve that rate of expansion, we need to be sure that the regulatory system that is in place is robust and has the confidence of consumers and wider interests. In recent weeks, there have been reports that pesticides from 12 salmon farms have contaminated lochs around Scotland’s coast in breach of safety limits. Since 2010, such incidents have been the subject of an annual report by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, which consistently raises questions about the environmental impact of fish farming. Labour has sought to take a proportionate approach to the bill. At stage 1, the committee debated at length the publication of sea lice data. There was certainly recognition that there could be greater transparency and information sharing, and Labour lodged a consensus amendment, so it is disappointing that, once again, the evidence that was heard at stage 1 and supported in the stage 1 report has been rejected at the amendment stage on the minister’s recommendation. We have seen committee members twisting and turning on the issue this afternoon. We recognise that the industry is to increase its reporting to 30 areas of data, but the international perception of Scottish salmon relies on its reputation for comparatively high standards of health and welfare for farmed fish. Greater transparency should be nothing to fear and would only strengthen its reputation. The industry and the minister raise concerns regarding commercial risk, but it is argued that no other industry is protected in this way, and the strongest comments on the matter came from SEPA. It is disappointing that those concerns have not been addressed in the bill and there has been such reluctance on the Government’s part to take a stronger lead on the issue. Although the minister has given a commitment to review the success or otherwise of the SSPO proposals on sea lice data publication, it is not clear how that success will be judged. He might want to give an indication of that in his closing remarks. It is crucial that the right level of regulation is in place for the sector. No one in the debate today wants regulation that would damage the industry, but there have been calls for proportionate regulation that protects consumer confidence, in recognition of the fact that across our food chain there is—perhaps now more than ever—a need for transparency and robust governance.

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing this debate on the freshwater pearl mussel and thank Scottish Environment LINK for holding an information session in the Parliament this afternoon. I apologise in advance for having to leave the debate early due to a prior engagement. The debate is another example of the success of the Scottish Environment LINK species champion initiative. As the champion of two species—the puffin and the lesser butterfly orchid—I understand that it is not enough just to put one’s name to threatened species. We must be active in offering our political support to protect them. MSPs’ enthusiasm has been matched by the support that we receive from the charities and organisations that promote the species. Like other organisations, the RSPB and Plantlife have been very helpful to me in providing support to raise issues that impact on the species, from the long-term challenges around climate change to the impact of the recent storms. The relationships that the initiative has created are helping to raise the profile of Scotland’s biodiversity. It is not that long since many of us were in the chamber debating the 2010 biodiversity target that Scotland, along with other countries, failed to meet. Concerns were raised about how many threatened species play an important part in our biodiversity. The UK has a large proportion of the species that are threatened in Europe, and we have an important responsibility to make progress on biodiversity targets. As we have heard, the freshwater pearl mussel is one of the most critically endangered molluscs in the world. As such, it is worthy of championing. In the recent stage 1 debate on the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill, my colleague, Graeme Pearson, spoke about illegal cockle fishing. The bill contains measures to improve detection and prosecution. However, it is not enough to simply pass legislation that defines the ban on pearl or, indeed, cockle fishing; we must ensure that the enforcement measures are robust enough to deal with any illegal fishing that may take place. Pearl mussels are protected by the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981, but that has not stopped reports of illegal damage taking place each year. In he past five years, the police national wildlife crime unit has recorded at least 10 incidents a year, and estimates put the number of suspected crimes as high as 30 annually. The reality is that the detection of illegal pearl fishing and thus any enforcement are extremely difficult, as offences often take place in remote areas of the country. To their credit, Scottish Natural Heritage and the police national wildlife crime unit have run awareness-raising events to highlight the signs of illegal pearl fishing. At today’s LINK event, Dr Peter Cosgrove from the University of Aberdeen told us about his work to raise awareness with estate and land managers. As we near stage 3 of the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill and move on to the future work that is planned by the Scottish Government, this might be a chance to reflect on whether more measures need to be taken to support those working to protect the freshwater pearl mussel from illegal fishing. The freshwater pearl mussel thrives in clean, fast-flowing rivers and streams, so it is positive that more than half the world’s recruiting population exists in Scotland. However, the population is declining rapidly, and illegal pearl fishing is not the only reason why the freshwater pearl mussel is absent from a third of the rivers that it once populated, nor from a further third of rivers where no new freshwater pearl mussels are being produced. Freshwater pearl mussels are also at threat from pollution. Clean gravel and sand are essential for their survival, particularly the younger mussels. If the river bottom is clogged with silt, they will perish. Pollution directly affects not only the mussels but fish such as salmon and trout. As the RSPB briefing highlights, tackling illegal activities is about the enforcement and close monitoring of the Water Environment (Controlled Activities) (Scotland) Regulations 2011. It raises concerns about illegal activities that damage water quality and habitat going undetected and unenforced. Although compliance with the CAR regime is part of the solution, the RSPB also identifies that more rigorous enforcement of cross-compliance with the Environmental Impact Assessment (Agriculture) (Scotland) Regulations 2006 is required. Today’s debate has highlighted how iconic a species for Scotland the freshwater pearl mussel is. We have a responsibility to address the decline and secure the place in Scotland’s future of a species that is admired and coveted around the world. I am pleased that Mary Scanlon will not only champion their survival but—I hope—along with others oversee their ability to thrive in Scotland again.

I thank Professor David Crichton for submitting the petition on flood insurance, and the Public Petitions Committee for bringing the debate to the chamber. The petition calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that Scotland’s interests are represented in on-going negotiations on home insurance for flooding, but discussion of the petition has raised many other issues. I know that flooding is a matter of concern to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, so I hope that today’s debate will contribute to its considerations. As MSPs, we have seen increasing instances of flooding in our constituencies and regions. I know about the impact that flooding can have on families and communities because my region has been particularly affected in recent times. Last year a home in Dura Den was severely damaged and up to 30 families had to be evacuated from their homes when the River Eden burst its banks. In December, the Eden also burst its banks between Ladybank and Kingskettle, causing severe flooding for some homeowners. Within the region, Perth has been particularly badly hit in recent years, which has caused a great deal of stress to residents. Evidence to the committee highlighted the potential risks to Orkney and Grangemouth, and the potential impact of flooding on the economy and energy supply was also discussed. The problem of flooding is not reducing in Scotland and we must respond to the challenge as a country, not just as homeowners. The response is complex but, as the Stop Climate Chaos Scotland briefing recognises, solutions can be as much about land management as they are about anything else. Flood prevention and management measures must include more use of land and natural ecosystems to store water or to buffer at-risk areas, instead of just relying on carbon-intensive and costly infrastructure that might not be sufficiently flexible for future needs. We discussed that with the minister when we talked about Scotland’s biodiversity strategy. Today’s debate is particularly about flood insurance for individual households. The flooding of a home is traumatic and the consequences can be devastating. Insurance is therefore vital so that individuals and businesses can give themselves a level of security. Payments need to be affordable and to accurately reflect the level of risk. If they are not, individuals are at risk of leaving themselves and others vulnerable. The minister will be well aware of the financial pressure that dealing with flooding is placing on the worst-affected local authorities. Under devolution, Scotland has started to face up to the challenge of increased risk of flooding and has undertaken some good long-term planning. However, when the Scottish Government removed ring-fencing of funds for capital projects, Labour expressed concerns that the burden that was being placed on local authorities would be too high. Communities look to their local authority to deal with such problems, but the costs of preventative and restorative action can be considerable, and the burden falls heaviest on particular authorities. Although the Scottish Government has the Bellwin scheme, the scale of the problem now and in the future is in danger of not being matched by investment. Information sharing by relevant authorities and planners was discussed at the committee, which talked positively about the role of flood liaison and advice groups, and the opportunity that they provide for formal and informal discussion and information sharing. In response, SEPA has said that it thinks that the local advisory groups will replace many of the functions of FLAGs in the long term, and that it will seek to continue to support FLAGs where they remain in operation. However, there is encouragement of participation in the planning system in the local advisory groups. The committee also discussed resilient building. We discussed the attraction of requiring insurers to adopt a more resilient reinstatement policy to adapting existing building stock after a flood or a storm claim, at no cost to the taxpayer. However, it seems that that would mean higher premiums for householders, and that a requirement would need to be placed on insurers to ensure a level playing field for all insurers. Homeowners are seen to be increasingly vulnerable to the effects of flooding, and that is particularly true of low-income households. Since the statement of principles on the provision of flood insurance in 2008, the Scottish Parliament has passed legislation on flood risk management, in 2009. Part of the statement of principles is about providing information about how to obtain flood insurance and promoting access to insurance for low-income households. The petition was prompted by the fact that the agreement is due to end in July 2013, and the ABI has made it clear that it does not intend to renew the agreement because it believes that it prevents the development of a free market in flood insurance. In a letter to the committee, the Scottish Government said: “The Scottish Government wants to ensure that any proposed solution is equitable across the UK, and we have made it clear that there are a number of issues around the proposals for an internal industry levy which we believe will require careful consideration in relation to Scotland.” The minister said that he had a conversation with Richard Benyon this afternoon. Could the minister use his closing speech to say more about whether the discussions are going well? I am a bit concerned about reference to transitional arrangements, because we are only seven weeks away from the period of change, so I would appreciate more detail on that.

I thank the minister for that. I do not know what the intentions of the committee are, but it might be helpful if the minister could respond to the committee in a more formal way about where we expect to be by July. On the issue of moving away from the statement of principles, it is right to reflect that, whether or not the new development is a positive one and whether or not the statement has delivered for homeowners, it has been claimed that it secured the availability of flood insurance to communities that are at risk of flooding and that it ensured that the Scottish Government invested in flood risk management measures. It is of concern, however, that the evidence from COSLA said anecdotally that “even for those areas which have adequate flood defence schemes in situ, access to insurance can be an issue in some communities due to the unwillingness of the insurance industry to provide cover.” The forthcoming change presents challenges for the Scottish Government, which need to be resolved urgently. It is only two months until the statement of principles expires. The report to which Chic Brodie referred, “Flood Insurance Provision and Affordability” from CREW—the centre of expertise for waters—found that “lower income and non-homeowner groups were also the most likely to have no insurance”. The report went on to suggest that, after July, insurance rates will move closer to the market rate, which would place a heavier burden on people who live in high-risk areas. Concerns have been raised about the availability of accurate information on the risks in Scotland. As other members have said, the CREW report highlighted a particular area of concern that had been expressed by the insurance industry: the “difficulty to date in accessing information on improvements which may substantially reduce the flood risk for individual properties”. Surely that can be resolved. I welcome the minister’s assurances on that issue this afternoon. Another concern is about quantifying the risk of surface-water flooding. No map is available for surface-water flood risk. The situation might soon change, with the planned update of SEPA’s indicative river and coastal flood map and the development of local flood risk management plans by 2016. That would still leave an information gap, however, while the system for calculating insurance is set to change. The CREW report found that, although they are underrepresented in high-risk areas, 41,000 people on very low incomes are identified as being “at risk”. There are further concerns that changes to the insurance market could have an impact on people who are just outside the most income-deprived groups, and the survey that was undertaken suggests that that might be the case. It is estimated that one in 22 households is at risk, and there is a further risk for people who only require contents insurance: if costs go up more than they are able or willing to pay, they might stop having any insurance. Evidence to the committee from the insurer Adrian Webb highlights the possibility that that could be an issue, as “The worst cases that insurers see involve people who believe that they will never be flooded but who are suddenly hit by a catastrophic flash flood. Those people are the ones for whom the Government becomes the insurer of last resort.” [Official Report, Public Petitions Committee, 2 October 2012; c 788.] In those circumstances, it should be asked which Government would be able to provide that level of security for homeowners. The petition raised the issue of cross-subsidy, and suggested that a separate flood insurance pool would be appropriate for Scotland. That is becoming less of an issue, however, as the insurance providers want to move to a system that recognises higher levels of risk. Once that becomes the practice, the issue of cross-subsidy becomes less noticeable—although the extent of it has been questioned by some commentators. In addition, future predictions suggest a greater, not smaller, risk for Scotland. Although a changed system might suit some customers—although it is unlikely to lead to a reduction in premiums—it has the potential to impact more heavily on low-income and high-risk households across the UK. The petition has focused minds on the immediate problem that faces home insurance, as well as highlighting on-going challenges. The Stop Climate Chaos Scotland briefing highlights the fact that “SEPA have estimated average annual losses of between £720 million to £850 million from flooding of buildings and agricultural land ... Work by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation has shown that coastal communities are on the front line from increased flooding”. The foundation has also highlighted the need for “socially just adaptation” to predicted climate change impacts such as flooding. Preparation of Scotland for future climate challenges is important. For many households, how they protect themselves will change in a matter of weeks. The Scottish Government has heard the arguments. It now needs to be clear about the consequences and solutions for Scottish households.

To a certain extent, the ABI briefing questions Professor Crichton’s analysis. The ABI argues that there is more sophistication in the setting of premiums, whether in Scotland or in England, but it highlights the lack of appropriate information as an issue. Will the member perhaps respond to the points that have been made by the insurance sector, which does not agree that there is a significant level of cross-subsidy throughout the UK?

5. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on ash dieback in Scotland. (S4O-02049)

The minister will be aware of research that was published last week by the University of Edinburgh that shows that 90 per cent of trees in the United Kingdom will be infected by the disease. There are real concerns that it will aggravate the effects of climate change. It has been reported that experts at a recent Scottish Government summit proposed the introduction of protection zones. Is that a policy that the Government will pursue? Given the potential impact of the loss of trees on climate change, and given concerns about other fungal diseases, is that being taken into consideration in redrafting the report on policies and proposals?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its response is to the Supreme Court ruling on the Salvesen v Riddell case. (S4T-00329)

I share the cabinet secretary’s disappointment at the decision. Labour will work with the Scottish Government to deliver a workable solution that supports tenant farming in Scotland. Affected tenant farmers have been in limbo, which has caused distress and uncertainty, and the cabinet secretary will be aware of their disappointment at the recent decision. I understand that the Scottish Government asked for a limit on retrospection, which was not granted. Will the cabinet secretary say how many tenant farmers are affected by the judgment? Although the Supreme Court’s ruling on incompatibility was limited to section 72 of the 2003 act, the court said that that section’s relationship with section 73 needs to be looked at again. Will the cabinet secretary address concerns in that regard?

As the cabinet secretary said, the decision is suspended for 12 months. At this point, can he give an indication of the Government’s anticipated timescale for bringing forward proposals? I appreciate the information that the cabinet secretary has provided today. Given the complexity of the issue, will he say how he will keep members informed of the Government’s work? If possible, will he comment on the issue to do with section 73?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on opencast restoration. (S4O-02024)

The minister refers to the establishment of the Scottish Mines Restoration Trust. Yesterday in the Parliament, he described it as a facilitating body rather than a funding one. Will he say a bit more about what discussions he is having with local authorities to ensure that bonds are in place for all current sites? What assurances can he give to local communities that, if there is a problem and the bonds are not in place or are at risk, the Scottish Government will take action to ensure restoration, including considering the sale of assets or putting in place a condition on any future buyers?

When the proposals from the Scottish Court Service were initially leaked in December 2011, I raised concerns over the future of Cupar sheriff court. When my colleague, Iain Gray, led a members’ business debate in February 2012 about the internal document, I raised those concerns again, highlighting in particular the concerns over local access to justice and the economic impact of closure. At the time, members were told that the debate was premature, that there were no proposals to close courts, and that we should wait for the consultation before drawing conclusions. When the consultation was finally published, it was actually worse for Fife than the floated proposals were. Not only was Cupar identified for closure, but it was proposed that jury trials at Kirkcaldy be ended and that they should be held only in Dunfermline.

I thank the member for the intervention. That is an issue that I will turn to later. I have always felt that the proposals were flawed and driven by financial pressure, not what is best for the delivery of justice in Fife. By 2015, the Scottish Court Service’s running cost budget will have reduced by 20 per cent in real terms and its capital budget will have reduced from £20 million to £4 million. Hearing the defence that closures were due to poor facilities and crumbling buildings, I wanted to see the experience for myself, from the witness waiting areas to the cells. I went to a public meeting at Cupar sheriff court. A number of services are located in those buildings, and the police are about to move in. Unfortunately, it was clear at that meeting that the decision to close Cupar had been all but taken by the Scottish Court Service. The condition of the building was a key determining factor that was identified by the Scottish Court Service. However, as Rod Campbell and others have identified, there are questions over who has to meet the costs and whether the figure of £470,000 for the maintenance backlog, which was quoted by the Scottish Court Service, is accurate—the figure was certainly challenged by people at the public meeting. In addition, the annual running costs of the building are less than £50,000 a year. Once the additional costs of moving to Dundee are taken into consideration, there are question marks over whether any money will be saved. The consultation did not include a cost benefit analysis of closure. In addition to the costs, there is the impact that court closure will have on Cupar town centre. At the centre of the issue is the impact that the closure will have on victims and witnesses. Additional strain, in more ways than one, will be put on staff and local people using the service, particularly in relation to transport. Moving the business of the sheriff court to Dundee also moves that part of Fife out of the Fife and Forth Valley community justice authority area, as Alison McInnes said. The proposals are flawed and will bring to an end years of justice being delivered in Cupar. The centralising agenda will also impact heavily on a rural town and represent a significant loss of local services. In addition to the closure of Cupar, the consultation also proposes ending jury trials in Kirkcaldy sheriff court and moving them all to Dunfermline. In the past year, Kirkcaldy held almost three times as many jury trials as Dunfermline did, sat for almost twice as many days and issued twice the number of indictments. Dunfermline sheriff court will see the number of jury trails that it handles increase dramatically. The consultation document suggests that, if justice services were to be centralised anywhere in Fife, it would be in Kirkcaldy. However, I am not convinced that either sheriff court alone could accommodate the needs of Fife. I am not convinced that Dunfermline could cope with such an increase in capacity and workload. That has the potential to lead to an increase in the waiting period for a jury trial to be called, with such delays only adding to what is a stressful time for victims and witnesses. However, again, the condition of the building in Kirkcaldy and the provision for witnesses there were cited as reasons for the change. Before Christmas, I visited both sheriff courts to compare the provision and I took the opportunity to speak to people who worked in the courts. I would like to thank the Scottish Court Service for facilitating those visits, which I found valuable. It is true that Kirkcaldy is in need of an upgrade, as there are features of the building that are not ideal. Dunfermline has more modern facilities. However, the facilities that are highlighted in Kirkcaldy as being poor will still be used by witnesses, victims and staff. Moving jury trials will not change that: the building will still be used. The difference in cell provision was particularly highlighted but, from talking to people who work in the system, it is plain that there are advantages and disadvantages to both courts. For example, Dunfermline has direct access from the cells to the court, but that is the only access from the court to the cells, which means that, as the courts become busier, sessions will be interrupted as solicitors will have to go through the court in the middle of sessions in order to speak to their clients. Overwhelmingly, the people to whom I spoke felt that, on balance, the weaknesses of Kirkcaldy sheriff court were outweighed by the positives of continuing jury trials there. My principal concern is the impact that the proposal will have on access to local justice. Kirkcaldy serves the surrounding area, including Levenmouth and Glenrothes. Levenmouth has one of the lowest rates of car ownership in Scotland. From that area, public transport to Dunfermline can be time consuming and costly. That presents challenges for people with caring responsibilities, which is of significant concern as the court deals with a large number of family cases. A number of other issues have also been raised. Removing jury trial and family cases to Dunfermline will lead to a lack of continuity in the solicitors who represent people. It takes away the flexibility of the solicitors who can be provided in Kirkcaldy, which is particularly concerning when sensitive family cases are being dealt with. The removal of jury trials will also reduce the sheriff’s breadth of experience and lead to a risk of Kirkcaldy being a less attractive place for a sheriff to be based. We have also recently learned that, in addition to the diminution of justice services in Kirkcaldy and Cupar, the funding for the Fife drugs court is being stopped and the service is being run down. There has been no consultation on that move. It will bring an end to a good service that works and put additional strain on other services. A combination of decisions is leading to justice in Fife being sold short by the Scottish Government. Again, the most vulnerable in our communities will be let down.

I welcome the minister’s comments on the steps that are being taken to support those who face the threat of redundancy, but the minister will also be aware of concerns about the restoration of the St Ninian’s site, outside Kelty, and the completion of a significant land arts project that is on-going there. What discussions has the minster been able to have with Fife Council about ensuring that that work is completed?

I am pleased to be speaking in this lunchtime debate, and congratulate Nigel Don on securing the slot. In many ways this is a timely debate, not least because Nigel Don hosted a successful farmers market in Parliament this week. It was an excellent example of what Scotland’s local producers have to offer, and a good opportunity for MSPs to talk to stall holders about their businesses and their passion for their produce. As well as welcoming the two stalls that are based in Fife—the Eden Brewery Ltd and the St Andrews Farmhouse Cheese Company—I spoke to farm owners who had diversified into running shops and selling their own produce direct to their customers. I also spoke to the people running the butcher stall. They had a fantastic model. They are supplied by a local farm, they butcher on the shop premises and they can tell customers exactly where the product is from and how it has been produced. They have complete traceability and quality. For the modern shopper, a butcher’s shop or farmers market can be intimidating. If customers are used to prepackaged produce, they can be wary of the mental arithmetic that is involved in calculating pounds and kilos, particularly if they are price conscious. The butchers whom I spoke to recognise that and they work to price the produce as clearly as possible and to be accessible and provide friendly service. I remember going into a butcher’s shop with my mother when I was a little girl, but like many of my generation, my shopping experience has been much more supermarket focused. This point might not seem to be relevant to those who have always shopped at butcher’s shops, but for people who have only ever experienced off-the-shelf shopping, it can be intimidating to go into a shop and ask for a pound of sausages without knowing what that actually looks like. There are opportunities for butchers. Although the number of high street butchers has reduced, in recent weeks there have been reports of increased footfall and many shops are now also promoting online sales, which is a smart move in today’s market. My granddad was a butcher. It was the trade that he learnt on leaving school and his profession until he retired. At the time, it was an essential skill. That meant that during the war he was at home and his contribution was made in a different way. Butchery was a highly regarded skill and a lot of pride was taken in the work. In the move to much bigger-scale production over the years, there have been concerns that some of that skill is at risk of being lost. There is now a greater commitment from many small and big retailers to recognise and nurture the skill of butchers, which is to be welcomed. The motion also mentions the horsemeat scandal. The shocking revelations that we have heard could be the catalyst for a national debate about our culture’s relationship with food, which could include how we eat, what we eat, how decisions on that are made at individual and corporate level, and the impact that those decisions have on our local and national economies, our nation’s health and our environment. Last year I held a members’ business debate on the Fife diet food manifesto. Given what we now know about the impact of the supply chain stretching across Europe, the scale and potential for food fraud and the treatment of the consumer, this is a good time to have a wider debate. In preparing for today’s debate I did a bit of research. It is undoubtedly true that the quality of meat is higher in many butchers’ shops, that the supply chain is shorter and that there are potential environmental benefits to more local shopping. However, what challenges does price present? A pound of pork sausages—roughly 400g—at my local farmers market cost me £3.24. At a high street butcher’s in my region, a similar weight of sausages cost me £3.18. Although the big supermarket that I went to offers a range of differently priced sausages, a pound of its own-brand pork sausages cost £1.38. Many families across Scotland are facing economic challenges. If people are on low incomes, they have to make choices. I know that compared to other European countries we spend less of our household income on food. An argument can justifiably be made that people should buy less meat, but should buy meat of a higher quality—although that argument tends to be made by commentators who do not have to make that kind of choice. I fully accept that there is evidence to suggest that a cultural shift would be a good thing as it would support local businesses, improve our environment and lead to people being able to eat better-quality produce. However, part of the debate must be about how we ensure that low-income families are not excluded as we meet that challenge.

As well as proposing the closure of Cupar sheriff court, the report states that jury trials in Kirkcaldy will stop, which will put significant pressure on victims and witnesses who live in the Kirkcaldy and Glenrothes area. It will also increase the probability of court delays and reduce access to local justice. What discussion has the cabinet secretary had with the Scottish Court Service on that proposal, which, unlike the proposed closures, will not require parliamentary approval? Does he share my concern that the removal of jury trials from Kirkcaldy will have a negative impact on witnesses and victims?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this evening’s debate and I congratulate David Torrance on securing this slot. I welcome members of the Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society to the chamber. I hope that they find the debate an interesting and positive contribution to their work. The society was established in 1986. I recognise its commitment and hard work in highlighting the importance of the caves and campaigning for their preservation. The society does a lot of work to gather and record information on the caves and to encourage others to take an interest. This debate is not its first engagement with Parliament. In 2000 it brought a petition to the Parliament following the loss of the foreshore path to coastal erosion and it received support from the Public Petitions Committee for further efforts to be made to protect the caves. The Wemyss caves are a group of seven natural caves that lie along the coast immediately to the west of the village of West Wemyss. They are statutorily protected scheduled ancient monuments and are recognised as being of national importance. The drawings in the Wemyss caves are unique. They depict Pictish symbols, early Christian imagery and Viking representations. They tell the story of the coast and the communities that lived and traded there and of those who smuggled there. The drawings provide important information for our understanding of Pictish imagery and how it represents life as well as death. They expand our knowledge of early drawing and carving techniques. Most importantly, they connect modern generations to history in a way that textbooks just cannot do. The caves are difficult to access and the society is to be congratulated on the opportunities that it offers people to visit them through guided tours. The knowledge of the guides adds much to the experience of visiting the caves. It is not always easy to see the drawings, so the guides’ expertise adds greatly to the experience. There is potential for greater public engagement, but there are significant challenges to achieving that. Over the years the caves have been vulnerable to vandalism. A combination of wilful damage and neglect has led to a compromising of the quality of what the caves have to offer. The society recognised that fact when it formed, partly as a response to vandalism and fires being lit in the caves, which led to some of the work being lost for ever. It is worth recognising that the caves are on private property. Clearly Fife Council and Historic Scotland have key interests in the future of the caves and, given their national importance, surely the Scottish Government also has a role in ensuring their future. However, the caves are on private land as part of the Wemyss estate, so there should be some responsibility and engagement at that level, too. Although vandalism, natural weathering and inherent geographical instability have all played a part in the deterioration of the caves in their landscape, coastal erosion has been and continues to be the greater challenge. Since 1989 Fife Council and Historic Scotland have invested in coastal defence works, but the challenge of success in this area must not be underestimated. This stretch of coastline is experiencing considerable coastal erosion. The coastline has retreated by at least 30m since 1974, which presents challenges not only to the caves but to many villages and communities along Fife’s coastline. The caves are at the mercy of the elements. The Scottish Coastal Archaeology and the Problem of Erosion Trust—otherwise known as SCAPE—has been involved in recording the Pictish carvings in particular. As Fiona Hyslop, the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs, recently recognised, “SCAPE has led the field in highlighting the erosion of coastal sites and it is a credit to its members and research that it has found a way to use incredibly accessible mobile technology to improve the national records through the creative use of local expertise.” We need to consider all options for the caves. Coastal erosion presents significant challenges to achieving a long-term or permanent solution, but we need to consider the options for long-term management. A sustainable solution needs to be found that means that the knowledge that the drawings give us and the insight that they provide into the history of the shoreline and of Scotland can be saved. We should not underestimate the threat of coastal erosion or how difficult and costly coastal protection is, but we can be committed to a future for these important historical depictions.

I thank the minister for providing an advance copy of his statement. This is not the first time in this session that the Government has had to seek to reverse a decision on crofting. It is not good enough. Will the minister apologise to the crofters who have been affected by this recent situation, which is deeply worrying to the 179 crofters who have already decrofted and the 60 who are waiting to do so? It is perhaps not surprising that there are problems with the 2010 act. At the time, Labour called for greater scrutiny of the bill, but the Government pushed through legislation that has now been shown to be flawed. In his statement, the minister said: “there is more than one potential way to draft the bill”. However, although the Government accepts the need for emergency legislation, it does not yet know what form that legislation will take. Will the minister say more about timescales? Will we be in a position to start work on the issue immediately after recess? For those who are left in limbo until new legislation is passed, will it be possible to use the Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993 in the meantime? The longer the situation continues, the greater the financial pressure that is being put on crofters across Scotland. Finally, in introducing emergency legislation, will the Government allow independent scrutiny of the act to guard against further flaws?

I welcome this afternoon’s debate. The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 is a significant piece of legislation, which established Scotland as a good example of both Government and Parliament action on climate change. It set out ambitious targets, which we all agreed to. It is recognised internationally as progressive. In a number of recent debates, we have made it clear that the rewards of delivery are not just domestic; they contribute towards Scotland’s effort to deliver climate justice and our international obligations. The collective international effort is not where it needs to be, however, and there is an increasing need for leadership and for results. There is a huge responsibility on the Parliament and the Government to deliver. We all accept that Scotland’s targets are ambitious, and that places all the more emphasis on the need to deliver if those targets are to be credible. We have had early indications that all is not well, and the first emissions target was missed. At the time, the minister identified a cold winter, but it is surely not a surprise to have a cold winter in Scotland. We need to move away from those excuses, and we need greater action. Cold winters by themselves are not the problem; the problems are too many homes and properties with inadequate insulation and inefficient heating, and not enough progress on building standards for new homes. We cannot afford to miss those opportunities if we are to deliver the step change that is needed.

The weather will be a contributory factor, but we cannot accept it as the reason why we might fail targets in future years. The issue needs to be addressed. The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee said that policies to address those challenges, such as on building standards and home efficiency, need to be accelerated. Furthermore, much of the progress that has been made has been attributed to the economic downturn, and there are concerns that change is not being embedded. This afternoon we are debating a draft report, and the next few weeks provide the Scottish Government with the opportunity to respond to the concerns that are being raised and to come back with a more convincing set of policies and proposals. In this short debate, it is impossible to cover the four committee reports, although the conveners’ opening speeches set out the thrust of them. Although there has been scrutiny by policy area, there is a need for scrutiny of RPP2 as a coherent passage of measures. Although the RACCE Committee is the lead committee, there was little synergy between the committee reports. I know that there was frustration from some witnesses at the RACCE Committee that they could not talk about transport policy, even though it is pretty impossible to discuss behavioural change without talking about transport policy. Key messages emerge from the hours of scrutiny involving MSPs, local authorities and environment campaigners, which the Government must listen to and act on. Although it is a statutory requirement to report on how the Scottish Government will respond to the missed target, it is open to interpretation whether or not that can be achieved through RPP2. There has been rhetoric, but it has been difficult to identify what specific policies or proposals have changed in response to the missed target. There has been criticism that it has been difficult to compare RPP1 and RPP2, and I acknowledge the minister’s comments on that in his opening speech. There is a lack of transparency on which proposals from RPP1 have become policies, which proposals and policies have been dropped, and how policies will be addressed. If that point could be addressed in the redraft, it would be much appreciated. No one suggested that meeting our climate change targets would be easy. It needs a combination of Government effort and effort from local authorities, individuals and communities. The committee reports make some good points in those areas. There is an acknowledgement that there are positives in RPP2—that is not in any doubt. There is a recognition of the importance of peatland restoration as a welcome addition to the Government’s priorities. We can also point to the progress that there has been on recycling. In relation to behavioural change, schools and their partners are doing a lot of good work on early years. As my local primary school headed off to the beach this morning as part of eco-week, I do not think that they expected to be going there in the snow. The unpredictability of the weather, both at home and abroad, is one of the key challenges of climate change. The question is whether RPP2 is robust enough to get us to where we need to be and whether it is credible, ambitious, transparent and capable of delivery. When the document was published, Stop Climate Chaos did a scenario calculation demonstrating that Scotland would hit all its targets only if the EU shifted to a 30 per cent target and all policies and proposals were introduced. It looks increasingly likely that the change at the EU level will not happen until at least 2016, so RPP2 is at risk of being doomed to failure. Missed targets in the early years will only make future targets more difficult to achieve and we will constantly be compensating rather than making progress. Stop Climate Chaos chair Tom Ballantine said in recent days: “Ministers are trying to pull the wool over the eyes of the parliament with the current climate plan”.

I am just about to refer to the RACCE Committee. To be fair, the committees have recognised the risk. The RACCE Committee report states: “It is clear from the draft Second Report on Proposals and Policies … that there is only one combination of circumstances that will allow Scotland to meet each of its annual targets from 2013 until 2027.” The committees are consistent in calling for the Scottish Government to be clear about how it will respond if the EU delays setting, or fails to set, the 30 per cent target. At the weekend, a Government spokeswoman was reported as saying that it is “commonly understood” that Scottish targets are based on the EU target. However, that is not the case. It was always recognised that it would be harder without the 30 per cent target, but the Scottish targets were still to be achieved regardless of the EU target. In that context, the challenge for Scotland is to be bold and ambitious, and RPP2 needs to respond to that challenge. The concern is not only about the EU target and the impact that it will have but about the overreliance on proposals over policies. Although proposals have a role to play, the dominance of proposals risks undermining the credibility of the RPP2. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee described it as a failure “to strike the appropriate balance between policies and proposals.” RPP2 itself recognises its limitations. As Stop Climate Chaos highlights, low-carbon transport policies are classified as proposals rather than policies, and RPP2 states: “while in most cases they are already being taken forward, they are not yet being implemented at the intensity required for the abatement figures in this document.” Of course, there needs to be a degree of flexibility, but an overreliance on proposals leads to the plan lacking credibility. Policies, as opposed to proposals, come along with finance and/or legislation and a clear set of timetables. It is not clear when, or which, proposals are expected to become policy. When the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 was passed, there was recognition of the need for early action. However, RPP2 back-loads activity, and there is a lack of evidence of policy action of sufficient intensity in the early years. Transport, housing and rural land use are the policy areas that are identified for additional effort. That is not to say that nothing is happening, but the scale of the challenge in those areas is significant and we have the opportunity to do more now. Although there were calls for greater commitment in the early years, particular concerns were raised about the future abatement—

I am sorry, but I am running out of time.

I know that we are tight for time in this debate. Particular concerns were raised about the future abatement figures—the phrase “wishful thinking” was used in more than one committee. In his opening speech, the minister referred to the fact that significant abatement potential is identified in transport, rural land use and housing in particular. There needs to be greater transparency about how projections are arrived at if there is to be confidence in the RPP2. The minister cannot deliver on the challenges alone. If RPP2 is to have the confidence of MSPs and wider Scotland, a Government response and leadership in the Cabinet are needed. Although there is support for what can be achieved, the purpose of RPP2 is to set out the future path to hit statutory targets, and there are concerns that the report as it stands will fail to achieve that. Scotland has a reputation on climate change that is world leading and worth saving.

Will the minister take an intervention?

In relation to Stop Climate Chaos, does the minister want to say something around the importance of the interim targets and the difficulty that there will be in achieving them prior to 2020? There is also concern that the policies that are meant to deliver after 2020 are unclear and undefined at this stage in RPP2.

I congratulate Angus MacDonald on securing this debate and on his interesting speech. He has given us all an opportunity to recognise the 75th anniversary of the Scottish Association of Young Farmers Clubs. Farming and farming communities have come a long way from the clubs’ original motto, “Better farmers, better countrymen, better citizens,” although the ethos remains. The rural-based youth organisation provides a modern, vibrant, social network of clubs for young people aged 14 to 30 and offers a wide range of activities. The motion highlights the importance of “education, social integration and community participation”. Rural communities often have poor transport links as well as poor access to facilities and entertainment opportunities for young people. Young people in such communities often travel to high school or college, but they can be quite isolated when they return home. We all know that farming is intensive and all-consuming. By enabling contact with others who are actively engaged in farming, young farmers clubs give young people an opportunity to socialise with others who face similar pressures. I note that, although they are called young farmers clubs, people do not need to be farmers to join. As well as opportunities for socialising, the clubs offer skills and training and, because they are peer led, members can shape the programme of activities to meet their needs. Looking at the website, I see that they are engaged in things as wide ranging as tug-of-war competitions, go-karting, speechmaking and, recently, a European vineyard tour. They run a competitive exchange programme, with young people travelling to Canada and America in the coming year. The clubs also provide a focus for involvement in farming through showing livestock as well as learning relevant skills. We know that the average age of a farmer in the United Kingdom is 58. There are complex reasons for that, but essentially there is a reduced rate of new entrants and a reduced rate of retirement or exit of older farmers. At the recent dinner that was held to celebrate NFU Scotland’s centenary, I sat next to a dairy farmer who is based in Fife. He is a few years past conventional retirement age, but he is up every morning when most of us are still in bed. He talked in glowing terms about a young woman who does not come from a farming family but who helps out on his farm, including when they were showing the livestock. He said that she shows a real talent for farming. Her ambition is to be a vet, but I could tell that the dairy farmer thought that she should go into farming. Going into farming is a difficult road for young people. Although the Scottish Government has announced schemes to support new entrants and a pot of money was recently announced, there are still many barriers for new entrants to farming, including financial barriers, rising land prices and the lack of tenancies and starter units. I was pleased to see yesterday that the proposed deal following the Council of Ministers meeting on the common agricultural policy should include a way of providing additional support for new entrants as well as of topping up support for some recent entrants, although the detail of that is yet to be agreed. It is also good to see the level of involvement of young women in young farmers clubs. The majority of the recent winners of the international travel exchange programme were women. Farming is traditionally seen as a male occupation, even though many farms have always relied on a partnership and on family effort to make the business successful. In recent years, there has been an increasing number of examples of women taking a lead in farming. For today’s debate I looked through the archives and, in 2010, The Scottish Farmer reported—rather tongue in cheek I suspect, or hope—that “History was made in the SAYFC Stockman of the Year contest at the Highland, when it was won—for the first time ever—by a female!” It went on to describe the then 23-year-old Ann Laird from West Linton, who won with a convincing lead of 15 points. Ann qualified with a first in animal science at the Scottish Agricultural College in Edinburgh, worked in New Zealand for a year and returned home to join the family business, milking 500 Holsteins. Maybe there should have been less mock surprise when she won. I wish the organisation well with raising contributions for its newly launched 75th anniversary legacy fund and look forward to its continuing contribution to rural communities and the lives of young people throughout Scotland.

I am pleased to speak in this evening’s debate and I congratulate Jackie Baillie on bringing forward the issue. Dementia is a condition that impacts on many families and individuals across Scotland and one that is expected only to increase among the Scottish population. Those demands will impact on our health and social care services, so we must ensure that we develop services that will respond to those rising demands. When I met Royal College of Nursing clinical leaders from Fife in the Parliament a few weeks ago, they identified the growth in more complex health needs as one of the pressures facing the health service. Of course, the issue is not just about our health service or the structure or frameworks that we create to work with dementia. What strikes me in reading the briefing from Health and Social Care Alliance Scotland is the human response to dementia, how people are treated, how they are understood, how they are supported and how they are talked to. We can get the structures right, but how people are treated will be the key to a successful dementia strategy. Carers must be at the heart of our strategy. With an estimated 86,000 people in Scotland living with dementia, there is an army of carers out there looking after their loved ones. That experience can be difficult and challenging—it is certainly exhausting—and is also an act of love and care. My family, like many across Scotland, has had the experience of caring for a family member at home with Alzheimer’s. No one expects a medal or recognition for caring. Carers care from a sense of duty, because it seems like the right thing to do and because they feel that no one else will do it or because they worry that no one else will be able to provide the kind of care that they personally can provide. They may have 100 different reasons, but the heart of the matter is that they love the person that they care for. Caring can take over the carer’s life and become a 24-hour-a-day job. Someone may become a carer over a period of time, as a spouse or parent gradually becomes more dependent, or it may be a sudden change when a decision has to be taken about care and a relative moves into the family home. Some people make the decision to be a carer whereas, for others, particularly spouses, it can be a role that they just increasingly fulfil. The Fife Carers Centre in Kirkcaldy, which offers support and advice, is supporting an increasing number of people all the time. That work should be recognised. Carers often worry about the person they care for, about the level of care that they are able to provide, about the treatment that the person will get from others, about the effect on the wider family and also about what will happen in future. That responsibility places a burden on carers that affects their physical, mental and emotional health. In addition, carers often experience added pressure on their finances, sometimes as a result of incurring extra expenses and sometimes as a result of their income being reduced because of a need to cut their working hours or give up work altogether. Those are some of the reasons why the dementia carers’ voices project is so valued. I welcome the extent to which the debate has recognised the work of Tommy Whitelaw, who has been raising awareness of the impact of dementia on families. The collection of life stories demonstrates that carers of people with dementia often feel isolated and that there is insufficient recognition of the complex issues that they have to deal with, which range from legal and financial matters to health and housing. Those letters and stories are a valuable resource that should be used to inform future policy and service provision. One of the identified outcomes of the project is to gather information that will support family and person-centred approaches to health and social care. The briefing that we have received makes it clear why that is important. Many of the carers’ comments are about the person for whom they are caring not being recognised as a person—they express a feeling that the person inside the dementia is forgotten—and they call for greater recognition of the carer role among health and social care professionals. One carer described the need to recognise the value of the trust that the person with dementia has in the carer. The letters that have been collected are powerful and are testimony to the valuable work that carers do across Scotland, but they are also about the human experience. Being a carer is not a job; it is about being part of a family. The letters demonstrate that, although people do it for the best of reasons, they cannot and should not have to do it alone.

Although there is no current evidence of products that are produced in Scotland being contaminated with horsemeat, there has been contamination of beef products with pork. Does the cabinet secretary agree that cuts since 2008 in numbers of meat inspectors, environmental health officers and trading standards officers have contributed to problems with mislabelling of products?

I am pleased to be speaking in this debate. There is widespread agreement that reform of the CAP is necessary. There must be greater fairness in distribution among European Union members; we need to recognise the environmental challenges that Europe faces; and we need to deliver public confidence and respond to the priorities of a changing world. The CAP budget is nearly 40 per cent of the total EU budget, and there must be greater public confidence and transparency in its use and priorities. With 85 per cent of Scotland’s farmed area designated as disadvantaged and less favoured, reform needs to recognise those challenges. I hope that the UK Government and the Scottish Government can work together positively on those matters. It needs to be recognised that farming in more remote and disadvantaged areas brings multiple benefits to communities. We can agree that there needs to be a fairer distribution of support throughout the EU and within the UK, and not just for Scotland. The accession countries receive small pillar 1 payments, and agriculture is at the very centre of the economies of many of them. It employs many people, and those countries also deserve a fairer distribution. Towards the end of the process, decisions will need to be made about how Scotland will distribute its payments in the move from historic to area payments. We have sharp contrasts in Scotland. The average payment in East Lothian is over €125,000, while Highland receives an average of just over €34 per hectare. Therefore, there is an opportunity for the cabinet secretary to deliver the degree of redistribution that he argues for across the EU and within the UK, provide increased support to farming in disadvantaged areas, and ensure a level playing field for new entrants. The Scottish Government’s amendment argues for CAP spending to be rectified in order to address the needs of rural Scotland. Will the cabinet secretary take the same approach when he makes allocation decisions relating to Scotland’s direct payments? Whatever decision is made on area payments, there needs to be greater transparency in the proposals as well as an opportunity for parliamentary scrutiny and engagement. The Government amendment says that more will be revealed on 17 April. Meanwhile, the Welsh Assembly Government, which is facing similar decisions, has been open about the changes that are being proposed. It even has a website that anyone can go to and do the sums. That is quite a contrast with the Scottish Government’s approach. It is inevitable that there will be winners and losers in the process, and farmers and crofters need to be able to begin planning for the changes. Our amendment highlights the need to be clear about new entrants to farming and crofting and where they stand. New entrants currently get a raw deal from the CAP. While recognising that they get pots of money from the Scotland rural development programme and other targeted payments, they rightly ask why, when they are productive and growing new businesses, they do not get the support that other farms get. New entrants face lots of challenges in entering farming: financial barriers, rising land prices and lack of tenancies and starter units. The reform of the CAP must deliver for new entrants if we are to see a secure future for farming in Scotland. Greater clarity is needed on the timescales for reform and the support that will be available. NFU Scotland and the Committee of Professional Agricultural Organisations—COPA—have signed a declaration in support of the Irish tunnel subsidy payment system. However, I think that we should be cautious about that approach, because it will slow reform and, although it will cushion change for some, it will mean that others who are in need of support will have to wait longer. For example, a farmer from Grampian recently tweeted me to say that it will mean that he will have to wait until 2025 for a level playing field. As Tavish Scott said, it would be helpful to know the cabinet secretary’s view on that. I am short of time, but I want to address the Conservative amendment. We support the principle of convergence and the need for a fairer allocation within the UK, but I am concerned that the amendment is too prescriptive and does not address the issues around production and disadvantage. An average per hectare payment masks quite a lot of inconsistencies in Scotland, as the earlier East Lothian and Highland example illustrated. However, I will listen to Alex Fergusson’s speech with interest. We hear again from the Government the assertion that we would see significant additional CAP funds from independence. During a debate in January last year before he became a minister, Paul Wheelhouse claimed that “when Scotland becomes independent, the full economic benefit of convergence between member states will be delivered to Scotland automatically.”—[Official Report, 18 January 2012; c 5396.] However, we increasingly see the terms of Scotland’s EU membership being questioned: the SNP claimed that it would be automatic, but it now acknowledges the need for negotiations.

I am sorry, but I am just closing. What could be more open to negotiation than CAP payments? We see a reducing budget with more pressures being placed on it. Recent examples show that new member states, including those that joined in 2007, have had direct payments phased in gradually. That would be disastrous for Scottish farming, and the SNP can give no guarantees on the future of farmers within the EU. I move amendment S4M-05898.2, after “substantial changes” to insert: “and that new entrants into farming and crofting can be clear on what support will be available to them”.

In September I was pleased to bring to the Parliament a members’ business debate on the Fife diet manifesto. I hoped to start or encourage discussion about our relationship with food, how we eat and how we grow and trade food. The need for such discussion has, if anything, intensified in the wake of recent food scandals, and it is unfortunate that it has needed a crisis to bring us to this point. I doubt that any member disagrees with the cabinet secretary when he says that Scotland produces some of the world’s finest food and that our food and drink industry is a vital part of the Scottish economy. However, although we recognise the contribution of our farming sector and our fishermen and although we welcome initiatives that promote the best of what Scotland has to offer, the stark reality is that food banks are on the rise, the demand for food parcels has doubled and, according to Save the Children, one in six children goes to bed hungry every night. In the debate in September, members discussed a food sector that is dominated by a few companies. In recent weeks, we have seen how such companies influence the food chain. The horsemeat scandal magnified the issue, implicating large companies that many people considered to be reputable, safe and trustworthy, such as Findus, Birds Eye, Tesco and Asda. It is right that we challenge supermarkets about their supply chains and that we identify the need for more European Union action on labelling. However, the Scottish Government has responsibility for regulation and implementation in Scotland, and recent events force us to ask whether our system is robust enough to be able to restore consumers’ confidence and trust. The restoration of trust would benefit industry as well as consumers. We await final results from DNA testing and, given the weekly reports of a new company or product being implicated in relation to food fraud, it seems that we have not yet resolved the problem. It is important that we ask the hard questions. We can acknowledge the strong approach to traceability in Scottish farming and the positives of our food sector, but we cannot be complacent. Since the cabinet secretary’s statement on the horsemeat scandal, we have learned that two large catering companies, Brakes and Sodexo, which supply the public sector, have been supplying adulterated meat products. Questions about who supplied the companies with those products remain unanswered. Has the cabinet secretary been told who supplied the meat? If so, will he inform Parliament and consumers? If we are to aim for a transparent food chain and full traceability, we need to know where the processed meat originated. If we are to restore consumer confidence, we must ensure that all information is available and that there is full traceability to where the horsemeat originated. In his statement to the Parliament, the cabinet secretary told us that food and drink contracts are awarded with regard to a balance between price and quality. We were told that quality is vital in the awarding of a contract and that the lowest price will not necessarily win the contract. It has since been revealed that the Scotland Excel contract for school catering is awarding a weighting of 65 per cent to price compared with 20 per cent to quality. Cost is therefore given more than three times greater weighting than quality. That is not a balance. Was the cabinet secretary aware of the 65:20 ratio weighting when he made the statement to Parliament? Does he agree that it would have been better to have greater clarity for members and parents? Recently, it was announced that the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment would join the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning in hosting a school meals summit. We now know that the average cost for a school meal is as low as £1.68. Although we can point towards local authorities such as East Ayrshire Council and its focus on local food sourcing, it is evident that local authorities have been encouraged towards national procurement contracts as a means to deliver best value. Parents and carers should be able to send their children to school in confidence that the lunch that they eat is healthy, nutritious and exactly as described. For some children across Scotland, the school dinner is their only meal of the day. Transparency, traceability and quality must be higher on the agenda. We look forward to hearing more from the cabinet secretary on the outcomes of the recent summit. We will probably never know how much horsemeat was in the food chain prior to the breakout of the scandal or how long the adulteration of food had been taking place. It has been clear throughout that the complexity of the supply chains and the relationships between companies have been difficult for people to understand. If the Food Safety Authority of Ireland had not found traces of horsemeat DNA in beefburgers on 15 January, there is every chance that the recall of contaminated products would not be taking place. The Ulster Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals believes that there are 70,000 horses unaccounted for in Northern Ireland. Through the close working of the USPCA and the Scottish SPCA, we know that Scottish ports have been used in the transportation of maltreated horses with fake passports. Was the cabinet secretary aware of the conviction and subsequent fine of a horse trader from Northern Ireland in November 2012 at Stranraer sheriff court for transporting maltreated horses with no or fake passports? In the current circumstances, that recent conviction is concerning. Did any information sharing take place on that conviction? Of course, hindsight is a wonderful thing, but we can perhaps now recognise that there is a greater need for agencies to share information. Sometimes the connections are not easy to identify. A national debate started because of the horsemeat scandal, but that has grown into a much wider examination of food standards. Waitrose withdrew a product that was contaminated with pork at its Shettleston plant, which is a major concern for halal customers. There have also been more recent reports that banned mechanically separated meat is being used in the UK to count towards meat content. Only last weekend, questions were raised about the reliability and accuracy of meat dish labelling in restaurants. Although many of the cases are about mislabelling, there are also public health concerns. George Fairgrieve, the food safety adviser at the Royal Environmental Health Institute of Scotland, recently said: “A worrying impact of the reduction in the number of inspections being carried out is that the opportunity for fraudulent activity increases and law-abiding traders are disadvantaged .... There are other vital areas of public health that must also be considered, for example preventing or dealing with outbreaks of E-coli O157 and Legionella.” The latest revelations show once again that it is the average customer who is being let down. The FSA Scotland’s consultation launch last week was welcome. We must take that as an opportunity to review what is working and what needs to be improved.

Since 2008, under the Scottish National Party’s watch, we have seen a reduction in the number of meat inspectors and environmental health officers. Under the Scottish Government, cuts have been passed down to local authorities. We see the pressures that they face and, if we work in a light-touch regulatory system, those are seen as easy areas to make reductions. Last week my colleague, Dr Simpson, asked questions about the FSA’s funding. Although commitments were given on the stability of FSA funding, the new body will have additional responsibilities that will need to be fully supported. To go back to Rob Gibson’s comments, the debate should give us the opportunity to ask whether we have things right and to recognise where there are mistakes in the current system. Regardless of where those mistakes emanate from, the debate gives us a chance to ask whether we have the regulatory system right and whether we are delivering the best interests of the consumer. A recent Unison Scotland report raises concerns about the drop in food sampling by a third, the reduction of meat inspectors by 50 per cent and the drop in the number of environmental health officers in local authorities. Some 56 per cent of environmental health officers say that their teams have had major cuts. A further 10 per cent describe cuts as severe and one member said: “We have not submitted any samples for food in ten months!” The issue is not only the reduction in staff numbers but the way in which the system operates. Random testing, unannounced visits and a system for whistleblowing are needed if we are to have integrity in the system. A combination of lighter-touch regulation and financial pressures has resulted in fewer checks and balances. Professor Andrew Watterson of the University of Stirling described the risks: “Declines in meat inspector numbers and local authority food safety officers, along with reduced food sampling, must contribute to a weakening of public health standards and the possibility of criminal abuses in the food system.” Of course, I recognise the FSA’s work in recent weeks and the additional inspections that have been carried out. However, those are all after the event and I imagine that, even if there had been any problems, the premises would have got their houses in order for preannounced visits. Given what we now know, we need a robust assessment of whether the system provides us with confidence. Food is a complex issue. The Parliament has been bold in other areas of public health, but our food policy is defined primarily by export levels and quality products. Those are both positive outcomes, but our food policy must work for everyone in Scotland. It is important for our economy, our health and addressing inequalities. The Government motion does not address the challenges that we face in relation to food, the growing inequality around food and the crisis that has engulfed the sector throughout Europe. Those are the matters that the Parliament needs to address. I move amendment S4M-05892.3, to leave out from “welcomes” to “policy and” and insert: “supports the promotion of local produce and sourcing while recognising the need for affordability, particularly as the demand on food banks rises; notes the recent food scandal, including the adulteration of products with horsemeat, which has affected products sold throughout Scotland and, in learning lessons from this, believes that a robust regulatory regime is necessary to ensure the highest standard of food labelling and food safety to restore consumer confidence and trust; expresses concern that a school in Scotland was supplied with adulterated food through a national procurement contract; calls on the Scottish Government to outline what action it will take following the school meals summit; highlights the recent members’ survey by Unison that raises concerns over staff cuts, reductions in food sampling and the future of the meat inspection service and calls on the Scottish Government to outline its response to this; recognises the progress that has been made through the national food and drink policy but believes that there is no room for complacency as it”.

Following last week’s summit, can the cabinet secretary say whether the balance between quality and cost will be reconsidered? Currently, quality is only a third of the balance. [Interruption.]

I congratulate Jean Urquhart on bringing the debate to the chamber. Her speech revealed a real understanding of not just the challenges that crofting communities face, but of their resilience and their reason for being. This is an opportune week for the debate, given that we had a debate on food policy this afternoon and will debate CAP reform tomorrow afternoon. Crofters play a vital role in the rural economy. As the motion highlights, they maintain land in remote areas, contribute to securing population levels in remote communities, support the larger agricultural sector and make a significant contribution to Scotland’s environment. I want to cover three areas in this short debate. First, the motion identifies CAP subsidy as a means of support for crofting communities. The process of CAP reform is on-going; we need genuine reform, and there will inevitably be winners and losers, but reform provides an opportunity to direct support to where it can achieve greater multiple gains. Crofting, given the contribution that it makes to sustainable communities and Scotland’s environment, has much to be championed. Crofting agriculture is generally agreed to be uneconomic, but it delivers much more. CAP reform and the move from historic to area payments in Scotland could give us an opportunity to ensure that appropriate support measures are put in place to protect and enhance crofting agriculture. We need to decide what the best use of the funds is to deliver the greatest benefits to vulnerable rural communities by contributing to their vitality and securing them even where the benefits are not easy to measure. Secondly, I want to refer to Raasay, which Jean Urquhart has lodged another motion about. Although the fact that the lease has been returned to the Raasay community is welcome, it is for only one year and has cost the Government three times what it accepted as a bid for the rights, so questions remain about how the decision was made. As land reform legislation passed through the Scottish Parliament, the then Scottish Executive introduced the “Estate Charter”, which set out a series of principles that acknowledged the Scottish Government’s role as landowner, and the impact that poor decisions could have on the viability of communities. The recent decision on Raasay shooting rights has highlighted the charter. The Scottish Government has claimed that ministers were not involved in the decision. Even if that were to be accepted, the question remains, why not? This evening’s debate is perhaps not the appropriate parliamentary forum for the unanswered questions to be answered, but there needs to be parliamentary scrutiny of the decision and the status of the charter. The minister will be aware of growing concerns, which have been raised by other members, about interpretation of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010. Guidance from the Crofting Commission has informed owner-occupier crofters that they do not have a legal mechanism through which to decroft, and that is creating uncertainty. If the problems are being caused by the 2010 act, steps must be taken to resolve the issue and the Government must provide clarity on how the situation will be resolved. I thank Jean Urquhart for bringing the debate and for recognising the importance of crofting to the Highlands and Islands.

Can I ask whether the Scottish Government still adheres to the principles in the estates charter that the then Scottish Executive established in 2002?

I congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing this evening’s debate. As the motion recognises, 2013 is the year of natural Scotland, which gives us an opportunity to focus on biodiversity and promote our heritage, wildlife and landscapes. I hope that it is about more than pinning a natural Scotland label on events that are already in the pipeline. We need much more debate and discussion about our environment, and a tangible legacy of the year would be a robust biodiversity plan with clear actions to deliver on our targets. In focusing on endangered species, the motion highlights the red squirrel. Last summer, I went to a red squirrel fun day in Tentsmuir forest in north-east Fife to find out about the work of the Fife red squirrel group. Fife is not a target protection area, but the peninsula at Tentsmuir provides an opportunity for local activists to try to grow a population there. I commend the work of the Fife red squirrel group and groups like it across the country as they work tirelessly in raising awareness and introducing programmes to protect endangered species. However, as Murdo Fraser said, they need support to do that successfully. Not for the first time in the chamber, I highlight the work of Scottish Environment LINK and its species champions programme, which is certainly capturing the imagination of MSPs. Although it is a bit of fun, it is proving to be an effective way in which to engage the Parliament in the challenges that many endangered species are facing. I am grateful to Dave Thompson, who is not here this evening, for adopting the sand eels. My puffins need them as they provide a valuable food source and help to grow their habitat. Habitat protection is vital to securing the future of species. The minister will be aware that there are concerns that the marine protected areas do not protect seabirds. The motion also mentions habitat conservation. That is just as important offshore as it is onshore, and the minister knows that there is growing concern about the delayed marine plan.

I am aware of other measures that the Government is taking, but the minister will know that there are still concerns about marine protected areas not protecting seabirds. Their inclusion would give an extra layer of protection. To show that I am not someone who will back away from trickier issues, I note that the motion also mentions wild land designation, and I understand that the Public Petitions Committee will take evidence on the John Muir Trust petition in the near future. I recognise the concerns of the John Muir Trust and other organisations such as Ramblers Scotland about wild lands in Scotland. Effective protection of wilderness areas is important and, as Murdo Fraser highlighted, it is valued by the public. The Parliament has introduced protective measures over the years. The National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000 resulted in the establishment of the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park in 2002 and the Cairngorms national park in 2003. In a response to the Public Petitions Committee, the minister outlined the existing means of protection, which include sites of special scientific interest, national parks, national nature reserves and national scenic areas. NSAs are defined as areas “of outstanding scenic value in a national context.” There are 40 such areas and they cover 13 per cent of the land area of Scotland. They ensure that areas such as Glencoe, Ben Nevis, the Hebrides and some landscapes in Perthshire and the Borders are protected from inappropriate development. There is a system of protection and there is already a system of constraints that are placed on developers. It is not easy to achieve the right balance between competing demands, but it is essential to do so. The John Muir Trust has a clear position on the limiting of renewables development and it raises concerns about the impact that such development has on our landscapes and the environment. However, Murdo Fraser started to explore the fact that designating wild lands would present other challenges. Decisions would be fairly subjective and they would run the risk of creating an imbalance in another direction. The key debate needs to be about the value of what is being protected, rather than what is being prevented. The Government has said that it is “satisfied that existing legislation and administrative systems for land use planning and environmental management provide appropriate means for meeting the obligations and objectives set out in the” European landscape convention. However, there are issues, such as hill tracks, on which we need progress to make the protections that we already have work better. I am sure that there will be an interesting debate on the matter in committee, and I look forward to hearing the minister’s response when he closes the debate.

As the minister will know, the number of meat inspectors has halved since 2008. While that is partly due to a reduction in the number of premises requiring inspection, there has been a move towards lighter-touch regulation, with a reduction in the number and frequency of inspections. Only today, we hear news of banned mechanically separated meat being used in the UK to count towards meat content. Will the minister respond to Unison Scotland’s warning against the introduction of a new body that promotes lighter-touch regulation? Will he give an assurance, particularly given what we now know about the food chain, that the new system, with a robust regulatory framework that puts consumers’ interests first, will prevent future scandals of this nature?

This has been a wide-ranging debate with many interesting speeches. I wish the minister all the best in taking forward his first piece of Government legislation. He might get through this afternoon quite comfortably, but stage 2 might be a bit bumpier. I thank members of the committee for the time that they took to prepare the stage 1 report. They not only considered the proposals in the bill but took the time to consider the broader issues and discuss issues that are outwith the bill’s scope. I know that that involved more than taking evidence in cosy committee rooms. The committee also travelled to salmon rivers, wild fishery hatcheries, coastal netting stations, fish farms and processing plants—we have heard about some of those experiences this afternoon—all in the deepest, darkest Scottish winter. I am sure that that is the kind of team building that companies cannot pay for these days. The breadth of the issues that have been discussed this afternoon perhaps demonstrated the bill’s limitations. The committee has stressed the need for the legislation to be fit for purpose for many years to come. There are exceptions—the area is complex—but, having introduced legislation as a first step, the Government needs to be careful that subsequent reviews and discussions do not weaken the bill. For example, in her opening speech, Claudia Beamish spoke about the importance of how the bill connects to the marine plan. In the pre-legislative consultation document that explored the possible content of the bill, the Scottish Government said: “aquaculture production and salmon and freshwater fisheries are estimated to be worth over £650m … to Scotland … It is important that both sectors—and their interactions—are managed effectively, as part of the wider marine and freshwater environment and to maximise their combined contribution to our aim of sustainable economic growth in Scotland.” The bill aims to address those issues. The consultation generated more than 1,000 responses. There is no denying that opinions were strongly divided. It would certainly be difficult to make easy progress on some of the issues that were raised. However, the Government’s solution to that was to produce a bill that was accompanied by a further document outlining where future action was planned for the matters that were not addressed in the bill—which, coincidentally, also seemed to be the matters that caused the greatest dispute. Unlike James Isbister, who caught a 6ft ling this week, the Government seems to have cast a line, got plenty of bite but failed to land the big fish. Although the bill seeks to improve the regulatory framework, it has increasingly been seen as the start of a process, with much work being left to the refreshed ministerial group on aquaculture and a forthcoming review of wild fisheries management. The committee talks about the need for a “coherent wild fisheries management structure”. It is a point well made. The minister must be mindful of the need for continuity and coherence. Many members referred to the tensions between stakeholders and to the sometimes contradictory evidence that was received—a point that was strongly emphasised in the stage 1 report. Scotland has a growing aquaculture sector. The Scottish Government recognises its importance to the economy. Scottish farmed salmon is viewed as a high-value, high-quality product throughout the world. It is Scotland’s top food export and is marketed in more than 65 countries, with particular growth in the far east. It employs more than 6,000 people often in rural areas, and there is a target of increasing the production of all farmed fish by 50 per cent by 2020. Alongside that industry is a wild fisheries sector, which is also highly valued in Scotland and throughout the world. One of Scotland’s most iconic images is of a wild salmon leaping up a river. That fish must be protected, as well as pursued, in its native environment. In its briefing for the debate, the Scottish Wildlife Trust highlighted the fact that there has been a decline in Atlantic salmon in European waters over the past three decades. It identifies the complex reasons—food availability, water temperature changes, pollution, barriers in rivers, overfishing and the effects of aquaculture—and recognises that probably a combination of all of them has contributed to decline.

I thank Claudia Beamish for her intervention. Although the two sectors need to coexist, an appropriate balance needs to be struck, and there needs to be greater trust and transparency. The level of regulation is crucial. No one wants us to have regulation that would damage an important Scottish industry, but calls have been made for proportionate regulation, in recognition of the fact that across our food chain there is a need—perhaps now more than ever—for transparency and, as my colleague Jayne Baxter highlighted, robust governance. As many members identified, how we report sea lice is the most contentious issue and, in some ways, it is one that encapsulates the tensions that exist across the sector. It raises issues of proportionate regulation, of transparency, of trust, of consumer confidence and of the importance of a science-led approach. Both sides of the debate make persuasive arguments, of which Graeme Dey gave a good description as he outlined the nature of the debate that has taken place in the committee. I welcome the recent moves by the SSPO to increase its accountability, but I recognise the strong arguments in favour of a more robust reporting system. Although the minister has ruled out a Government amendment on the matter at this stage, the importance that the committee has attached to the issue suggests that we will return to it at stage 2. In the time that I have left, I will pick up on a few issues that members have highlighted. Graeme Pearson and Alex Fergusson discussed illegal cockle fishing. Thankfully, cases of illegal activity and exploitation in the sector are few and far between, and it is important that we do not allow the activities of a minority to tarnish the reputation of the rest of the sector. I am pleased that the Government has recognised the need to strengthen the legislation in this area. It is important that the Government works with the Scottish police service, the industry and other relevant agencies to ensure that robust further progress is made. It is interesting that many members have talked about areas that were discussed in the consultation, but which were not included in the bill. That indicates that there is much more work to do. I will touch briefly on the issue of commercially damaging species. In its report, the committee suggested that the Scottish Government should take the opportunity to re-examine the issue and to consider lodging amendments, but at the moment the minister continues to argue that the current proposals are proportionate. I hope that the Scottish Government will reflect on the committee’s comments as the bill moves forward. Angus MacDonald and Richard Lyle talked about the potential for the bill to contribute to tackling climate change challenges, as well as the challenges that the sector faces. Rob Gibson and Margaret McDougall spoke about the contentious issue of seals and reflected the committee’s support for greater use of alternative predator controls. Jim Hume discussed escapes and promoted a solution; we await the minister’s reply. The committee recognised that escapes from fish farms are undesirable and stressed the importance of all sectors working together to minimise them. The report also raised concerns about biomass. Last year in the chamber, I highlighted to the minister the concern that the aim of increasing the production of all farmed fish by 50 per cent by the year 2020 could result in a subsequent increase in the use of chemical treatments. I reiterate that point and ask for assurances that the Government is actively looking into the issue. It is important that the regulatory framework that the bill contains is robust enough to ensure that any increases in aquaculture will be suitably managed and regulated. It has been an interesting debate, in which there has been as much discussion of what is not in the bill as there has been of what is in it. We might be moving towards stage 2, but wider issues need to be addressed before we can be confident that we have an aquaculture and fisheries sector that is fit for the 21st century, and which will meet the needs of the industry and the wider environment. Those will need to be resolved through the bill or through future work by the Parliament.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it has made on addressing concerns regarding horsemeat in the food chain. (S4T-00260)

Despite the fact that the cabinet secretary said in his statement last week, “food and drink contracts are awarded in a way that balances price and quality before they are awarded. It is not necessarily the lowest price that wins; quality is vital in the public sector”,—[Official Report, 19 February 2013; c 16658.] horsemeat has in the past week been identified in school burgers and frozen beef products have been withdrawn from schools across Scotland. In preparing the statement, did the Scottish Government know that school contracts are awarded on a weighting of 65 per cent price and 20 per cent quality, meaning that, in the national contract, cost is weighted three times more than quality? Why was that not made clear to Parliament and Scotland’s parents in last week’s statement?

Of course, the people who check food safety in local authorities are the environmental health officers. Today, Unison has published a damning survey of environmental health officers, 56 per cent of whom say that their team has seen “major” cuts, with a further 10 per cent describing the cuts as “severe”. One member has even said: “We have not submitted any samples for food for ten months!” Was the minister’s department aware of those cuts? Was the minister also aware of FSA Scotland’s underspend, which amounted to 10 per cent of its budget? Were any questions asked about why the organisation was returning such a significant underspend?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement, although it is fair to say that the Scottish Government’s reaction has been slow. We fully support efforts to promote the Scottish meat sector and its produce, but Scottish consumers are as likely to have eaten contaminated products as consumers elsewhere in the UK. Greater local sourcing and shorter supply chains are part of the solution, but such food is often outwith the budgets of hard-pressed families. Regardless of income, consumers deserve to have confidence in the products that they buy and to know where those products have come from. In his statement, the cabinet secretary recognised potential weaknesses in the processing sector. What assurances can he give that those will be addressed? Given what we now know about the regulatory regime in Scotland—a third fewer food safety inspections are carried out than in 2008 and there has been a 50 per cent fall in the number of meat inspectors, as well as a drop in the number of local authority environmental health officers and specialist food safety officers—we must ask whether the cabinet secretary believes that the regulatory system is robust enough. Does he agree that light-touch regulation has failed the sector and the consumer? It has taken a crisis to kick the Government into action on a stand-alone food standards body. This has been a missed opportunity. The Government promised a consultation by the end of the year, and now we are to get a statement next week. Will it now fast-track the establishment of such a body?

The First Minister will be aware of the decision by the board of the Byre theatre of St Andrews that the theatre is to go into liquidation; the theatre has already closed its doors. What discussions has the Scottish Government had with Creative Scotland over the closure? Can the First Minister give an assurance that ministers will do all that they can to support discussions between Fife Council and Creative Scotland in attempts to secure a future for the Byre?

The Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 is enforced by wildlife crime officers throughout Scotland. The minister will be aware that there are some concerns about their future. Will he assure the Parliament that the police service of Scotland will protect and develop the important work that the wildlife crime officers carry out?

First, I apologise for being late. It is a large document, but I thank the minister for an advance copy of the statement and the document. This is the beginning of the parliamentary scrutiny of the document. There is a serious responsibility on parliamentarians to ensure that the new plan is credible and robust and will enable Scotland to deliver on its climate change targets. We know that that is challenging. Scotland failed to meet its first emissions reduction target and the Scottish Government’s director of energy and climate change admitted that, at the current rate of progress, Scotland would miss all its legally binding emissions reduction targets. Does the director of energy and climate change now believe that we are on course? We need a step change and a move away from proposals to deliverable policies. The statement highlighted where progress is being made, and we can support that, but the minister did not say enough about what additional substantial measures will be taken to meet our ambitious climate change targets. Disappointingly, his statement today has given the Parliament little assurance that the shortcomings of RPP1 will be addressed and it lacked sufficient new and additional policies to really make the difference, particularly in housing and transport. The minister cannot address those issues alone. What commitments has he gained from Cabinet members that will compensate for our lack of progress, both in this year’s budget and in future years? Against the backdrop of rolling back on the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme, watering down new building standards and planning to use public subsidy to support inefficient large biomass, is there enough evidence in the document of policies that will make the difference that is required?

I am pleased to open the debate for Labour. First, I thank the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee for securing the debate and using its time to bring this important issue to the chamber. The debate gives us the opportunity to reflect on the submissions that have been received for the Scottish Government’s consultation on the 2020 challenge for Scotland’s biodiversity and to add to them. However, we will have to wait for the opportunity to debate the Government’s response, although I welcome the minister’s announcement on the delivery agreement and the monitoring committee. The consultation is welcome. Biodiversity has been on the political and global agenda since the Rio earth summit in 1992. A commitment was made in April 2002 “to achieve by 2010 a significant reduction of the current rate of biodiversity loss at the global, regional and national level as a contribution to poverty alleviation and to the benefit of all life on Earth.” In addition, the Aichi targets set by the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity called for a step change in efforts to halt the loss of biodiversity and to restore the essential services that a healthy, natural environment provides. Scotland’s response to that was the 2004 “Scotland’s Biodiversity: It’s in Your Hands” strategy. It is hugely disappointing that Scotland failed to meet the 2010 target but, as Rob Gibson explained, it was a global failure. The call to action in 1992 has not resulted in a halt to the loss of biodiversity. There is a need to redouble efforts at home and abroad if we are to meet the important 2020 targets. We should take the time to consider why the targets are important. Biodiversity can seem removed from people’s everyday lives and irrelevant in a modern and technological age. It may be seen as something to enjoy recreationally rather than something that impacts on our lives. However, the problems that we faced in 1992 are as relevant today as they were then. The “Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 and the Aichi Targets” recognises that a functioning ecosystem is essential to human wellbeing because it “provides for food security, human health, the provision of clean air and water; it contributes to local livelihoods, and economic development, and is essential for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, including poverty reduction.” Biodiversity is about human wellbeing as much as it is about anything else. If we consider the challenges that communities in Scotland face today, such as flooding, healthy ecosystems can mitigate the impact and be part of the solution. In the rest of the short time that I have available this afternoon, I will comment on some of the key issues that arise from the consultation and the briefings for the debate. Although there is widespread disappointment about our failure, there are positive developments in some areas. It is important that we recognise where we have had successes as well as where we have had failures in order to learn lessons as we go forward with the new strategy. RSPB Scotland’s briefing makes the important point that, by missing targets, along with other European partners, Scotland is now playing catch-up in efforts to meet the 2020 targets. It recognises the importance of continuing initiatives but makes it clear that, if we are to make the necessary progress, the biodiversity strategy must provide additional effort and add significant new value over and above what is already delivered by existing initiatives. The consultation highlighted the interesting debate about how to resolve conflicts of interest. As the minister who has inherited the decision on whether to designate the Sound of Barra, Paul Wheelhouse will be aware of the difficulties that are involved in balancing competing interests. The consultation also raised the debate about the economic importance of biodiversity. Even respondents who support an approach that integrates the economic contribution raised concerns about having a solely economic valuation of biodiversity, as that would diminish the intrinsic value of biodiversity, could be accused of being short-sighted and would risk marginalising important but perhaps less economically valuable biodiversity.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I welcome the minister’s comments on that. I thought that it was important to highlight the debate about how we measure the importance of biodiversity. Plantlife talks about prioritising actions and makes the case for plants and fungi, which underpin the majority of ecosystems. It might be easier for us to sell the importance of saving the red squirrel or the capercaillie, but without robust ecosystems, habitats and food sources, we will fail in our efforts. The Scottish Wildlife Trust highlights the importance of marine biodiversity, which is suffering from declines in habitat and species. We all recognise the importance of the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010, but also the frustration about the lack of a network of marine protected areas and the delay to publication of a marine plan. That is particularly frustrating, as we all accept the need for a plan but, as we wait for one, marine developments are moving ahead and pre-empting it. As a result, the plan will have to fit around developments rather than setting the strategic direction. The consultation also highlighted the need for sufficient funding. There was some concern about the statement that “relatively little investment is needed to restore ... natural systems back to full capacity.” There must be investment. It can be a combination of public, private and social sector investment, but it needs to be attractive and accessible and have outcomes that are relevant and meaningful. Scottish Environment LINK makes the good point that efforts to conserve and enhance biodiversity outside mainstream conservation action are weak and underresourced despite the fact that, in the long run, it is easier and cheaper to achieve biodiversity conservation through, for example, improved agriculture, flood management, planning and forestry policy. Scottish Environment LINK emphasises the need for a champion in Government to promote the broader gains to all Government departments and agencies. Although outside groups have been consulted, there is perhaps a need for greater promotion within Government. That is a challenge for the minister. When we talk about funding in this context, the Scotland rural development programme is always highlighted. With the review continuing, there are certainly opportunities there, but we also need to recognise the limitations of the SRDP, which is constantly proposed as the possible future funding mechanism for many demands.

I am sure that members will highlight many other areas in their speeches. I look forward to the rest of the debate.

The debate has been wide ranging and interesting, full of good examples of local projects, reflecting the breadth of activity—from Falkirk district to Dumfries and Galloway, and from Loch Lomond and the Trossachs even as far as Kent. We have heard about bats, badgers and bluebells and the other 982 species that reside at Lochore Meadows. Aileen McLeod spoke well about the Biosphere site in her region, which was an excellent example of partnership working. A lot of its strength lies in the fact that it is community led. We heard about the contribution of Stewart Stevenson’s hedge and it is good to see his continuing interest in this policy area. Alison Johnstone made an important point about green pockets in urban areas. Although many members focused on more rural environments, it is important that there was recognition that there is also a role for our cities to play in achieving a greater biodiversity. Jim Hume spoke about ash dieback and the interconnectedness of our environment. He raised important questions about biosecurity and tree health and how we can work to secure a healthier future. Members talked about their roles as wildlife champions of various species—from sea trout to natterjack toads and from rare brown hares to rusty bog moss—with varying degrees of enthusiasm. I hope that other members will take the time to sign up to the campaign. The importance of public support and community involvement was highlighted. Alison Johnstone talked about the need to engage young people, and a few members referred to the role that eco-schools can play in increasing the interest and commitment of future generations. Claudia Beamish highlighted marine issues. We need to get on the front foot with marine planning. We all recognise the importance of the marine environment, so we must make swift progress on bringing in the necessary protections. There will be developments—there is great potential in our seas—but it is crucial that we have in place the proper framework to accommodate fisheries, renewables and aquaculture without further eroding our marine biodiversity. On marine issues, I want to raise the proposed closure of the Millport marine station. I understand that the closure has been proposed by the University of London in response to capital demands and a cut to its teaching grant, but the facility is used by Scottish universities and students working in marine and biodiversity fields. The marine station is in a unique location and makes a big contribution to marine science in Scotland. Therefore, I was disappointed to hear that, after receiving a petition of 9,000 names of people who “ask the Scottish Government to work with others in education, industry and statutory bodies to ensure that the Millport Marine Station remains open”, the cabinet secretary promptly passed the petition to the University of London. I hope that that does not indicate a lack of interest from the Government about working to retain the facility. The consultation responses, and many members, talked about funding and the importance of recognising economic as well as societal benefit—a point that was made by Stewart Stevenson. In a seminar in the Parliament last year on thinking about the environment differently, Scotland’s Futures Forum highlighted how putting an economic value on nature may diminish its importance in the eyes of the public. That may be something to consider when we think about how we might increase public engagement and support, if that is part of how we are to achieve our targets. There has been a strong focus on local authorities and their role as partners in delivering on the targets. Jayne Baxter talked about projects in Fife, which I am happy to re-emphasise. One of my first experiences of representing Fifers was as the Kelty community council representative on the liaison committee of the Lochore Meadows country park, which is a great facility that provides a good example of what can be achieved from reclaimed land and rescued from our industrial heritage. That theme was also reflected in the speech by Angus MacDonald, who spoke about the Jupiter wildlife centre. Jayne Baxter also talked about Kinghorn’s Ecology Centre, which is a fantastic project that, as well as supporting a diverse ecosystem, is a great educational facility showcasing renewable energy and employability projects and providing lots of family events. I am pleased that Angus MacDonald raised the issue of biodiversity grant funding for communities. I was at the “Making the Most of Landfill Tax” event in Parliament this week. From memory, I think that 5 per cent of the fund will go to biodiversity projects and almost half of the fund will go to community assets. There is a need to capacity build and to improve community understanding of the opportunities that exist for people to take part in biodiversity projects, which could play a greater role in helping Scotland to achieve its targets. Fiona McLeod and Rob Gibson talked about the crucial importance of peatlands. Peatland restoration offers multiple benefits—including wildlife, water services, carbon sequestration and forestry—but there is a need for buy-in from a greater number of partners. As Fiona McLeod highlighted, representation has been made for the use of a range of funding mechanisms, including from the water sector and from business carbon payments where appropriate. The minister may want to respond to those points in his closing speech. Margaret McDougall talked about local authorities working together in her region to share resources and expertise. Public bodies have a biodiversity duty under the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004. Although members were able to point to examples of local projects, there may be a need to reflect on where and how those plans could be more mainstreamed and strategic. A couple of years ago, the Scottish Wildlife Trust published “Guidance for planning authorities on implementing the Biodiversity Duty”, which suggests five first steps that authorities might take in trying to think about how they can fulfil their duty properly. There may be a need to better monitor the delivery of that duty, at both local and national level. Perhaps the refreshed strategy needs to be a bit more responsive. If we introduce a strategy, it needs to be monitored regularly to see whether we are making progress and, if progress is not being made in areas, the strategy must be flexible enough to respond to that. Biodiversity needs championing. We can make gains from across all sectors, from the simplest approach that adapts the immediate environment of, for example, a workplace or a public place—I know that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body is engaged in increasing the biodiversity surroundings of the Parliament—to more complex drivers that offer incentives to support biodiversity activity. We all have a role to play, from MSPs promoting the importance of our environment to the important role that the minister must play in Government. I look forward to the publication of the refreshed strategy, which will provide a clear path to success.

I thank Rhoda Grant for securing this evening’s debate. How Scotland meets its present and future energy needs is one of the key issues facing this Parliament and future generations. During the 20th century, we saw a massive expansion in energy production and we now live in a modern society in which, when we flick a switch, we expect energy to be available. However, in recent years we have had to pay more and more for domestic energy. While increasing numbers of people are entering fuel poverty, everyone is finding that they are spending a greater share of their income on energy bills. We are also facing significant climate change challenges, and in Scotland we have made a clear commitment to achieving a low-carbon economy. In trying to meet those challenges, alternative sources of energy need to be explored, but it is clear that we need greater public engagement and confidence in the debate. It is difficult to think of any energy source that does not present a series of challenges or have a host of supporters as well as a group of detractors. It is important that the different needs are balanced in delivering a more sustainable low-carbon cleaner energy future. Several times in this Parliament, I have had meetings with campaigners who are raising concerns over the scale and location of large biomass proposals, and those concerns should be heard. This evening’s debate focuses on wood biomass. As Rhoda Grant highlighted, wood is a limited resource and there are various demands on the sector in Scotland: it plays a significant part in carbon capture; it has industrial uses; it supports our forestry sector; and it provides recreation opportunities. As a limited resource, although there is a potential that the use of by-product and small-scale wood biomass could provide a sustainable alternative energy source, any large-scale biomass in Scotland will need to rely on imported wood as there is not a large enough market in Scotland to support the sector even if we exclude all other interests. The Department of Energy and Climate Change suggests that 10 per cent of wood for biomass will be sourced domestically and 90 per cent will need to be imported. That introduces a whole host of concerns, not least of which is the lack of confidence in the sustainability of the imported wood. Friends of the Earth and Biofuelwatch highlight contradictions between Scotland’s support for climate justice and the expected growth in reliance on imported wood for biomass. They have expressed concerns that that expansion will cause huge destruction to vulnerable communities and their food and water security. There is a real lack of confidence in international accreditation schemes, and when considering any applications the Scottish Government must be aware of and address those concerns. The Scottish Government’s stated aim that sustainable biomass should be recognised as a limited resource and that it should be used at an appropriate scale and primarily for heat and high-efficiency combined heat and power is to be welcomed. Subsidy plays a large role in shaping future energy production, and the decision to exclude large electricity-only stations from renewables obligation certificates should be welcomed. I recognise that the Scottish Government has proposed that a 10MW threshold should apply to electricity-only biomass and that, above that, biomass plants must generate electricity and heat. There is a loophole that the Scottish Government must address. As Rhoda Grant highlighted, the EU directive recommends that 70 per cent efficiency must be achieved in CHP. The Scottish Government proposal—and the UK Government proposal—is just 35 per cent. We need to increase the level of efficiency that has to be reached to receive subsidy and we should aim to meet the EU directive. Robust measures must be put in place to ensure that the infrastructure, capacity and market is there to use the heat that is captured, which was referred to by Angus MacDonald. We need to have confidence that applications can deliver what they say that they will deliver. Under current proposals, although 10 per cent heat efficiency needs to be achieved, that heat must be used, not exported, which means that it could be used within a plant to dry wood chips, for example, and still qualify as good quality CHP. In advance of the debate, Forth Energy contacted members to say that it would bring renewable heat to major urban and industrial areas. If that is the case, the achievement of a higher efficiency level should not really be an issue. This is a short debate in which to explore the issues, but I particularly urge the Government to look again at the proposed efficiency level and to ensure that the power of public subsidy is used to its greatest advantage.

Concerns have been raised that the proposed closure of Cupar sheriff court and the removal of trials from Kirkcaldy to Dunfermline will not realise significant savings but will significantly reduce access to justice locally. Does the cabinet secretary share my concerns that the Scottish Court Service has not published a robust cost benefit analysis of proposed closures and reorganisation that recognises the potential for increased costs as well as perceived savings?

This has been an important debate about the recent international talks. We have attempted to cover many issues, but it is surely impossible to address in such a short debate the significant challenges that the world faces in climate change, climate justice and global poverty, and it is disappointing that today’s debate had to be shortened and MSPs who wanted to speak have not been able to take part. Climate change is important to many members from all parties, and the quality of the debate has reflected that. It is 50 years since Rachel Carson published “Silent Spring”—a seminal text on the environment that was a game changer that not only inspired a movement, but resonated with the wider public. In many respects, we have come a long way since then, but although the pollution and harmful substances that Rachel Carson highlighted have largely gone from our economies, workers and environments in developing countries around the world are still being damaged by lack of regulation, protection and political leadership. This year’s UN framework convention on climate change conference was disappointing because it failed to deliver the necessary cuts to carbon emissions and did not commit enough to help the poorest countries to adapt to climate change. We can point to some positive initiatives, and the minister highlighted some of the announcements that were made, but that is not really what we hope for when it comes to international talks. As some members highlighted, one of the biggest disappointments is surely the role of some of the big players. We know that the US is one of the richest and most advanced countries in the world. In the recent US elections, those who supported Obama—many of us from afar—recognised that US engagement with and co-operation in international action on climate change would be far more likely with an Obama presidency, but I also recognise the continuing disappointment with his Administration’s work in the area. The US and other big emitters really must start to play their part. We know that the negative impacts of climate change fall heaviest on the poorer countries, as Stewart Stevenson highlighted. Those countries are less equipped to adapt, they lack the resources and infrastructure that they need to recover, and in many cases they contribute least to the problem but feel the impact the hardest. Even news from Doha that had at first looked encouraging, such as extension of the Kyoto protocol, failed to stand up to scrutiny. Without the commitment of countries including Russia, China and the United States, the limit on greenhouse gas emissions in the agreement will cover only 15 per cent of global emissions. In one of the many commentaries on Doha, the human rights campaigner Bianca Jagger—I know who she was previously, but she is now better known as a human rights campaigner—summed up the frustrations of many when she said: “Theoretically, the aims of the UN Conferences of Parties or COP are: to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions, limit the global temperature rise to below 2ºC, and avert catastrophic climate change. What was accomplished at COP18? Perilously close to nothing. The talks limped ‘listlessly’ to the finish line.” The same sentiments were reflected in some of the quotations that Margaret McDougall used this afternoon. Huge challenges remain after Doha. A great deal of disappointment is increasingly being expressed over what international talks can achieve. Of course, formal international negotiations will always remain vital, but there has been more and more discussion about the view that national Government policy is the key to the accelerated action that is needed. Although we are rightly critical about the lack of international agreement, we can point to more positive examples at national or subnational level; indeed, Alison Johnstone identified the increasing number of voices around the world that are recognising the need for action. South Africa has proposed a carbon tax, Mexico has passed a general climate change law and, in October, legislation to tackle climate change—the first such legislation in China—was passed in Shenzhen. Although such developments are not perfect, they might indicate a move towards nation-level action and responsibility. Scotland’s ambition has been recognised and the role of leadership should not be underestimated. However, it is easy to set targets but hard to meet them. The climate change legislation that was unanimously passed by Parliament has been hailed as a positive example to countries around the world, but unless we meet our targets our example risks losing its credibility. The necessary change takes commitment and often courage. Alex Johnstone made the same point, although I have to say that I do not agree with many of his remedies. Our approach to public policy and resources will certainly need to change. As Anne McTaggart reminded us, it is only a matter of months since constituents from across Scotland lobbied Parliament and delivered the strong message that we had unanimously passed historic climate change legislation. We must work hard to ensure that those targets are met. It is hugely disappointing to have failed to meet the first emissions target. If we fall behind now, it will be much more difficult to achieve future targets. As Malcolm Chisholm pointed out, the Scottish Government’s director of energy and climate change recently admitted that the Government will fail to meet its targets even if it fully implements its own plan. The campaigners who have contacted us in advance of the debate have always been supportive of our targets, the Government’s ambition and its international promotion of those targets. As a result, Stop Climate Chaos Scotland says, “However, with one target already missed, and emissions from our housing and transport sectors higher now than they were in 1990, Scotland’s climate leadership is in doubt” and WWF says, “the international standing of Scotland’s Climate Act is being placed in doubt against the background of a missed 2010 target for domestic emissions reductions and an apparent reluctance to implement world leading policies to match our targets” Those are calls for the rhetoric to match the reality.

The minister put forward the same argument in his statement, but even though he recognised that the target has not been achieved and suggested that there will be spikes in some years, the point is that if we fall back now we will find it much harder to recover ground. It just adds to the challenge in future years. We recognise that it will not be easy for the Scottish Government to produce an RPP that meets those challenges, but if it does it will have the Scottish Parliament’s broad and full support. However, if it continues to fail on targets because it is not taking the necessary action, it will face the criticism and scrutiny of the Parliament—and increasingly, I imagine, the public—as we continue to see the impact of climate change on our everyday lives.

If the voluntary recommendations on guidance, codes and data collection in the rent review working group’s report, which was published earlier this week, are not taken up widely across the industry, is the Scottish Government prepared to legislate to make them mandatory? Does the cabinet secretary agree that there is a strong case for a rent register to be mandatory from the outset?

I am pleased that we have been able to schedule this debate in advance of the Council of Ministers negotiations. Last week’s statement was welcome as it established the key areas of concern. Although we have seen some setbacks in the past few days, particularly in relation to mackerel, today’s debate gives us all an opportunity to emphasise our priorities as the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment heads off to further negotiations. Our fishing sector provides employment, with just under 5,000 fishermen in the catching sector and many more jobs in connected sectors, and our world-class produce carries Scotland’s brand around the world. Although the sector is distinctively Scottish, it operates throughout the UK, as the fleet may choose to land fish elsewhere, and there is a common regulatory system. Although the annual quota negotiations emphasise the difference between countries—last year, they were described as heated and chaotic—the industry is dependent on our relationships with Europe, particularly through onshore operations and exports. Fishing is a significant industry in Scotland. As the cabinet secretary said, it has seen real-terms growth in landing values and success in international recognition and quality in recent years, but this diverse sector also faces many challenges, including in relation to the future of our more vulnerable coastal communities and the margins that are being experienced by many in the onshore sector, which is a key part of a productive fishing industry. Labour’s amendment recognises that their futures are just as dependent as the future of the fleet is on the annual negotiations. I recognise the pressures on the sector—the value of the increasing stocks is being squeezed by inflexible regulation and the irresponsible behaviour of other countries is damaging our reputation—but I also recognise the need for sustainable management and international agreement. We must not forget that all the opportunity and wealth comes from exploiting—that word does not necessarily have to be interpreted negatively—the natural resource of our seas, so proper management of our seas and co-operation are essential if we are to leave a legacy for future generations. We have experienced—and in too many parts of the world are still experiencing—the consequences of overfishing, but we know the success that we can achieve with stock recovery through sustainable management. Today, we look towards the EU fishing negotiations. I sometimes think that the outcomes might be more positive if we had annual co-operation discussions rather than negotiations, but they take place within the highly charged atmosphere of the EU. The annual negotiations are well past their shelf life and progress must be made on reform of the common fisheries policy so that we can move away from the annual horse trading. Last week’s statement and members’ questions identified the key challenges as we go into the negotiations. Some positive outcomes are predicted for the sector, including proposed increases for North Sea haddock, whiting and herring and west of Scotland nephrops. However, following the cod recovery plan, a cut to total allowable catch of more than 20 per cent has been proposed, which would have an impact on quota as well as reducing days at sea. Cod is one of our most valued fisheries and was valued at £2.3 million in 2011. Although there is no denying the initial need for a cod recovery plan, the plan no longer works and needs significant reform. As the cabinet secretary said, in September the European Commission made proposals for a new plan, yet we are dealing with the frustrations of delays to reform and now an unacceptable dispute between the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers over who can propose and agree amendments that could ease the situation. The inflexibility of the cod recovery plan is damaging to Scottish fishing and risks hindering our conservation measures. We are starting to see a recovery in cod numbers, although they are still well below the target biomass levels. The advice from ICES shows a slight increase, but we must still be vigilant. I understand that if we want to catch fewer fish, it seems sensible to reduce the amount that can be caught. However, the fact that we have mixed fisheries in Scotland means that that is more likely to lead to increased discards. There should be a sensible response to that, but the plan is so inflexible and unresponsive it risks causing more problems than it solves. The proposed quota cuts will damage Scottish fishing, and mixed fisheries will make them impossible to achieve without increasing discards, which are an issue that we are all united in trying to tackle. As the cabinet secretary outlined, the proposed quota cut and reduced effort could perversely also have a negative impact on conservation credits, which is a successful scheme that rewards conservation measures, and the cod catch quota scheme—Alex Fergusson raised that following the statement last week—which concentrates on reducing discards. A cut to effort will make it difficult to offer additional days at sea as an incentive, which will potentially limit the number who can take advantage of the scheme. The future of the cod catch quota scheme is at risk if quota is reduced. In Scotland, we have shown that there are innovative approaches to the modern management of fisheries. In their briefing for today’s debate, WWF Scotland and RSPB Scotland are right to call on MSPs to call on the Scottish Government to ensure that, if there is a rollover of this year’s cod quota, additional measures must be taken to ensure cod mortality continues to decrease. As I said, we are only seeing a slight increase in cod biomass, so there is still much progress to be made. If the quota is to be frozen, that must be concurrent with participative and adaptive management. It will be hugely disappointing if a cod quota reduction limits our ability to deliver on conservation measures. There needs to be investment in finding solutions and innovative ways of working that will support a sustainable industry, which is why I was pleased to recognise the work of Dan Watson, a recent graduate of Glasgow School of Art who won the UK James Dyson award this year. He went on to win the international award—beating finalists from 17 countries—with his SafetyNet system, in which escape rings are fitted to the cod end of existing nets and light up to act as emergency exit signs for smaller fish, which is quite an intriguing image. It is encouraging to see that level of interest and innovation among graduates but, to go to the next level with that model or other innovations, there must be investment in science and manufacturing from both the public and private sectors. Such investment is needed if we are to deliver sustainable fishing methods that can be applied in this country and used to tackle some of the significant challenges that we see around the world. Labour’s amendment also addresses the mackerel dispute. It was disappointing that, last week, the second round of fishing talks between the EU and Norway concluded without agreement. Although that also has an impact on North Sea cod and herring, it has serious consequences for mackerel. The on-going dispute with Iceland and the Faroe Islands has led to the Scottish mackerel fishery having its Marine Stewardship Council certificate suspended and to proposals for a quota cut to compensate for overfishing. This is a desperate situation but one not of the Scottish fleets’ making. Both within the Labour Party and in the Parliament we have always taken the position that we should be guided by science, which is calling for a quota cut, but that cut would be hugely unfair to Scottish fleets that are being affected by the irresponsible behaviour of other countries. Sanctions must be the last resort and we call for some sense to be brought to the reconvened talks, although I appreciate how difficult that will be. There is a suggestion that a quota cut will be a condition of introducing sanctions and I welcome the cabinet secretary’s comment last week that that would not be acceptable. However, the impasse needs to be broken and those who recognise the unfairness of the situation must present a united case. Sanctions would have unintended consequences for other sections of the sector. In the Westminster Hall debate earlier this week, Angus MacNeil MP raised issues to do with the impact on consumer costs should there be sanctions. It is not a risk-free solution, and that gives us all the more reason to reach a resolution through negotiation. It must be clear that that is to the benefit of all partners. Labour’s amendment also calls on the Scottish Government to announce the full operational details of the concordat on fisheries management between the UK Administrations that will come into effect in 2013. Under the concordat, which was announced last December and will come into operation next year, quota allocations to the four UK countries will replace the present system whereby the UK Government allocates quota directly to fishermen and producer organisations. I understand that it also seeks to rationalise arrangements for the licensing and administration of fishing vessels. Last year, the concordat was presented as “a framework for enabling the four UK Fisheries Administrations to be given a greater degree of control over the management of their own commercial fishing fleets, within a UK wide quota and effort management and licensing system.” That is a quote from the concordat. I have managed to get a copy of the letter that was sent by the cabinet secretary to the members of the fisheries management and conservation group in May, which recognised that “some issues of detail remain to be settled in relation to allocation.” Last week, the Welsh fisheries minister provided a written statement with an update on the management of fisheries, which described the discussions on the concordat as “arduous”. It is important that Parliament is informed of these changes and that they carry the confidence of the sector, and I would appreciate further information from the cabinet secretary. There are many challenges ahead for the Scottish fishing fleets, but there are also many opportunities. I am proud that we have a fishing sector that is working towards sustainable fishing and that is prepared to take an international lead in ensuring that we leave a positive legacy for future generations. I move amendment S4M-05172.2, to insert at end: “; recognises the importance of these negotiations in terms of the fish processing and wider fisheries industry; expresses disappointment at the breakdown of talks concerning mackerel and calls for renewed efforts to reach a negotiated settlement, and further calls on the Scottish Government to announce the full operational details of the concordat on fisheries management between the UK administrations that will come into effect in 2013.”

Mark McDonald argued similar points the last time we debated the fisheries negotiations, and I questioned how having less influence in Europe would help Scottish fishermen. Now the question must surely be this: How would being out of Europe or having years of negotiations benefit Scottish fishermen?

Does Rob Gibson realise that votes will be based on populations, not on the number of fish?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the reported increase in unconventional gas exploration. (S4T-00160)

The minister will be aware of the reports in the media at the weekend on concerns about the safety and environmental impact of unconventional gas extraction and, in particular, fracking. It is clear from responses that I have received from local authorities that there is widespread confusion over what is needed by way of permissions or new licensing if, for example, there is a move from conventional extraction to fracking or from coal-bed methane extraction to shale gas extraction. There is also evidence that the use of delegated decision making is widespread. There is a risk that fracking will come into Scotland under the radar, with local communities not being fully consulted on or involved in decision making. Does the minister accept that the regulatory regime is not robust enough and that it lacks local accountability and scrutiny? In the light of the expected lifting of the UK moratorium, will the Scottish Government introduce national guidelines as a matter of urgency?

The minister’s response is disappointing. I assure him that, in the discussions that I have had with local authorities, communities, environmental campaigners and the industry, concern has been expressed that there are gaps and uncertainties in the regulatory regime around what is a new energy source. I am quite happy to share the correspondence that I have received with the minister. There is a desperate need for clarity, transparency and robust scrutiny if progress is to be made with unconventional gas. The regulatory regime is cluttered and confusing. It is extremely difficult for communities to get involved. Elected representatives are being marginalised.

The situation is unacceptable. Does the minister not accept that there is a need for greater community involvement?

2. To ask the Scottish Government when it expects Scottish Enterprise to decide on the location of the Areva turbine site. (S4O-01557)

The award of the Areva site would be good for the Fife energy park in Methil and the local economy. It would bring in much-needed investment and would ensure that Fife is at the forefront of the renewables sector in Scotland. Will the minister confirm whether or not Fife energy park is being actively considered as a location for the Areva site? Will he confirm whether there are concerns about capacity at the site?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. I know that there is disappointment that we have moved away from having a debate this week. The negotiations will impact on the livelihoods of many families and fishing communities, which bring much economic and social value to Scotland. The heated and chaotic negotiations are well documented, and they are as annual as Christmas. They probably have as much confusion as Christmas, but perhaps not so happy an outcome. We urgently need reform of the common fisheries policy to bring an end to the yearly wrangle. I understand the frustrations over the cod recovery plan. The Scottish fishing sector has made significant investment and can demonstrate returns in stocks for that effort, but there is a lack of reward from an inflexible and unresponsive plan. Time is running out. The cabinet secretary said that he is “calling ... on all key players in the EU institutions to see sense”. What response has he had so far? The cabinet secretary has rightly emphasised the importance of mackerel. It is unfair that Scottish mackerel have had their Marine Stewardship Council certification withdrawn because of the unacceptable behaviour of Iceland and the Faroe Islands. How will the cabinet secretary balance Scotland’s clear commitment to sustainable fishing with the demand for fairness for that important sector? Does he believe that sanctions are the only answer? How will they be introduced? What is the timescale for sanctions having any impact? Does the cabinet secretary expect that a quota cut might be a condition of sanctions?

I acknowledge that the subsidy has been removed from electricity-only stations. Is the minister aware, however, of concerns that the proposal to define good-quality CHP plants across the United Kingdom as those having a 35 per cent efficiency level, which is considerably lower than the European Union directive, which states a level of at least 70 per cent for industrial applications, will create a loophole for inefficient biomass generation, and does he agree that we should be seeking to increase the level of efficiency at which subsidies can be claimed?

Given that the failure to meet the European Union air quality directive targets can result in fines, what consequences does the Scottish Government believe that it will face if we continue to miss the targets?

The minister will be aware of newspaper reports that the Forestry Commission was aware of the threat of ash dieback as far back as 2009. When exactly did the Scottish Government and the Forestry Commission Scotland first become aware of the threat of ash dieback and what action was taken then to stop the disease spreading?

If the aim of increasing production of all farmed fish by 50 per cent by 2020 is achieved, it will lead to a subsequent increase in use of chemical treatments. What will the minister do to ensure that those increases are taken into account when the Government looks at reforming the regulatory system?

I thank the minister for providing an advance copy of his statement. We all support Scotland’s ambitious climate change targets and we recognise that they are world leading, but surely it is now time to lead by example. There has been a failure to meet the first greenhouse gas emissions annual target. In the statement, the Scottish Government offers every excuse under the sun, including the lack of sun, but the Government must now accept responsibility for the failure of its policy direction. Emissions from the residential and transport sectors were higher in 2010 than they were 20 years ago. The minister says that there is a “comprehensive package”, but Stop Climate Chaos Scotland, in response to this year’s draft budget, said: “Today’s Budget makes it clear that the Government is not taking sufficiently seriously the need for urgent action to tackle emissions and meet its legally-binding climate change targets.” The failure on emissions makes future targets even more challenging, and we are not seeing the step change that is needed to achieve our ambitions. Scotland is set to fail to meet all but one of the annual emissions reductions targets between 2010 and 2022. In the light of those concerns, what does the minister hope to achieve through the bilateral meetings that he mentioned, and what influence can he assert on the draft budget—particularly in relation to fuel poverty, transport and housing—which, as it stands, does not carry the confidence of the members of the public who will come to lobby us in Parliament on Thursday? It is revealing that not one member of the Cabinet is here for the statement. The minister might have had to make the statement alone, but it is clear that he cannot deliver on the targets alone.

In thanking David Torrance for securing today’s members’ business debate, I add my warm congratulations to the 5th Fife scout group Kirkcaldy on winning the Lyall trophy and on becoming Scottish champions at the Black’s of Greenock national camping competition 2012. In particular, my congratulations go to Jenny Ritchie, Reagan McLauchlan, Chloe Whyte, Kiah McIntosh, Robbie Swanson and Olivia Ewan, and I welcome them to the chamber this evening. I also take the opportunity to congratulate the Calder district and Arbroath and Montrose district scout groups, which finished second and third in the competition. I welcome this evening’s debate because it gives us the opportunity to recognise the contribution of not only the Kirkcaldy scouts but the scouting organisation as a whole. Uniformed youth groups including the scouts are a lot of fun not only for kids—we have all the Hallowe’en parties coming up next week—but for parents and carers, who volunteer in many different ways. When I got the note last night about baking for the Christmas fair, I thought, “Is it that time of year already?”, but I like the involvement and being able to play my very small part in the organisation. Uniformed organisations offer much more than that. They support children and young people to grow in confidence and to learn skills that can benefit them throughout their lives. Yes, camping is one aspect, but regardless of age or location—be it inner-city or rural Scotland—the common theme that runs throughout scouting, from beavers and cubs to explorers and scout network, is of team building and problem solving. A recent survey found that 89 per cent of scouts believed that they gained social, teamworking and leadership skills while part of the organisation. It is no surprise that the same survey found that 41 per cent of community organisations more widely believe that having scouting on a CV is a positive feature when appointing. It is therefore great that the number of scouts in Scotland is on the rise and that more and more children and young people are getting the chance to learn and to perfect those skills. Membership is at its highest since the millennium. In the past year alone, scouting in Scotland has had an increase in membership of 4 per cent, which is the largest increase in the four countries in the United Kingdom. It is great that many girls across the UK are signing up, with one in seven of all youth members in Scotland being female. Last year, for the first time, the number of girls who joined outstripped the number of boys. The rise in membership numbers is in no small part down to the tireless and dedicated work of volunteers across the country. Without those people, there would be no scouts, so their work should never go unrecognised. Indeed, if there were more volunteers, I am sure that the number of scouts would rise even more, as the waiting list seems to run into the thousands. The scouts should be congratulated on their efforts to ensure that their members continue to carry out voluntary work for the organisation. It is great that more than 2,000 young people in the 14 to 25 age group now volunteer in the scouts on a weekly basis. It should be recognised that the uniformed organisations promote volunteering outside their organisations and that 82 per cent of youth members in the scouts volunteer at least once a year, while 36 per cent of former youth members continue to volunteer for at least two hours a week in other organisations. Therefore, scouting builds a real legacy of people getting involved in their community and volunteering. It has been a pleasure to recognise the Scout Association and, in particular, the 5th Fife group in Kirkcaldy. I recognise the hard work and dedication of the many scout groups throughout Fife, which work well together and with other organisations. I wish them all the best in future years.

I thank the cabinet secretary for taking my intervention. There is a report in The Courier today about Alyn Smith’s amendment. Although I appreciate that the amendment is an attempt to deal with slipper farmers, concerns have been raised with me by the tenanted sector over its unintended consequences with regard to who would then own the land. I would appreciate some clarity from the cabinet secretary on what he understands the impact of the amendment would be.

This is a crucial period on the path to common agricultural policy reform. We are in the heat of negotiations and trade-offs and we face time pressure and budgetary uncertainty, with pulls in all directions, but we must not lose sight of why reform is necessary. There must be public confidence in the CAP; reform must deliver on our modern expectations and priorities; and the CAP must meet the many complex challenges that we face, in Europe and internationally. In focusing on the detail, we should not lose sight of the bigger prize. The motion recognises the need for the UK Government to work with devolved Administrations. There are challenges in the recent change of Cabinet team—and I do not mean Paul Wheelhouse, who I hope is enjoying his new ministerial role. The new UK Government team presents challenges of politics and timing but, regardless of political affiliation, there is a need to work together, and the initial comments from the Governments have been encouraging. Labour’s amendment places an emphasis on public benefit, which is crucial to securing public confidence. By highlighting rural communities, we recognise that the CAP is not just about farming, but about delivering a wider set of rural objectives for our communities. Jim Hume’s amendment makes fair points about financial modelling, which I understand the Welsh Government has done with a certain amount of success. Although that might show winners and losers, it will provide the opportunity to test the proposals further and to move quickly to address any issues. We agree that we need greater engagement on transition. We are happy to support the Conservative amendment. In 2010, at the start of the process, the Commission held a public consultation, which showed support from all sections of society for the continuation of a common agricultural policy to maintain diversified farming systems and deliver multiple public goods. However, perhaps unsurprisingly, there was less agreement on how to achieve that. Interest groups are strong in the debate and members of the European Parliament will have to resolve competing interests although, encouragingly, there is a degree of consensus in Scotland on the direction in which reform must go. However, the European Parliament and Commission must hold their nerve and ensure that public interest is at the centre of reform. For the first time, we have co-decision making between the European Parliament and the Commission, which should lead to greater democratic accountability. However, that involves attempting to get agreement between 27 member states on more than 7,500 amendments, with each state promoting its interests. That reality can threaten progress on reform. The European Parliament and Commission must focus on what is in the best interests of us all: progress on the environment and biodiversity, sustainable farming balanced with food security, sustainable rural communities and multiple social and public gains. We cannot ignore the context of the reform. The CAP, which was introduced to boost food production in response to post-war shortages, has increasingly been about much more than farming. The European Parliament identifies food security as a challenge to which the CAP must respond, as well as rising energy prices, climate change, environmental protection, land abandonment and the economic crisis. This is a time of unrest and uncertainty across Europe, both economically and socially, and there are protests about austerity measures, rising unemployment and poverty. CAP reform does not happen in a bubble. We need to recognise that, in a time of austerity, the CAP budget is about €57 billion a year and it makes up at least 40 per cent of the EU budget. There must be confidence in what that investment delivers and there must be transparency. Change will happen. We can see it positively and it can give us opportunities to make some sensible decisions. Looking at the payments that are received in Scotland, I note that they range from a business that receives £196.56 a year from the rural development programme to businesses that receive almost £1 million a year in direct subsidy. Administration costs must lead to questions about small payments, and large payments to profitable businesses need to be justified if they are to continue, whether they are made to large farms, estates or charities.

Rob Gibson makes an important point. DEFRA’s website has a certain amount of information, but it is often collected into a bigger picture and it can be difficult to identify recipients. I agree that, when we are talking about large sums of public money, there needs to be transparency. We talk about the historical legacy of Scotland’s share of the budget within the EU and the UK, but we also see big variations by region within Scotland, with recipients in East Lothian receiving an average of more than €125,000 while those in Highland receive an average of just over €34,000. Recently, the Scottish Agricultural College published a regional analysis of unemployment in Scotland. It identified particular challenges, such as the cost of service delivery, the ageing population, the relatively small size of the private sector and the lower wages but higher prices in the rural economy. The analysis showed that there is a stronger relationship between growth and employment in urban areas and that our response to rural unemployment must be complex and tailored. We can use the opportunity of CAP reform to respond to the pressures that people are facing in rural communities, whether through supporting agriculture and the employment that it offers or through the Scottish rural development programme and the opportunities that it can create. The reform gives us an opportunity to be imaginative. For example, crofting agriculture is generally agreed to be typically uneconomical, but it sustains rural populations across a large part of Scotland. CAP reform gives us an opportunity to ensure that appropriate measures are put in place to protect and enhance crofting agriculture, if we make the appropriate decisions. In its briefing, the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations identifies that less than 15 per cent of the SRDP budget is available to rural communities and non-farm enterprises. There is a strong argument that that percentage should rise significantly to promote social inclusion, poverty reduction and a wider range of economic development initiatives. There is a lot to do to ensure that we get the best outcomes from rural investment. There is broad consensus on the key agricultural messages for Scotland in the reform process, and it is worth while to re-emphasise them today. The National Farmers Union has identified 10 priorities and started to highlight the choices that the Scottish Government will have on regional payments. Although Scotland has some big operators, we do not have the monofarms that exist in other parts of Europe. On many issues, there is agreement between the farming sector and the environmental sector on the need for flexibility and a system of incentives that rewards farmers for work that they already do. Farmers manage more than 70 per cent of EU land, so there is a real public benefit in ensuring that they manage the land sustainably, and that must be central to reform. I appreciate that the greening measures that are on the table do not suit Scottish farming. There is a job to do to convince others about that and to try to change things. I was pleased to attend the NFU’s conference earlier this year, which brought together many of the northern countries with shared interests, but I support the aim of improving the sustainability of modern farming and incentivising that through sensible reform of pillar 1. There is a need for a clear decision on what constitutes eligible land as the current proposals could create problems. There needs to be flexibility and a recognition that the 7 per cent should include land that is already providing a diverse landscape. It is not just about taking productive land out of use, as it is also important to support the maintenance of hedgerows and field margins and allow the creation of networks of habitats. There is a push for convergence; how successful that will be is still up for debate, but the push for objective rather than historical criteria opens up opportunities for Scotland to recognise needs. The proposal for a minimum stocking level, which the NFU has promoted and to which the cabinet secretary referred, might hold part of the answer to how to determine active farming and might help to close the loophole that allows slipper farmers. However, we must guard against unintended consequences. I appreciate that the cabinet secretary commented on Alyn Smith’s amendment, but I urge the cabinet secretary to speak to the tenanted sector, which raised concerns with me today about unintended consequences, particularly in relation to where ownership would lie. The CAP needs to be simplified as far as is practical. No one disagrees that it is extremely complicated and often leads to perverse outcomes, but we need to be cautious and to keep an eye on cross-compliance rules, for example, where the push for simplification might mean a compromise in relation to the birds and habitats directives. While the debate about CAP reform continues, the EU budget still has to be agreed, and there is a great deal of uncertainty. The reform proposals were based on a budget that was frozen at 2013 levels, and a further cut would have an impact on what can be delivered. However, in arguing for protection of the EU budget, we should recognise that domestic budgets have been reduced. The Scottish Government has steadily increased the co-financing rate for the SRDP, from 25 per cent in 2006 to 63 per cent in 2012, which has reduced the estimated overall size of the SRDP from £1.6 billion for the programme period to £1.2 billion now. The cabinet secretary defended that to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, but he will know of the concerns about a diminishing budget and about demand being managed in a way that holds back progress on climate change, biodiversity and water quality. Furthermore, there is concern that a delay in agreeing to reform will lead to a gap in funding for the SRDP programmes. He must provide further reassurances on that. Over the years, CAP has been everything from the saviour of farming to a scandal of butter mountains. We now have an opportunity to deliver a CAP that is fit for the 21st century. I move amendment S4M-04263.1, to insert after “resources”: “while delivering public benefit and supporting rural communities”.

In light of the fact that the Scottish Court Service consultation states that it cannot close courts of its own hand and that that is the decision of the Scottish ministers, will the Scottish Government reconsider the proposal to remove jury trials from Kirkcaldy, given that the consultation recognises that Kirkcaldy is the most appropriate location for a sheriff and jury centre serving east Fife?

I welcome Paul Wheelhouse to his new ministerial role. I very much look forward to working with him. I am pleased to be able to have this debate today and to bring the work of Fife diet and its excellent food manifesto to the Scottish Parliament. Fife diet, which is a network of people who are interested in local food, was established in 2007. It does much good work throughout Fife and beyond, helping to set up allotments and community gardens, running education programmes and, most recently, setting off around the country in its seed truck, delivering a selection of free public workshops on food and climate change. However, today I want to highlight Fife diet’s excellent food manifesto, raise some debate about our relationship with food—the way we eat, the way we grow, the way we trade—and introduce the practical and challenging ideas that are in the manifesto. I am pleased to hold the debate in the final days of Scottish food and drink fortnight, which has given producers an opportunity to showcase the best of Scottish food and drink locally and internationally. However, the same fortnight has seen Citizens Advice Scotland report a doubling of demand for food parcels and Save the Children report that one in six children in Scotland goes to bed hungry. The reasons for both those figures are complex, although we can point to some obvious pressures. However, both tell us that we need to question our country’s food economics, and the food manifesto challenges policy makers to do just that. First, I want to congratulate Fife diet on producing the manifesto. I imagine that many of us who have worked on party manifestos know how difficult that can be, but Fife diet has managed to produce an engaging, thought-provoking and vibrant manifesto—if only we could all achieve that. It is the fruition of many years of work on sustainable food practices and has involved other partners, as well as discussion groups. In the best tradition of artists manifestos, the food manifesto is a document of an ideology, crafted to convince and convert. It describes our food market as one that is monopolised by a handful of companies while we struggle to meet our health and nutrition targets. It brings forward ideas about how we grow, consume and distribute food against a backdrop of the real health and environmental problems that we face. Organised around four themes—low-carbon communities, culture and education, innovation and enterprise, and health and wellbeing—the manifesto acknowledges the progress that has been made through the climate challenge fund but argues that food and its importance to Scotland are about more than increasing sales and exports. It challenges export growth as our main measurement of food success. Changing the way that we think about food is partly about questioning what we value. The food manifesto states that the Scottish Parliament has made bold moves to address smoking and alcohol, but argues that our approach to the public health challenges of food lacks the radicalism and foresight that are seen in other areas. The way in which we grow, distribute and consume our food creates 31 per cent of our greenhouse gas emissions; however, the manifesto argues, our food policy is not linked to Scotland's ambitious climate change targets. The manifesto identifies lots of the problems, but it goes further and offers solutions—some radical, some practical. In a time of economic restraint, those solutions are not about more money but about changing the way in which we do things with the aim of delivering health and environmental opportunities for the wider community. It proposes that the idea of food sovereignty should replace the idea of food security as the guiding principle of policy, and explores opportunities for collaborative gains between the agendas of community food and health, affordability and sustainability. The food manifesto sets out 20 challenges to policy makers, starting with the soup test, which is a proposal that no child should leave school without knowing how to make a pot of soup. That is a simple idea but one that brings together lessons in sociability and life skills, affordability, seasonality and locality, as well as health. I heard one of the founders of Fife diet, Mike Small, discussing the idea on BBC Scotland's “Call Kaye” a few months ago, and was surprised at how defensive some of the comments from callers were. I think that the soup test is a good idea, and many schools are already doing similar work—I have enjoyed my six-year-old’s sweet potato soup. The idea is not overly prescriptive, but it captures the imagination and has the potential to involve young people in bigger issues in a more accessible way. Yesterday afternoon, we debated the proposed community empowerment and renewal bill, which has the potential to take forward ideas that are included in the food manifesto, such as a community right to grow, with a legal presumption in favour of people growing food on land that is lying unused. The manifesto also takes on areas in which it is fair to say that there is less consensus. It proposes a soda tax, an idea that was promoted by my colleague Richard Simpson last year and which immediately became known as an Irn Bru tax—that reveals the challenges around debating some of these issues However, the statistics in the manifesto show that Scotland has the highest obesity rate in Europe; that between 2003 and 2010 the percentage of obese men and women rose to nearly 30 per cent; that 13 per cent of girls and 16 per cent of boys are obese; that the conservative trend is that, by 2030, 41 per cent of adults will be obese; and that the cost to the national health service at that time could be as high as £3 billion. We need transformational change to reverse some of those figures, as well as a frank debate. A moratorium on supermarket expansion is the manifesto’s radical answer to delivering on the national food and drink policy of creating a more secure and resilient food system that is based on diversity of food supply. In Fife, supermarkets take approximately 80 per cent of food retail spending, while local food markets account for just 0.5 per cent of total sales. As members of the Scottish Parliament, we should be challenged to think about whether that is the right balance and whether we can do more to increase local sourcing. The manifesto argues for elevating food to the climate change agenda by introducing specific annual food emissions targets and provides an analysis of our food infrastructure. With issues such as the possible closure of Hall’s of Broxburn, our infrastructure is going by the day, so we must find ways to build resilience into fragile supply chains. The manifesto argues for sustainable public procurement. The Government will be aware of concerns that the proposed procurement reform bill does not adequately address sustainability and that that is a shift away from the intention that was set out in the Scottish National Party’s manifesto last year. Those are some of the difficult proposals, but there are others on which quick progress could be made. They include the establishment of a food leadership team; the creation of new food indicators that reflect the range of important measures; a national campaign for a seasonal five a day; the expansion of Blasda, a national local food festival, as a celebration of food sovereignty; school farms; a Scottish orchard; and farm apprenticeships. I am pleased to have been able to bring the food manifesto to the Parliament. As individuals and as a Parliament, we might not agree with everything in it, but it is a document of ideas to stimulate discussion and provoke new ways of understanding Scotland’s food economy. The manifesto is an opportunity to celebrate our quality produce while questioning how fair access is and whether power is located in the right place. Therefore, although the debate might be the Parliament’s introduction to the manifesto, I hope that it is only the start of the discussion.

I welcome the opportunity to take part in today’s debate on community empowerment and renewal. This is an early debate on a wide range of proposals and, although the document certainly identifies the problems, there are still lots of question marks over what the solutions might be. We should emphasise the importance of the purpose of the proposals and we need to be sensible and proportionate about where and when legislation is needed. Although some of the discussion is about the transfer of assets, there is also a recognition that local authorities need to be given additional powers to deal with many of the challenges in their area. Laurence Demarco of Senscot has commented that the proposals have the potential to be either a damp squib or a significant advance in local democracy. It is clear that increasing democracy is not just a matter of empowering communities but about devolving more powers to local authorities when appropriate. We are in difficult economic times, and local government will need to manage very difficult budgets over the next few years, with increasing pressure on their services. We need to be mindful of that context. We are not asking people to help us to spend money; we are asking them to participate in some very difficult decisions. That approach can provide opportunities for doing things differently—the minister referred to the Christie commission—and the comments in the consultation on strengthening participation will provide options for debate. We should also ask how the proposals will address inequality in our communities and how they will include the communities that are often the most difficult to reach. The benefits of the proposals should be widely accessible. The briefing from the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations notes: “Without measures to ensure that communities have the opportunity to engage with and benefit from the Bill, there is a risk that it will widen inequalities by favouring those communities who already have the capacity to take action.” Proposals must be tested against this measure. As Sarah Boyack said, sustainable economic growth is not enough. The process must be about increasing social justice. There is an appetite for the issues identified in the consultation. As shadow spokesperson for rural affairs I am only too aware of the importance of ensuring that there is a healthy and strong relationship between people in their community and their land. The consultation document identifies the interest in extending to urban communities the benefits brought to rural communities through the land reform legislation. Scotland already has many positive examples of community: buyouts such as the ones involving the Galson estate in Lewis, which has been run by residents since 2007, the Stornoway Trust, Gigha and Machrihanish. Some 500,000 acres of land in Scotland are now in community ownership. The bold measures taken during the early years of the Parliament, along with the commitment of local communities, have helped to transform rural and island communities in Scotland. It is important that the successes should be given the chance to be replicated in urban environments, not just through the more familiar model of tenant ownership but by going further into community ownership to examine, for example, the benefits of alternative energy models and how they could be used to tackle the fuel poverty that exists in many communities. To confine the discussion to the issue of transferring public assets or public services is to miss the complexity of the issue and to limit the benefits it can deliver. Local government is a key partner in future models. While the transfer of ownership can be the catalyst for change, empowerment can also be achieved through increased community decision making. It is important to achieve the right solution for an individual community. In addition to owning an asset, communities can become empowered through influence and involvement in service delivery. As part of open doors day last Sunday I visited Ravenscraig community gardens and allotments in Kirkcaldy. Previously a disused space owned by Fife Council, it was opened in February this year.

That is an important issue and the resources need to be examined in the document. I refer to the way an island like Gigha has become self-sustainable. There are opportunities for raising revenue in the new models of community ownership. I refer again to my experience on Sunday in Kirkcaldy allotments. It is quite a mouthful but Kirkcaldy Community Gardens and Allotments community interest company was created in order to set up a 25-year lease of the site in the Ravenscraig walled garden for allotment provision. The company provides more than individual allotments. A training area is available for local schools and community groups. I spoke to members of the company, who expressed the need for a streamlining of the process but said that the local authority continued to be a positive partner in their work. A recent report from the rural policy centre at the Scottish Agricultural College highlighted the dangers and risks faced by many towns and communities. Its vulnerability index placed Kirkcaldy, Alloa and East Wemyss—all within my region—in its top 20. These towns across Scotland need the opportunity not only to survive but to thrive. There is an interesting contrast between East Wemyss and West Wemyss. East Wemyss is 13th on the list of vulnerable towns in Scotland, but its neighbour, West Wemyss, has seen a bit of a turnaround. The West Wemyss Walk Inn is owned and operated by the community. Driven by the West Wemyss Development Trust, lottery money was awarded to support the initiative, and the social enterprise has now been open for a year. Due to that investment, it provides a lot to the community—it is not just a bistro; it also runs children’s clubs and baking clubs. Only 10 years ago, the community had only 60 people in it, but it has seen a huge turnaround through that involvement and community ownership. There is agreement about what the challenges are, but the policy is a ship that needs to be steered and the direction of travel needs to be clearly defined as one that is about delivering on social justice and tackling inequalities in communities throughout Scotland.

The minister mentioned Ban Ki-moon’s sustainable energy for all initiative and the development of a clear offer from Scotland to help with the goal of doubling the rate of improvement in energy efficiency. The Scottish Government is revising the RPP. What action is it taking to ensure that its budget priorities meet its environmental ambitions? Will the timing of the RPP in relation to the Scottish budget ensure that they are able to influence each other appropriately?

I am pleased to take part in this stage 3 debate. As the parliamentary term comes to an end there is a cluster of stage 3 debates, although we are more concise this morning than we were yesterday. If it had not been for Jim Hume raising the thorny issue of common good land, there is a chance that we would have had no amendments to the bill at all. After our recent cautious approach to the Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, in relation to which we took a wait-and-see approach on many issues, the rural portfolio may be starting to get a reputation, although the minister might welcome that. Although we did not support Jim Hume’s proposal today, I welcome the debate that we had on the issue of common good land, which I am sure will be discussed in more detail this morning. I thank the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee for its scrutiny of the bill, and I thank all the witnesses who submitted evidence. The bill has been thoroughly scrutinised, having gone before the Justice Committee in the previous session of Parliament. Changes were made to the previous piece of legislation to take into account the concerns that were raised during that process; I imagine that that has played a role in our having a limited number of amendments this time round. The disadvantages of ultra-long leases are evident, although a very small income stream is provided to the landlord. The landlord can still place restrictions and other obligations on the tenant, although the length of the lease means in effect that the tenant is the owner and the landlord has very little real interest. On the appointed day in 2015, all appropriate ultra-long leases will convert to ownership. That all sounds quite simple, but the bill is a technically complex piece of legislation, and the contribution from all parties should be recognised. Our stage 1 debate raised many points to which we returned at stage 2, most notably the concerns around Waverley market. Many members called for a solution to the prospect that Waverley market would transfer from public authority to private ownership. The City of Edinburgh Council argued that that would severely compromise the public interest in the site, and that its location within a United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization world heritage site meant that the transfer of ownership would not be appropriate. It also argued that the—admittedly unusual—terms of the lease meant that the grassum should be taken into account as rent to move the site out of the scope of the bill. Others argued that the site should be recognised as common good land, and as such should be exempt from the provisions in the bill. Initially, the Scottish Government appeared to be reluctant to accept any of those arguments. Although the minister was technically correct in his view of grassum, for example, I and other members were pleased to receive at stage 1 a commitment from him to look at the detail of that particular case in order to find a solution. The minister’s solution appeared at stage 2, although the fact that no member of the committee asked any questions about his amendment suggests that the minister’s relatively lengthy remarks—as he referred to them—did not explain the amendment’s significance in plain language. I admit that I was not at the committee meeting, and it took me a few readings of the Official Report to appreciate the amendment’s significance for Waverley market. However, it appears that, by splitting the conditions for residential and non-residential leases and changing the length of time left on the lease of non-residential leases from 100 years to 175 years, a neat solution was found. That has little impact on other long leases, and results in the City of Edinburgh Council retaining ownership of Waverley market. Common good land continues to present challenges for public bodies and communities. Whenever the Scottish Parliament considers issues of land ownership, persistent frustrations with common good land arise in relation to identification, ownership and use of the land. With regard to the bill, neither the Justice Committee nor the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee came to a firm decision about the best way to proceed on exemption during their stage 1 discussions. Although we did not support Jim Hume’s amendment today, for reasons that Claudia Beamish identified, I appreciate his focus on retaining the public interest.

There was a discussion on Waverley market at stage 2. Once it became clear that the amendment exempted Waverley market, that was an important factor. I will go on to explain the reasons why. The narrowness of the criteria in the bill—principally, the length of the lease and the amount of money involved—limits the impact on common good land. Although we accept that the minister cannot be definitive about the amount of land that may be affected—Alex Fergusson raised that point—and that the complexities of common good mean that we probably never can be, I accept that if further land is identified that will be of limited significance. I was not entirely convinced by the minister’s argument on legal challenge, as that would depend on additional identification. I have a level of confidence that the level of legal challenge would be extremely limited, if there was any such challenge at all, although given that the number of affected parcels of land continually increased—albeit that it never reached double figures—that confidence may be misplaced.

Reconciling the Government’s confidence that only eight pieces of land were affected with its argument that legal challenges might arise in the future was what I had difficulty with. However, now that Waverley is out of the equation, I believe that the principle of protecting the public interest is upheld, in the vast majority of cases, by the transfer from public to public authority. Claudia Beamish correctly raised concerns about the transfer of parcels of land from Dumfries and Galloway Council to Buccleuch Estates, which will be a transfer from public to private ownership. In that case, the length of the lease impacts on our understanding of the public interest. By the time the lease expires, I am not confident that there will still be a Dumfries and Galloway Council to return the land to. We are dealing with the consequences of decisions that were made in the early 1800s and although that may not be the outcome that we desire, we are limited in how the situation can be resolved. In that context, the minister’s comments that the bill is an attempt to bring law and reality into line are relevant. The law and practices surrounding common good land, its use and its identification are tangled. As MSPs, we are all aware of those challenges. In evidence to the committee, the representative of Brodies LLP said: “It seems to me that common good has been an issue for a few hundred years and is a matter that is not going to resolve itself. If it were to receive the attentions of the Parliament, that may be a favour to all concerned with it.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 22 February 2012; c 624.] The minister may wish to reflect on that point. Finally, although the bill does not address this issue, there are concerns about implementation and the role of the Registers of Scotland. The fact that a specific exercise will not be undertaken to update the land register of Scotland to reflect the conversion of ultra-long leases to ownership raises concerns that the register will not be accurate and correct. We recently passed the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill and it seems incongruous that we are now passing a bill that is likely add to the inaccuracy of the land register. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee called for further information to be provided on plans to complete the register, including a target date for completion of the register. That call reflects concerns about the accurate inclusion of ultra-long leases once they are transferred to ownership. Perhaps the minister can provide more detail on that in his closing speech. The bill makes a contribution towards Scotland’s land laws becoming more transparent and more relevant to modern expectations.

The Scottish Government’s consultation document on proposals for an integrated framework of environmental regulation says that, in order for the Scottish Environment Protection Agency to become the sort of regulator that we need, consideration should be given to having a single permitting procedure which, it is argued, will simplify the range of current procedures. Can the minister clarify what sort of procedures we need? In the week of the Rio+20 conference, can he assure us that there will be no risk of private enterprises being able to opt out of regulation and being able to undertake their own regulation of our natural resources—specifically, water?

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to tackle water pollution. (S4O-01132)

Concerns have been expressed by constituents in Kinglassie in Fife about pollution in the Lochty Burn. Locals have worked hard to improve their local environment and to make it an attractive waterway to the village, but their efforts have been hindered by recent pollution of the burn by iron deposits, possibly from old coal mines. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency is working with the Scottish Coal Company to investigate the issue, but it has been doing so for over a year and we are no further forward. Will the minister raise those concerns with SEPA? Will he ensure that SEPA is adequately resourced and has robust strategies in place to deal with water pollution arising from Scotland’s industrial past?

I thank the cabinet secretary for providing an advance copy of his statement. It is only a week since we debated reform of the common fisheries policy and I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has returned with a fairly positive report on what has been achieved so far, which demonstrates the value of positive working relationships within the UK and that Scottish fishing interests are the UK’s fishing interests. We went in with a shared agenda on discards, conservation and regionalisation, and that approach has shown results. There is broad agreement that progress has been made on a lot of key issues, but there is still much detail to be decided that will determine how successful the reform will be. Environmental organisations are concerned that there are no binding targets on discards. While the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation warns against inappropriate regulation, my concern is not so much that the Scottish fishing fleet will not strive to meet the proposed targets but that other member states might take a different view. There must be a level playing field. Will the cabinet secretary comment on how we guarantee that? Furthermore, the discards target has been set at January 2018. Is it the cabinet secretary’s intention to push for the earlier introduction of a ban? How will he ensure that the timetable for a ban will coincide with the development and introduction of regionalisation and the subsequent multi-annual management plans? Unless those are co-ordinated, I do not feel that they can work. Is the cabinet secretary confident that the earlier ban that he desires and the proposed ban would both respond to the needs of mixed fisheries? Finally, I note what the cabinet secretary said about empowering member states, but does he agree that that will work in the interests of sustainable fishing only if decisions are taken by regional parties? The next stage is the European Parliament, where the detail and timescales to which the agreement will operate will be decided. What will the Scottish Government do to influence the next round of decision making?

Scotland has a long history and tradition with the sea. As a country with miles of coastline, it has used the sea for trade, for leisure, for invasions and emigrations, for industry and for food. The sea has been a source of bounty and a source of sorrow. It has shaped the history of Scotland and of the United Kingdom, an island nation. In these modern times, we face and embrace new uses of our coastline as we look towards advancements in renewables and explore ways in which we can harness the power of the sea and the tides. Our sea is a resource that is increasingly valuable, yet it is one that existed long before Scotland. It is a natural resource that we exploit. We must take seriously our responsibility to ensure a healthy marine environment, one that can provide a food and energy source for generations to come. Our fishing sector is at the heart of our relationship with the sea—perhaps our most historic engagement. The sector is diverse, ranging from small coastal communities that grew up around fishing to fish processors and producers, a growing aquaculture sector and large fishing fleets concentrated in the north-east. Scottish produce is recognised and exported around the world. The sector provides employment ranging from the hard and dangerous life of a trawlerman to top-class chefs presenting Michelin-quality food. Although the often byzantine rules of the common fisheries policy do not directly apply to everyone in the sector, they impact on their ability to do business. Today’s debate is an opportunity for us to recognise the importance of CFP reform, to strongly support the reform agenda and to be clear and unequivocal about what reform needs to deliver. As the cabinet secretary said, the fisheries council will meet this month to start finalising the proposals. When the reform agenda was launched in 2009, there were bold words from the European Commission, which were widely welcomed. The green paper states: “The ... vision for the future is a far cry from the current reality of overfishing, fleet overcapacity, heavy subsidies, low economic resilience and decline in the volume of fish caught by European fishermen. The current CFP has not worked well enough to prevent these problems. However, the Commission believes that a whole-scale and fundamental reform of the Common Fisheries Policy … and remobilisation of the fisheries sector can bring about the dramatic change that is needed to reverse the current situation. This must not be yet another piecemeal, incremental reform but a sea change cutting to the core reasons behind the vicious circle in which Europe’s fisheries have been trapped in recent decades.” The failures of the common fisheries policy are evident. Overfishing across the EU remains a problem. Available figures for 2009 show that, of the 93 stocks for which sufficient scientific advice exists, only 21.5 per cent are exploited at levels delivering maximum sustainable yield, while 35 per cent are overexploited and 43 per cent are outside safe biological limits. The Commission estimates that nearly 79 per cent of European Community stocks for which there is scientific advice are fished unsustainably. However, it is easier to diagnose the problem than it is to cure it. The reasons for failure are complex. For example, although it is true that there may be fewer fleets, there are more sophisticated and accurate fishing measures. However, there is concern that, at the EU level, there is a drift towards a position of little change and the maintenance of the status quo. That must be resisted. Limited reform would be damaging to not only the fishing sector, which is looking to the reforms to address the problems of the CFP, but the long-term sustainability of our seas and oceans. At a European level, overfishing and the exploitation of the seas, driven by short-term political solutions, must end. The yearly negotiations of quotas, which routinely put aside scientific advice, are not satisfactory. I acknowledge that there are concerns about incomplete science, but that means that Scotland and countries across the EU need to invest in science and ensure that partners work together to follow best advice. The Labour Party will support Jamie McGrigor’s amendment. I recognise what has been achieved in Scotland in terms of promoting responsibility and co-operation between the fishing industry, the scientists and the non-governmental organisations that are concerned about sustainability. There is broad recognition here that healthy seas and productive fish stocks are crucial for a profitable fishing sector and thriving fishing communities. I recognise the frustrations with the system of allocated quotas, which some feel do not recognise the steps that have been taken but, through the cod recovery plan and incentive-based conservation measures, we have a model that rewards responsibility and fosters sustainability. However, it is important that other member states take action. The concerns about control and enforcement under the control regulation in 2010 illustrate the persistent problems with the sector. It is unacceptable that bad practice continues, which is why the principle of sustainability must be enshrined in the CFP’s basic regulation. The key goal for Scottish and EU fishing is the proposal for regionalisation, which is a fundamental principle of the reform agenda. The proposal is the answer to the worst of the CFP, but would maintain EU co-operation and high-level strategic decision making. Let us be clear that regionalisation is not nationalisation, as that approach lacks credibility. We need only look at the current mackerel disputes with Iceland and the Faroe Islands to see where that would lead us. Proper regionalisation would respond to the varying needs throughout the EU; make it easier to respond to the challenges of mixed fisheries; and enable member states and stakeholders to design multi-annual plans that set out the measures that are best adapted to their fisheries and those of their partners. I am encouraged that many member states support the concept, but there must be confidence that the plans will be legal, deliverable and competent. Last year’s report by the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee identified the importance of devolved decision making. Encouragingly, the United Kingdom Parliament’s Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee has called for “greater regional ecosystem-based management”. It is now over to the cabinet secretary and UK ministers to push for its delivery. That is clearly the commissioner’s desire, but legal questions have been raised. Political will must push through the concerns. We must work closely with allies to deliver regionalisation. The Scottish Fishermen’s Federation has lobbied members of the European, Scottish and UK Parliaments. It is important that the message reaches the right people, and building coalitions is crucial to that. That leads me on to the debate about maximum sustainable yield, which is defined as the highest catch that can be taken year after year while maintaining the fish population at maximum productivity. The proposal to include the aim of achieving MSY by 2015 in the basic regulation follows on from the EU’s commitment at the world summit on sustainable development in 2002 to achieve MSY “on an urgent basis and where possible not later than 2015.” Just last week, we had a members’ business debate on Rio+20 in which we emphasised and committed to the importance of international agreement on the issues. In advance of this debate, WWF Scotland and RSPB Scotland have called on the UK and Scottish Governments to support those timeframes. We should continue to support the 2015 goal. I am pleased that the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation states that it fully supports the target, although I hear its concerns about definition and the importance of not setting up for failure. It is recognised that the inclusion of the phrase “where possible” is important, particularly when we face the challenges of mixed fisheries. Discards, which my colleagues will speak about in more detail, are a blight on the industry and a clear example of a policy going wrong. The Commission proposes a ban on discards by 2016. That is a tricky issue. As the cabinet secretary has said, “we can’t have a ban without a plan.” There are well-made arguments that a complete ban implemented on a short timescale is not the answer and that the focus must be on selective fishing to avoid unwanted catches of commercial and non-commercial fishing. Discards are an emotive issue and it is right that there is a public campaign to express anger about the practice. However, a solution must be found that does not create additional problems or simply divert the problem elsewhere. The cabinet secretary outlined concerns about transferable fishing concessions. I welcome the concerted effort from member states to reject that proposal. The reform of the CFP is extremely complex. This is a relatively short debate, so the clear message from the Parliament must be about the importance of regional decision making. If the Commission gets that issue right, the approach will lie at the heart of moves to address many of the broader challenges by equipping the sector to deal with discards, overfishing and eco-management at the appropriate level and with the appropriate partners. It has been difficult, if not impossible, for the CFP to be sufficiently flexible and responsive and sensitive to the needs of fishing communities throughout the EU. In December, we saw what difficulties there were in securing the cod recovery plan. It was only because of the influence and size that Scotland’s relationship with the UK gives us that we stated and won our case on the interpretation of article 13 of the cod recovery plan. Regional flexibility will provide an opportunity to support a sustainable, productive and responsible Scottish fishing sector, which is an aim that we can all support. I move amendment S4M-03163.2, to insert at end: “and, in recognising the role that the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment has as part of the UK delegation to the Council of Ministers, urges the Scottish Government to work closely with the UK Government to ensure that the long-term interests of the Scottish fishing and aquaculture industries and Scotland’s marine environment are at the centre of the discussions at the council.”

The member might be interested to know that the UK back-bench debate in April made exactly the same statement on transferable concessions.

Will the member reflect on the fact that member states’ votes are allocated not by the size of their fishing fleet but by the size of their population? Can he explain how reduced influence and fewer votes at the Council of Ministers would be to Scottish fishermen’s advantage?

Will the member gave way?

Will the cabinet secretary comment on the concluded Moonzie case? Does he believe that the potential impact of the judgment on tenant farmers requires a legislative solution?

I am pleased to be giving a closing speech in this debate. As members have highlighted, the Agriculture Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill is a slim piece of legislation. The Scottish Government responded to concerns that were expressed at stage 2 about the transitional arrangements, so the bill has had a smooth passage this afternoon. The committee’s stage 1 report included calls for the bill to go further on the definition of “near relative”. In evidence to the committee, the STFA told us that part of the response to concerns about an ageing farming population and the need to encourage and support new entrants could be the extension of who qualifies as a near relative. However, the debate took place against a complex background so that, on balance, it seemed better to consider the broader issues in more detail and more comprehensively. In pursuing that route we need to be confident that there will be solutions, that the partners, regardless of their wealth or status, will be treated equally and that we will achieve an improved set of circumstances for tenant farmers. I thought that Graeme Dey gave an insightful analysis of the relationships involved. There is broad agreement that a vibrant tenant sector is key to the future of farming if it is to survive as an industry. Although we can point to good examples, greater clarity is required on some issues. I understand those who say that their relationship is fine and that they just need to be left to get on with it. However, as the STFA proposal on near relatives highlighted, we need to think about future generations and their opportunities, which can best be achieved by a tenant farming sector that meets modern expectations. Certainly, wherever there is best practice, we need to learn from it. As new entrants struggle to find farming tenancies, it is more important than ever that we encourage collaboration between landowners and prospective and existing tenants from a basis that is fair to all parties. It was clear from the evidence that the committee took and from my discussions with stakeholders that the bill is fine as far as it goes, but that there are many more issues that need to be addressed. That has been reflected in the debate, in which many members, including Margaret McDougall, have highlighted the pressures that farmers in their regions have explained to them. That is not to fail to recognise that there are many long-standing, stable, positive relationships between tenants and landowners, but even within such relationships there is often a need for greater transparency and clarity, particularly in light of recent court cases. Last November, the NFUS held a briefing for MSPs in which many of the issues that members have highlighted were discussed. Since then, greater pressure has been applied by the outcome of the Moonzie case, which has led to uncertainty over rent reviews. The decision left the sector feeling vulnerable. Along with other members, I welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement today on the membership of the independent expert working group on rent reviews. It is heartening that the tenant farming forum is, as a wide group, showing willingness to deal with the problem, and that it is supporting the four members of the group. We cannot underestimate the challenge that the group faces in exploring the determining factors of a rent review, and it will do that against a backdrop of a legal decision that has moved the goal posts. There is a pressing need to provide clarity and stability to the process, as it can be ill-defined and can lead to disputes, which ultimately sour relationships and make tenancies untenable. The group is dealing with complex problems and it is working to tight timescales. I wish it well in its work and I look forward to the outcome with interest. Members have highlighted a number of other areas that the tenant farming forum is proceeding with as an agreed set of priorities. Annabelle Ewing highlighted the call for an arbitration system. Although the Scottish Land Court plays a valuable role, there is a need for a simpler, cheaper option that offers dispute resolution. The issue is about building and increasing trust in the system. The forum will also look at the practicalities of a code of practice. That will address some of the issues that Graeme Pearson raised. Many landowners employ an agent to act on their behalf when dealing with tenants. That is an example of the shifting nature of tenant and landowner relationships—they are moving away from the more personal towards the increasingly professional. In that context, there is an argument that a robust code of practice is needed. The code could include the period of a rent review and what it would cover, which would cross over with some of the work that is being undertaken by the expert group. A few members raised the issue of waygo compensation. That is often an area of dispute and the uncertainty about what will be recognised leads to a reluctance to invest, which, ultimately, is not good for the tenant or the landlord. There needs to be greater transparency and a better understanding of expectations in relation to how decisions will be made on apportioning assets that may have deteriorated, or assets that may have improved the tenancy. As Claudia Beamish highlighted at stage 1, we also received representation from RSPB Scotland on its proposals for conservation tenancies. Such tenancies could help it to let more land and overcome some of the obstacles that it and other non-governmental organisations face in trying to let land. The cabinet secretary may want to respond to those points in his closing speech. It is crucial that we promote an environment that supports long-term letting and gives confidence to the sector. As Rob Gibson highlighted, the current situation is leading to reports of increasingly short-term letting due to uncertainty. That can only mean less investment in farming by tenants and landlords, which will lead to less productivity in and less security for the Scottish farming sector. The bill will make a small contribution towards resolving those issues, but, in some ways, it has been overtaken by events. The work of the independent expert working group and the tenant farming forum is crucial in pointing to the way forward, but over the next few months we cannot underestimate the challenging questions that there will be for the forum and its partners to answer, nor the complexity of the Parliament’s response. Today’s work may be finished, but we still have a task ahead of us.

The minister referred to the interest that has been shown in the Scottish land fund, but we are now entering the third month of the first year of funding and there are still no details available about the precise criteria for use of the fund. When does the minister expect to announce those criteria, and when will the fund be open for business?

I am pleased to speak in this debate in support of the Rio+20 summit. I congratulate Aileen McLeod on securing the debate and giving us the opportunity to discuss the approaching summit. My colleague Claudia Beamish is disappointed not to be here, but it seems that her committee trip to Gigha to see in action many of the policies that speak to the purpose of Rio+20 has left her speechless—she has lost her voice, which is a bit unfortunate for a politician. The Rio+20 summit will bring together Governments from around the world. The organisers hope that it will be “an historic opportunity to define pathways to a safer, more equitable, cleaner, greener and more prosperous world for all.” There is huge expectation and hope about what global summits can achieve, but no one should underestimate the challenges that we face in achieving a global transformation in how we grow our economies and sustain our populations. The first Rio summit, two decades ago, was a seminal moment in the growth of sustainable development and environmental protection. Then, the core message was that nothing less than a complete transformation of our attitudes and behaviour would bring about the necessary changes. Ten years later, the world met again in South Africa to carry on the work. This June, world leaders, Governments, businesses, NGOs and others will gather to pledge once again to move towards the level of transformation that was called for in 1992. However, we cannot ignore the persistent concerns that progress is not fast enough; that global commitments involve warm words, but not enough action; and that the big discussions about responsibility and growth between the developed and developing countries get in the way of progress. We last discussed the issue of climate justice in March, when the Parliament joined together to promote “the moral, environmental and economic reasons for action” on climate change. At that time, Scottish Labour called on the Scottish Government to “redouble its efforts to reduce emissions and target climate change in Scotland”, a call that was supported by members from across the Parliament. Global summits are vital to bring together the world to work on a complex set of issues. Those issues know no borders and require co-operation. Radical solutions will be on the table in June—there is a push for a law on ecocide. Pollution, climate change, ecological degradation and the worrying decline in global biodiversity are issues that concern us all, and there is an increasing call for accountability. However, there must also be further progress at home. The seven key areas that have been identified for discussion at the summit can be worked towards at home if we are to live up to the First Minister’s pledge in China a few months ago to “set our own house in order, to be part of the solution not the problem but also to lead by example.” To take just one of the key themes—the green economy—the RSPB has highlighted the opportunity at the summit to work towards the creation of a global green economy, which would help all the world’s people and deliver social, environmental and economic development in some of the poorest parts of the world. As WWF Scotland and other organisations are highlighting in advance of Rio+20, the Scottish Government must continue to take action at home to ensure that our economy moves towards a low-carbon and sustainable future. We must ensure that the focus is not simply on jobs that are associated with renewable energy, but on embedding change in every sector of our economy. I welcome the chance to speak in the debate. I wish the delegation well as it joins world leaders in Rio in 22 days’ time. I hope not only that agreements are reached that will shift the world towards a more sustainable future, but that the summit gives fresh impetus to the Scottish Government’s commitment to a sustainable and low-carbon future here at home.

Does the minister agree that, although the measures that he has identified are welcome, a fundamental issue for new entrants is access to farming land and tenancies? The tenant farming forum is identified as the body that will deal with such concerns, but does the minister accept that the recent Moonzie case and the lack of clarity about its consequences add greater tension to the discussions? How will he ensure that we can be confident that the tenant farming forum’s recommendations will be fair to all parties that are involved?

What challenges in establishing a rural Parliament were identified in the stakeholders’ meeting on 6 May? Several recognised rural stakeholders were involved in that meeting, but there were no trade union representatives. Will the cabinet secretary give an assurance that the seminar on 29 May will be fully inclusive?

I am pleased to take part in the debate and I thank the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee for its work on the bill. The hours that the committee spent taking evidence and debating the key points make my contribution much easier. It may be appropriate to thank the previous session’s Justice Committee, because the bill was initially introduced in the previous session. It is welcome that, in reintroducing the bill, the Scottish Government has moved to address many of the issues that were raised in the previous stage 1 report. I also acknowledge the contribution that has been made by witnesses who contributed to the debate. In many cases they illuminated the technicalities of what is a short but complex bill that will, put most simply, enable the conversion of ultra-long leases to ownership. I am happy to confirm that Labour will support the bill at stage 1 and look forward to the debates at stages 2 and 3. I thank the Scottish Law Commission, which has been at the heart of the debate over the legal context for land in Scotland. It has carried out a major review of the structure of land law. That review concludes with this bill, which extends the principle of conversion that was established by the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000. The 2000 act prevents—with some exceptions—the granting of leases, after June 2000, that last more than 175 years. The estimated 9,000 ultra-long leases that will be addressed by the Long Leases (Scotland) Bill were largely generated by large estates from around 1750 to 1930, often with the purpose of encouraging the industrialisation of Scotland. As the minister indicated, such leases tend to be concentrated in particular parts of the country. As the Scottish Law Commission highlights, ultra-long leases are “barely distinguishable from feus” and carry the same disadvantages. As the minister said, in the case of ultra-long leases the difficulties can be even more significant. The disadvantages are that, by providing a small income stream to the landlord, restrictions and other obligations can be imposed on the tenant, although the tenant is the owner, in the everyday sense of that term. The conditions might allow for an inappropriate degree of control by the landlord. Given the conditions that are identified in the bill—annual rents of less than £100, and more than 100 years being left to run on a lease of more than 175 years—the tenant is in a similar position to that of an owner, and the landlord has little real interest. The Scottish Government has responded to issues that were raised by the Justice Committee in the previous session of Parliament. I welcome the decision to exempt from the scope of the bill low-base rentals with variable rent, when agreement or order has been registered; leases that include a harbour, either wholly or partly, in relation to which there is a statutory harbour authority, which provision has been included following evidence from Peterhead Port Authority; and leases that are granted solely to allow the installation and maintenance of pipes and cables. The committee supports proposals to allow for one-off payments to compensate for loss of landlord rights. The minister expects such payments to be modest, and the Lands Tribunal for Scotland will be part of the process. Such matters are complex but relatively straightforward. The bill generated more discussion in the context of its relationship with the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill, the role of common good land and how it should be understood in the context of the bill, and the case of Waverley market and whether it should be exempt from the scope of the bill. The report, as the Justice Committee’s report did in the previous session, talks about common good land. There are a number of issues in that regard. Identification, ownership and use of common good land are complex issues. Although the bill does not address the matter, it will change the ownership of some common good land. Concerns about that were expressed in both reports. The Public Petitions Committee in the previous session also looked at common good funds and identified common problems to do with lack of knowledge of what is common good and how it operates. I do not have the answers, but the issue is challenging. Parliament seems continually to confront the problem without being able to find a satisfactory way of resolving it.

The minister gave a good example of the difficulties that we face in relation to common good land. However, MSPs find it frustrating when constituents come to us with a problem and we cannot find an easy solution. The difficulty to do with our confidence in the records of common good property, particularly in relation to land that will be affected by the bill, is frustrating. The committee is right to think that even though perhaps only a small number of cases will be involved, such cases are important to the public interest. In its report, the committee made a strong comment about compensation payments for common good land and asked whether payment can compensate for the loss of common good land, saying: “the Committee believes, with respect to leases of land held under the common good, financial compensation on transfer of ownership is not necessarily adequate compensation for the loss of that land and the loss of greater public benefit.” The committee went on to welcome “the Scottish Government’s intention to write to local authorities recommending that the proceeds of any compensation should be directed to its common good fund.” We will not resolve the issue of common good land through the bill. The issue is, rightly, the responsibility of local authorities. I was initially concerned that the minister, in saying that he would write to local authorities to make recommendations about use of compensation, did not fully appreciate the importance that many people place on common good land, which goes beyond its monetary value. However, I note that the minister indicated a stronger interest in the matter in his formal response to the stage 1 report. We will see how the situation develops. I anticipate that we will hear more about exemption of Waverley market during the debate. The City of Edinburgh Council argued that the grassum that it received in 1989 represents commercial value that is greater than £100 per annum, and that the council should not lose its interest in a property that is within a United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization world heritage site. Other people argue that the site is common good land and should be exempted on that basis. The City of Edinburgh Council does not support that interpretation, and the committee and the Government are not inclined to exempt common good land. The Scottish Government argued that there is no need for an exemption and that the council would be able to maintain an interest through its role as a planning authority. The committee concluded that there is still a case to be made. It may be that the City of Edinburgh Council has still to convince the committee and the minister that there is a case, but as we look to stage 2, the council must be heard. I am pleased by the minister’s comment in his opening speech that he is actively seeking a solution to the situation. There seems to be a unique set of circumstances—there is no equivalent case—and it seems that no other local authority has raised similar concerns. The Scottish Government must respond in a way that is in the public interest. Over the years, the Scottish Parliament has sought to tackle the inequalities, inconsistencies and intricacies of land ownership. The process has been, and continues to be, complex, but it aims to deliver transparent, fair and equitable land laws that will deliver for a modern society.

I am pleased to be closing for the Labour Party. The debate has been wide ranging and complex. I particularly liked Alex Fergusson’s description of the bill in his opening speech as dealing with a relic of the feudal system. Members covered a number of issues and provided examples from their constituencies and regions. Some members, including Claudia Beamish, focused on the bill’s relationship with the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill, which is also going through Parliament. These parallel bills interact with each other and, as the minister acknowledged, there might be a need for amendments to the Long Leases (Scotland) Bill at stages 2 and 3 in response to any changes to the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill. Concerns were expressed to the committee that Registers of Scotland has made it clear that it does not intend to carry out a specific exercise to update the land register to reflect the conversion of ultra-long leases to ownership, and that it will therefore not be possible to rely on the register to be accurate and correct. In the committee, the minister replied that the updating will take place the next time the land register is updated in respect of ownership, and that that will be more economical and effective. We can all appreciate the attraction of that approach, particularly in the current financial circumstances, but there were concerns that that was not a satisfactory response. The committee recommends that the land register should be updated to accurately reflect ownership. Alex Fergusson discussed those concerns this afternoon. Scottish Land and Estates encapsulated the problem when it said in evidence to the committee: “this would seem to be a very good opportunity to catch some land that might otherwise stay under the same ownership for a long enough time before it triggered first registration.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 22 February 2012; c 627.] However, I welcome the further comments from the minister in his response to the stage 1 report, and his recognition of the value to Scotland and the Scottish economy of keeping the land register as up to date as possible. The minister’s comment that Government officials will work closely with Registers of Scotland on implementing the bill is welcome, although he might want to clarify whether it relates to both of the bills that are going through Parliament. As we have a land registration bill going through the Parliament, it seems incongruous that we have a parallel bill that looks as though it will add to the inaccuracy of the land register. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee is calling for further information on plans to complete the land register and a target date for its completion. That chimes with the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s concerns about the accurate inclusion in the register of long leases once they are transferred to ownership. A few members discussed the Waverley market issue, particularly those with an interest in Edinburgh, such as Marco Biagi and Alison Johnstone, although it was clear that all members found the subject of interest. I was particularly interested in the committee report’s reference to the issue of grassum. Following the evidence taking, the committee did not take a firm view on grassum, but it noted the conflicting evidence on it. Part of the City of Edinburgh Council’s argument for exemption for Waverley market is that a grassum should be taken into consideration when the lease is of a commercial nature. It argued that, because a grassum of £6.25 million was paid for the market, the low annual rent does not reflect the true nature of the lease. The minister argued that that was not appropriate because a grassum is not a substitute for rent and that such an approach would misapply a grassum. I appreciate and understand the minister’s point. However, has there been a common misapplication of grassums? Has it been common practice to have a grassum operating as an element of commercial rent? Will the exclusion of a grassum lead to the transfer of land that, it could be argued, is outwith the bill’s scope? Alternatively, is it the case that other leases that might be relevant were agreed several hundred years ago, so their grassums can justifiably be discounted, and that the case in Edinburgh is exceptional? We must consider the consequences of the bill, which I imagine were not envisaged when the lease arrangements for Waverley market were entered into in 1989. Marco Biagi described the economic circumstances and decisions that faced the City of Edinburgh Council at that time and gave some insight into why the council took the path that it did on Waverley market. That might have been short-sighted, but we must respond to the conditions and the circumstances that we face now. I welcome the consideration that the minister is giving to the issue. It would be helpful if more details on the issue could be provided to members as soon as it is available. Members also raised the issue of compensation payments for long-lease common good land that will transfer to the tenant under the bill. Annabelle Ewing talked about the lack of clarity about common good land and the difficulty in gaining proper information about it. Margaret McDougall highlighted that the committee initially thought that four sites were involved, but now it seems that nine sites are affected. Alex Fergusson asked how much confidence we can have in that figure. I was intrigued by the minister’s statement in evidence to the committee that “the test is whether the asset and its availability for public good would be affected by what is in the bill.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 7 March 2012; c 683.] That suggests that it is not about who owns the land but about how it is used and its availability. I apologise in advance if that is a misinterpretation, but that is my understanding of what the minister said. In his speech, Jim Hume outlined the principles that would challenge that view. It would be helpful to have further detail on how far access to and activity on common good land will be maintained if it is transferred. Perhaps the minister can say more about that in his closing speech. It is expected that nine common good land sites will fall under the bill, but only limited information was provided to the committee on the sites. Does the minister have any idea of the value of the sites? I refer not just to their financial worth but to their community value and contribution. The leases in question in Dumfries and Galloway were created in the early 1800s—there is an example there of a lease that has changed tenancy—and the leases in Glasgow include three parkland sites. Is the minister confident that those leases are appropriate and that the loss of those sites will not have an impact on local communities? It has been an interesting debate, with many insightful contributions, and it will no doubt provide plenty for us to consider at stage 2.

I congratulate Kenneth Gibson on securing the debate. His motion talks about the “500 community, therapeutic and allotment gardens throughout Scotland”, which illustrates the interest in the issue. Mr Gibson also talked about physical health improvements and mental health opportunities, and the way in which allotments and green gyms can contribute to that agenda. My region has a network of allotments, many of which are long established and offer the traditional allotment experience. Alongside that, more recent projects have been established such as the community garden in Burntisland, which is a small shared space with some allotment plots that seeks to engage older people in the community and encourage them to work with the primary school. If we can engage children at a young age, they will gain skills that they can carry with them through the rest of their lives. Kenneth Gibson talked about access to funding. The range of funding possibilities shows that policy makers appreciate the wider benefits of allotments and the whole agenda. Christine Grahame talked about access to land and her experience of the difficulties in trying to find a plot. We are also talking about the advantages of working with the community on community engagement issues. Jackson Carlaw highlighted that when he talked about the objections that were made to some of the projects that he had been involved with—or was that Annabel Goldie? I am not very sure. We need to convince communities and take them along with us by letting them see the advantages and positive benefits of an allotment site. In the Parliament, we talk a lot about food security. What better way to have individuals contributing to that agenda than by helping them to grow food themselves? How easy is it to grow lettuce all summer rather than buying plastic bags of it, as Alison Johnstone said? That can be done on a windowsill. We need to engage people with that agenda. Allotments are not just about providing food; there is also an issue around how we impact on our carbon footprint. Allotments provide a lot of community support and knowledge sharing. In some ways, growing our own fruit and veg is a lost skill. Allotments can provide mentoring. I know that I can grow cucumbers, but I have tried to grow butternut squash and I cannot get the flowers to turn into vegetables. I can read many glossy books and watch celebrity gardeners on television, but if I had someone who has grown veg in Fife and knows what the land is like there, I could find answers to my questions. I am not just talking about myself, but I would like to work alongside experienced gardeners. I would have to find the time as well as the plot and not having an election next spring might help with next year’s crop. I thank Kenneth Gibson for bringing the debate to the chamber. It has been an interesting discussion.

I am pleased to be speaking in this afternoon’s debate. As an MSP who is not on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, I thank the committee for an informative, well-argued and interesting report. I thank all the stakeholders who responded to the consultation and improved and challenged our understanding of the issues. I particularly thank the tenant farming forum. Its work on improving agricultural holdings legislation to encourage the release of land to rent has been invaluable, and the bill responds to its concerns. The bill is a narrow piece of legislation that discusses only three areas, yet it has highlighted the wider arrangements in Scotland and the need to improve the system for current farmers and future generations. This slim bill is recognised as a move in the right direction. Although no one is denying that there is more to be done, it is fair that we use this focused bill to bring the measures into law as quickly as possible. Labour will support the bill at stage 1. At the heart of the debate around tenant farming is how we secure a sustainable future. We must question why we have seen a fall in the total number of holdings with tenancy agreements while, at the same time, there seems to be a rise in contract farming. The landmark land reform programme produced the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 2003 and, among other measures, introduced limited duration tenancies and short limited duration tenancies. There has been an increase in both of those, although there are perhaps still not as many as we would like there to be. However, the number of 1991 act tenancies and limited partnerships has declined and overall, as Rob Gibson pointed out, there has been a reduction of 10 per cent in the number of tenancy agreements. By contrast, England’s tenanted sector has developed differently, with the decline in rented land being halted and even reversed. However, that is a complex comparison. In England, there is little security of tenure, and there is little evidence that any increase is due to new entrants. In Scotland, our tenanted sector must encourage long-term investment from the tenant and the landlord and ensure that they feel confident that their investment will be recognised. It must also support new entrants not just through the availability of land but through investment and other support. The answer is not simple. We should recognise, as the cabinet secretary pointed out, that there is a lot of good practice in the sector and that there are good relationships. However, there is also an ageing population in farming, and we must make new opportunities easier to find. The better the evidence, the easier it is to provide the correct policy response and, as the committee identified in its report, there are concerns about the lack of reliable data. We can assume that a number of the tenancies under the 1991 act are historical but, as the Government identified, we do not really know what happens when such a tenancy comes to an end. That gap is contributing to falling numbers, so the Scottish Government must take measures to improve data collection. The bill looks to expand the options that are available when a 1991 tenancy comes to an end by extending the meaning of “near relative”, where the person concerned is a successor, to include grandchildren. In principle, we very much agree with extending the definition of who qualifies as a near relative, but I expect that it is an issue that will be returned to at stage 2. The Scottish Tenant Farmers Association and NFU Scotland question the difference in the interpretation of a near relative, depending on whether an assignation or a succession is involved, and the STFA, in particular, would like to include nephews and nieces. Others have expressed concerns about getting the right balance between landlords and tenants, and I agree with the committee that the Scottish Government needs to look at the issue again. Consensus is a good thing and events are moving along, albeit slowly, but we are continuing to see a decrease in tenant farming. If a further extension of the definition of a “near relative” would play a part in addressing that decline, we should consider that. In relation to transitional provisions, I am pleased that the Scottish Government has responded to the committee and has indicated that it will lodge an amendment at stage 2. That is a sensible move that will capture those people who are in the middle of the process at the time of the bill’s passing. Section 2 addresses rent reviews and prevents upward-only and landlord-only initiated rent reviews in a limited duration tenancy. I welcome the widespread support for that sensible measure, which I believe will be a positive move for future contracts. The committee helpfully considered wider tenancy issues. The progress that has been made through devolution should be recognised, but we can make further improvements. The Government has an opportunity in this session of Parliament to make progress on tenant farming through legislation, if necessary, but also through policy direction. We can improve conditions for new entrants. Although starter units, a new entrants register and the introduction of mentoring are all positive, the common agricultural policy subsidy system does not support new entrants, whose needs must be central to discussions. I would like to see a more level playing field for new entrants when it comes to accessing subsidy support. The RSPB proposal for conservation tenancies is worth further consideration. The RSPB argues that such tenancies could solve the current limitations that it and other non-governmental organisations face in letting land. The committee identified another area that can act as a barrier to successful tenancies: the lack of clarity on investment in holdings and waygo payments. If a tenant does not feel secure in their current farming interests or in what will happen to their investment in the future, they will be reluctant to invest, while the landlord may not be convinced that investment will give them a return. It would be good to hear more from the Government on what it thinks the extent of the problem might be and how it could improve the present system. From my discussions with the tenant farming forum and other stakeholders, I am aware of the work that they are doing on a code of practice for land agents and on proposals for dispute resolution. The recent decision by the Court of Session in the Moonzie case must raise questions about the effectiveness of the current legislation. I understand that 18 applications for rent review are still in the process, and the outcome of the Moonzie case will have an impact on those. Although the cabinet secretary has indicated that he does not intend to use the bill to address that issue, I welcome his announcement that a summit is to be held and his recognition of the significance of the decision to how we make progress. This Parliament has been ambitious in addressing the historic legacy of Scotland’s land. That reflects the importance of access to our land in our culture and in our identity, and of modernising our relationship—working and leisure—with this great Scottish resource. The bill is narrow, but it goes to the heart of concerns about ownership and fairness, and although it will receive support today, I am sure that the bigger debate will continue.

The difficulties that parents face in organising childcare came home to me this morning when I had my own crisis in organising childcare and thought that I might not be able to attend this debate. I welcome the announcement that the Scottish Government intends to extend early years education to 600 hours a year, even though the Government’s amendment today perhaps weakens that commitment. However, we should be clear about what the commitment means. It is good news in terms of access to good-quality nursery education. It contributes towards breaking the link between poverty and educational underachievement and it contributes to the learning, nurture, care, creativity and health of all children. Labour believes strongly in that agenda, which is why we extended nursery education to three-year-olds and vulnerable two-year-olds. Although we support moves to extend provision, the question is, why wait? This is a commitment that fell by the wayside in the previous session but, as the Labour motion says, the Government could move much quicker on the policy. Of course there will be issues to overcome—capacity issues to be resolved, funding to be met, political leadership to be shown and priority to be given—but if those issues are all to be addressed in two years’ time, why not get on with it now? There are a couple of points that I want to make about this policy. We need to be clear about what it will deliver for families. It has been described as a childcare boost but, without proper integration of the childcare system, it does not contribute to the childcare solution for many families. We can value it for what it is. From three years of age, children are brought into the curriculum for excellence. Although delivery is varied, they will have access to qualified nursery teachers. If we value early education for the benefits that it brings to the child, we might ask why it is children of the more advantaged families who get the most benefit from the current system—they are the children who have access to a greater number of pre-school hours, largely through the private sector. Secondly, although the policy is described as “free nursery hours”, for many working parents who are trying to organise childcare, it certainly does not feel free. Many parents still pay the fees of mainly private nurseries while the child attends the school nursery, because of the lack of wraparound and flexible care. The fees are considerable. They are equivalent to private school fees, and represent a level of fee that parents will never have to pay again for any part of their child’s education in Scotland. We need to find a way to make the system work for parents as well as children. We need commitment to make the arrangements more flexible, but I recognise the challenges in that. If local authorities introduce more flexibility and approve more private nurseries to deliver provision, will that affect the viability of their own nurseries? How will public sector nurseries that are oversubscribed be able to deliver additional provision? Will the increasing number of private nurseries delivering the curriculum break links with schools? To make all this happen, the work of the early years task force is important, but the early years change fund must be transparent. Of the £250 million that was announced in the spending review, the Government’s contribution is £50 million over the parliamentary session and the rest is up to local authorities and the national health service. However, at local authority level the contribution is varied. I understand that some authorities are identifying existing work and money as their contribution, while others are identifying new money, but that is money that is contributing to the gap in their budgets. The necessary change cannot be underfunded. School wraparound care is important and needs to be improved and to be accessible and affordable but, unless we get early years childcare right, we run the risk of excluding mothers from the workplace. It is difficult enough for mothers with one child to work, but if they have more than one, it can be unsustainable, even for well-off families, which means that we are in danger of taking talent out of our economy. As John Park highlighted last week, part of the solution is more flexible workplaces that recognise family responsibilities; other countries do it and evidence suggests that it does not affect productivity but leads to more committed staff. What are the solutions? We can tinker around the edges of the system that we have, we can extend provision here and there and we can rightly focus on particularly vulnerable groups of children. I was encouraged by the minister’s comments about looking for a more flexible system, but my concern is that a clear commitment has been made to increase the amount of free nursery provision to 600 hours and we need to move forward more quickly on that.

We perhaps need to be more radical. The Scandinavian model is universal early years provision. That is not free, but we should recognise that, for many families in Scotland, the solution that we are working with just now is not free either.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it is taking to address female unemployment in Fife. (S4O-00821)

The claimant figures for women in Fife that were published last week show that the biggest increase in female unemployment was in North East Fife—an area that traditionally has a lower claimant count. In recent months, the figure has been steadily increasing. What specific actions is the Scottish Government taking to support women who face unemployment in rural areas? Those women often face childcare challenges as well as difficulty in accessing training, both of which are barriers to employment.

Will the cabinet secretary provide details of investment and support that are in place and are planned to help new businesses and social enterprises—particularly in high-energy-use sectors—to contribute to the zero waste strategy?

5. To ask the Scottish Executive whether an industrial operation may operate outwith the permitted hours specified in its planning permission. (S4O-00803)

Constituents are raising with me concerns about the operating practices of Lomond quarry in Leslie. I understand that Fife Council has received more than 900 complaints from residents about operating hours and blasting, yet the council is taking no action against the quarry even though it is persistently operating outwith its permitted hours. Will the minister confirm that, in light of the United Kingdom’s obligations under the Aarhus convention, if Fife Council continues to refuse to take enforcement action over operations that are only 55m from the houses, the local communities have the right to do so?

I am pleased to close this debate on climate justice on behalf of Labour. As a broad movement, we have always been concerned with the interconnectedness of nations, the impact of our actions on others, and a global perspective on tackling poverty and inequality. We have always been concerned with working to address not just unfairness at home, but inequality and injustice throughout the world. The debate has been wide ranging. Mary Fee talked about environmental justice, Paul Wheelhouse highlighted issues around human rights, and Dennis Robertson talked about the importance of engaging young people in future challenges. We have heard many thoughtful, considered and powerful speeches that have demonstrated the breadth of issues—from green vehicles in China to drought in south-east England—that are connected to climate justice. All the topics that have been raised are interconnected, and they all contribute towards the action that we must take at home and abroad if we are to play our part in delivering climate justice. Many members have highlighted the complexity in actions in one part of the world affecting other parts of the world. Rob Gibson spoke about the consequences of deforestation and the growth of soya, and Jamie McGrigor highlighted the changes in fish stocks. Our mackerel fleet are currently dealing with that. I welcome the fact that the Government motion highlights the extreme vulnerability to climate change of communities in developing countries. Evidence shows that they carry the burden of the consequences of global activity, although they are the least equipped to deal with it. Many members have made that point. There will be challenges at home, and the principle that the poor will suffer most is as true here as it is anywhere, but the context in which we in the western world think about how we will cope with the effects of climate change is far removed from that in developing countries, where increased temperatures and unpredictable weather mean the difference in people’s ability to access water, grow crops and protect their homes and communities from flooding. The International Food Policy Research Institute has calculated that 12 million more children under the age of five will be consigned to hunger by 2050 because of climate change. We have much greater capacity and resources to deal with those challenges, and we must do all that we can to help developing countries to prevent the preventable, and build capacity and provide support to deal with what is in some cases, unfortunately, the inevitable. I think that Aileen McLeod made that point. This June, the United Nations conference on sustainable development will take place in Brazil. The minister may want to say what the Scottish Government’s aims in relation to that conference will be and what Scotland’s involvement might be. The Government’s motion certainly recognises the opportunity for Scotland to provide leadership on the issues. Our climate change legislation provides the context for us to do that. Scotland’s ground-breaking legislation provides a lead for other countries, and members of Stop Climate Chaos Scotland have been proud to promote that legislation as a blueprint for other countries, but the Government’s motion misses the need for us to be clear about the action that must be taken at home. Both amendments address that. We need to be clear that meeting Scotland’s climate change challenge is not the ambition of one party; it is the ambition of all of us. All the political parties contributed to the debate on climate change legislation, and we should not forget the role that the environmental groups and activists played in Scotland in shaping it. We all have ownership of the legislation, but the responsibility for delivery falls on the Government, and concerns remain that we lack detail on how progress will be made at the rate that is needed. In the briefings that we received for the debate—I thank all the organisations for their contributions—it is clear that there are concerns about the action that is being taken and the pace of change to deliver on climate change commitments. Claudia Beamish talked about the importance of the forthcoming revised report on proposals and policies, and Stop Climate Chaos Scotland has highlighted the need for the new report to be “sufficiently credible, ambitious and transparent.” The existing RPP was welcomed. Friends of the Earth described it as “a serious document containing a number of costed measures”, but expressed concern over funding and implementation, highlighting in particular transport and energy efficiency in homes. Elaine Murray highlighted the issue of fuel poverty and the need to address housing emission levels, a campaign that is currently being undertaken by WWF. The UK Committee on Climate Change recently highlighted transport as a particular concern. A recent Audit Scotland report stressed that “Transport depends more than any other source of emissions on proposed new policies to achieve emissions reductions” and raised concerns about “optimistic assumptions”. That point was also made by Mary Scanlon. That is why there was such concern when the Scottish Government made cuts to the active transport budget, and why concerns remain that, while the RPP requires almost £500 million for low-carbon transport measures for 2012-13, the Government is funding less than 10 per cent of what its own climate action plan says is needed. We need to have confidence in what the contribution of other partners will be, if we are to make progress. Annabelle Ewing said that we have to recognise the progress that has been made so far, but that progress is sometimes difficult to fully understand. The recent positive figures noting a fall in emissions for 2009 were dampened when it appeared that they were more the result of recession and less activity than of any Government action. We need change to be positive and to be embedded, and we need to change practices and behaviour if we are to see any lasting benefit from those figures. No one can accuse this Government of not being optimistic, but Stop Climate Chaos Scotland is right to say: “The Scottish Climate Change Act is to be commended, but it will mean little if we cannot deliver on the targets it commits us to.” At the beginning of my speech, I talked about the interconnectedness of the issues raised by members of all parties this morning. Following this debate, members will have the opportunity to highlight WWF’s work on earth hour, and a photograph will be taken immediately after this debate. Yesterday, as part of Scottish environment week, I hosted a seminar in the Parliament on exploring Scotland’s past. Plantlife Scotland gave a presentation about the humble twinflower and described how the organisation had studied past woodland management to better understand and then create the conditions in which the twinflower could flourish. However, it was Plantlife Scotland’s description of why it did that that has stayed with me. It was to make the plant population more robust and to give it a better chance of surviving in the future. That aim seems to encapsulate this morning’s debate and our commitment to climate justice.

First, I apologise because I have to leave the chamber before 6 pm and I will miss the minister’s closing remarks. I welcome the opportunity to speak in this important debate on the future of our courts and I congratulate my colleague, Iain Gray, on securing parliamentary time to discuss an issue of importance to my constituency of Mid Scotland and Fife. I also welcome the opportunity to put on the record my concern about the proposals to close courts in my region that are contained in a document that the Scottish Court Service has produced. The Government has been uncomfortable discussing the document “Future Court Structures”, which asks whether we can manage with fewer courts. According to the document, three courts in my region—Alloa sheriff court, Cupar sheriff court and Kirkcaldy justice of the peace court—could be considered for closure because they fall below two key tipping points in being courts that sit for three days per week or fewer or that are in a settlement with 20,000 people or fewer that is within 20 miles of another court. That rationale is difficult to apply to services in rural communities. Is it fair to determine access to justice by uptake? Less populated areas will always lose out against such a criterion. As far as possible, we must make sure that access to justice is delivered locally and in a meaningful way. I accept, for example, that Cupar is not far from any major centre for someone who drives a car, but if they have to rely on public transport, travel to another court could be costly, time-consuming and inconvenient. The Scottish Government has failed to rule out court closures, stating that they are a matter for the Scottish Court Service, but pressure from budget cuts is driving many local decisions. The Scottish Court Service has received a 20 per cent budget cut as well as a significant cut in capital budgets. The Scottish Government made those decisions and must recognise that budget cuts on such a scale will have consequences. It needs to take responsibility for the proposals that are being made. In response to a question from me on this issue, the cabinet secretary accepted that a final decision would be made with parliamentary approval. I hope that we get the opportunity to scrutinise the proposals properly—Christine Grahame talked about the Justice Committee’s role—and that the Government will accept responsibility for the final decision. I look forward to the roll-out of a consultation on the plans. Many local voices in Mid Scotland and Fife are speaking out against the proposals. I have no doubt that many of those people will wish to make the strength of their feeling known to politicians when the opportunity arises. Mid Scotland and Fife’s network of local courts not only delivers justice in the communities that it serves, but provides crucial support for witnesses to and victims of crime.

It is important to understand the possible consequences of closures. I am not saying that everything in the current court system is perfect but residents in Cupar are looking at travelling long distances and at other similar pressures and there needs to be a balance. That is why I am hopeful that the Justice Committee will look at the issues. Christine Grahame represents Peebles, which has one of the courts that is on the list for closure, so I am sure that she appreciates that there is another side to the argument. People in Mid Scotland and Fife deserve to have access to justice where they live. They do not want to have to travel beyond their local area, which would present many families and individuals with difficulty in accessing justice services. I want to ensure that we retain the vital services that the courts in Alloa, Kirkcaldy and Cupar provide and I hope that the Scottish Government will listen to people’s concerns about proposed court closures now and at any time during this parliamentary session.

Ensuring that the existing housing stock, particularly private homes, reaches minimum energy performance standards presents a challenge. Section 64 of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 provides for the introduction of regulations in this area. Does the Scottish Government intend to introduce those regulations and, if so, what is the timescale for introduction and delivery?

Serious concerns are being raised about the lack of progress on air quality in some Scottish cities, including Perth in my region. Scotland has breached European air pollution targets for the second year in a row. The Scottish Government, as part of the United Kingdom Government’s request to the European Commission, is asking for an extension of air quality targets, including an extension of 10 years for Glasgow. Is the expectation that the request will be accepted on the ground that all reasonable efforts have been made? If so, what will be the consequences for residents’ health? Finally, what are the consequences of breaching the targets? Does the Scottish Government foresee possible infraction proceedings?

I am happy to contribute to this debate about an issue of great concern to many people. People from Barra, some of whom have joined us in the chamber this evening, have been in the Parliament today to make their concerns heard, and it is right that they are heard in the chamber. I recognise the strength of feeling of many local MSPs who have expressed their concerns about the proposal to designate. I say at the outset that it is important that we designate protected areas to protect our unique wildlife and natural environment and make our contribution to the Natura 2000 network of conservation sites across the European Union. Our most significant sites must be given the fullest protection. Many factors must be taken into consideration when proposing designations, and they can include different perspectives on what is the best way forward. Often, what is presented in good faith as sound scientific evidence rubs against a local need for economic development and growth. Of course, those things are not always mutually exclusive. However, in the case of the Sound of Barra, it is becoming increasingly difficult to reach agreement between community interests and SNH. The evidence from Western Isles Council challenges the evidence from SNH, and we now need to find a way forward. I appreciate the pressures that the minister faces in making the final decision on the designation. In 2009, the European Commission found that the United Kingdom sites that contribute towards the Natura 2000 network fail to protect an adequate proportion of sandbanks, reefs and harbour seals. The network must be completed by the end of this year and, if further special areas of conservation are not designated this year, the Scottish Government may be subject to infraction proceedings and face a substantial fine. However, we need to have confidence that the designation is right. It will be for the minister to make that call. Local members have been right to raise their concerns about the process and the evidence that has been provided, but we must now focus on a way forward. The minister could reject the designation, but then we would be in danger of not meeting our Natura 2000 obligations. He could press ahead with the designation, but previous experience has shown that designations work best when the community buys into the decision—in some cases, even actively pursues it—because it appreciates the socioeconomic benefits that could be gained and supports the changes. That is currently not the case in Barra. Given the strength of feeling that we have witnessed today, it will be difficult to build bridges if the decision is forced on to the community. My colleague Rhoda Grant has suggested a halt in the process to allow for a full and thorough investigation, and it would be helpful to hear the minister’s views on that. The minister can avoid addressing these questions this evening. The public consultation on Barra has just concluded and I am not sure whether he has yet received the report. However, he can be in no doubt about the tensions that exist. Whatever the outcome, it would be constructive for us to reflect on whether the process for designation is right and fit for purpose. SNH has come in for a lot of criticism this evening, but is that partly due to the role that it must play in the process? It prepares the scientific case for the minister and then carries out the public consultation. Perhaps we need to reflect on what can be learned from the experience in Barra to improve accountability and engagement in future designations. I look forward to hearing the minister’s remarks.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what the impact of the proposed reductions in the agri-environment budget will be. (S4O-00634)

The cabinet secretary may be aware of concerns that true demand in the sector is masked by the difficulty in getting the right support and advice to apply for agri-environmental support. When that is in place, demand for such support, which contributes to our biodiversity targets and supports land managers, increases. In the light of the cut to the budget, how will the Scottish Government monitor its progress towards the 2020 biodiversity target and assess the contribution that the agri-environment budget is and could be making? Will the annual report to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee provide sufficient information to allow such an assessment to be made?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with the Scottish Court Service in relation to plans to consult on the closure of courts. (S4O-00605)

Does the cabinet secretary share the concern of my constituents in Fife that although the Scottish Court Service says that it currently has no plans for court closures it is pursuing options to reduce the number of courts, and Cupar sheriff court and Kirkcaldy justice of the peace court have been identified for potential closure? Does the cabinet secretary accept that budget cuts of 20 per cent and a significant cut in capital budget for the court service are driving such decisions? Will he rule out the widespread closure, as a consequence of the Scottish Government’s cuts, of a local network of courts throughout Scotland, which not only play a vital role in delivering justice in the communities that they serve, but provide crucial support for witnesses to and victims of crime?

First, I thank Joan McAlpine for bringing the debate to the chamber. It is good that we recognise that there is strong public support for retaining “Introducing in Scotland”. She made an important point about BBC 6 Music and the successful campaign to save it. I am happy to add my voice to the campaign to retain “Introducing in Scotland”. Annabel Goldie made some points about the BBC. We recognise that it faces financial pressures and that there will be some changes to output, but it is right to question the proposal that is on the table. “Introducing in Scotland” promotes unsigned music talent in Scotland, and it plays an important role in doing so. Scotland has a vibrant music scene. Its contribution to our economy, at both national and local levels, is often overlooked, but it does play an important role. It is one that is often delivered on a shoestring budget. Alongside the big corporate events, such as T in the park, that bring people from all over the United Kingdom and further afield, there are lots of smaller venues, practice rooms and studios and lots of local networks of music enthusiasts, bands and people who are passionate about promoting and creating music in their communities. “Introducing in Scotland” gives them the opportunity to engage with a wider audience, as well as providing an effective showcase for their talents. Annabel talked about the level of exposure that bands get and how there might be opportunities for Scottish bands to reach a wider audience, but Mark McDonald was right in his comments about stepping stones and different levels of exposure. There is more immediacy in having something that is rooted in Scotland, with the knowledge that goes with that, and having presenters who engage with the gig scene here. It would be a shame to lose that. There have been huge changes in the way in which we consume and have an interest in music. Annabel talked about internet promotion—

I am sorry. I meant Annabel Goldie. It is quite an informal atmosphere tonight. Annabel Goldie talked about the importance of self-promotion and how the internet has opened up such opportunities, but we should recognise that mainstream promotion is still hugely important. Radio 1 and the “Introducing in Scotland” programme give valuable exposure and support important talent development. I very much welcome this evening’s debate.

I am pleased to open for Labour in the debate. I welcome the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s work in considering the CAP reform proposals and in including a chamber debate as part of the inquiry. CAP reform is complex and wide ranging, and the level of scrutiny that the process is being given in Scotland is welcome. I thank all the organisations that have provided us with briefing material for the debate. In the time that I have, it will be difficult to refer to every organisation, but I will try to raise the key issues that they have identified. I also welcome the series of engagement meetings that have been taking place with the farming sector and the inclusion in the CAP reform reference group of RSPB Scotland and Scottish Environment LINK among others. The way forward in Scotland is about balancing the needs of our farmers—who play a key role in food security, supply world-renowned produce, operate to high animal welfare standards, support the rural economy and maintain Scotland’s land—and the need for sustainable farming in the future, environmental protection, responsible stewardship and growth in our rural communities in a way that promotes responsible and sustainable agriculture. The way forward is really about integrating those demands, and we can do that successfully in Scotland. Reform of the CAP is important if we are to embed those values into farming practices and build confidence in the use of public money to support a vital sector. The key to our discussions is getting the best deal for Scottish farmers, but it is also about addressing the challenges that we all recognise. The European Parliament, which must agree the new regulations, identified those challenges as the need to respond to future food security, rising energy prices, climate change, environmental protection, land abandonment and the economic crisis. In Scotland, as a result of previous reform and the introduction of the rural development programme, we have seen a change in the way in which we support our agricultural sector in delivering environmental benefits as well as sustainable production, but we are dealing with a complex and bureaucratic system that too often works counter to what it is trying to achieve. I refer, for example, to the difficulties that new entrants face in gaining enough support, the perverse creation of slipper farmers, a regulatory system that lacks flexibility, and inequalities in the distribution of support across member states. Those are just some of the challenges that reform must address. In the reform proposals, there is a desire to further develop and embed environmental benefits into the CAP, principally through the proposal to green pillar 1—although, given the significant budgetary pressures that the EU faces, that is partly a recognition that no more financial support will go into pillar 2, whose support levels have been cut. Indeed, the Scottish Wildlife Trust raised concerns about the domestic cuts to the agri-environment budget. I understand that the Scottish Government has said that the budgets are reducing due to a lack of demand. That is surprising. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will say more about that in his closing speech. There is support for greening pillar 1 measures. In evidence to the committee, the NFUS said: “we do not have a problem with the general direction that the European Union is taking”.—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 23 November 2011; c 401.] However, there are real concerns that the measures are not suited to the Scottish farming sector and about the proposed rules on maintaining permanent pasture and crop diversification not being flexible enough to deliver the best benefit for Scottish farming or our environment. Alongside those concerns is a strong body of opinion that we need greater greening of the CAP, whether through reform of pillar 1 support or, as Scottish Environment LINK, the Scottish Wildlife Trust and the RSPB argue, through the progressive transfer of support to pillar 2 and agri-environmental benefits. The cabinet secretary says that he has no objection to the principle of greening, so we need to retain the principle but argue for alternatives that meet the demands of Scottish farming. There is a commitment to that approach across different interests. Scottish Environment LINK said in its evidence to the committee: “We need to make pillar 1 work hard and deliver for the environment in ways that are compatible with running a farming business.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 23 November 2011; c 407.] We must try to influence the debate on greening in our interests. There is potential for direct support to provide increasing environmental benefit. We must have a strong pillar 1. Many in our farming community rely on direct support to remain viable and to expand sustainably, but we should also strive to recognise and reward through an alternative pillar 1 greening programme what farmers already do. There are debates about greening; about how support is distributed and whether it should be focused on more productive areas or concentrated on more vulnerable farming areas; about how areas of natural constraint will be identified; and about how far resources will shift. Those examples illustrate the discussion around what we want CAP to deliver in future. There are opportunities. Historically, the UK’s funding allocation from pillar 2 has been low and we must push for a fairer distribution of that funding throughout the EU. We must also work to ensure that Scotland gets a fairer share of UK funding, because historically Scotland has received a lower per-hectare share. CAP reform gives us an opportunity to address that issue. The significant financial challenge is the EU budget. In June last year, the CAP budget for 2014 to 2020 was announced, delivering a 9 per cent cut over that period. The assumption that everyone has been working to is that the budget will stay the same and that redistribution will happen within that envelope, but increasingly there are concerns that the budget will be cut further. Prior to the announcement in June, the UK and German Governments argued that the CAP budget must fall significantly within an overall declining EU budget. There is now such instability in the EU that there are growing concerns that there will be a further cut.

I have only one paragraph left, Presiding Officer. Such a cut would be very difficult for Scottish farming and would make it very difficult for the CAP to deliver the necessary reforms across all its objectives. Although it has taken a while to reach this stage, these are early days in the negotiations. We must work together to ensure that we can get the best deal for Scottish farming while delivering for the wider public benefit.

How, specifically, will the outcomes of the Durban conference impact on the Scottish Government’s target of reducing CO2 emissions by 42 per cent?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the early advance copy of his statement, and I am pleased to respond in my new role. I discovered this morning that there was to be a statement on the fishing negotiations; there is nothing like being thrown in at the deep end. The east neuk fishing industry is in my region, so I very much recognise the need to support our fishing sector and acknowledge its importance to the viability of many communities. It was difficult to get to where we are with the EU fisheries negotiations, and I acknowledge the contribution of the Scottish Government, the UK Government, the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation, RSPB Scotland and WWF in securing the withdrawal of the proposed regulation in the cod recovery plan. Their achievement underlines the importance of everyone working together in the interests of the Scottish fishing industry. Following the outcome of the negotiations, how will the cabinet secretary respond to the concerns of the fishing sector, which is worried about elements of the deal? How will the Scottish Government work with both the fishing fleet and the processing sector to address those concerns? The cabinet secretary stresses his frustration at the inflexibility of the cod recovery plan, but what further dialogue will the Scottish Government have with the Commission to get it to recognise the Scottish fishing industry’s strenuous efforts to deliver sustainable fishing and promote the use of scientific evidence in advance of the promised complete overhaul of the cod recovery plan?

9. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Housing and Transport last met senior officials from ScotRail. (S4O-00457)

I think that Helen Eadie’s point was about the lack of information for passengers. I found out about the change that she mentioned from a passenger who was handing out leaflets on the train last week. The minister has talked about changes to the timetable, but is not it the case that the new timetable will be in place not for the standard six months, but for a year? Will it be possible to make any changes to it before next Christmas?

In the light of the recent decision by the Office for Fair Access to approve the reduction of student fees in 11 English institutions, does the cabinet secretary still believe that £9,000 fees are the answer for Scotland?

Many of my constituents will be disappointed. The minister stressed the cost of different measures and announced that the existing overhead line from Fallin to Glenbervie will be undergrounded, although he recognised that the area will still be affected by existing and new power lines. Who called for the undergrounding of that section of the line? The minister said that the enhancements scheme for the Stirling area will require co-operative working to be successful. How will he encourage members of the community to engage actively in the process when they are concerned by not only the environmental impact but, as Liz Smith pointed out, broader issues, including the health impact?

Presiding Officer, “What is happening to our young people? They disrespect their elders, they disobey their parents. They ignore the law. They riot in the streets inflamed with wild notions. Their morals are decaying. What is to become of them?” “The young people of today think of nothing but themselves. They have no reverence for parents or old age. They are impatient of all restraint ... As for the girls, they are forward, immodest and unladylike in speech, behaviour and dress.” Those are quotes about young people of their time. The first is not from Jeremy Clarkson; it is from Plato. The second is not about Rihanna; it is from 1274. The popular perception of young people has a tendency to fear, label and generalise about them rather than reflect the full range of what they do, how they study and work, and how they engage with their community and create their own communities and cultures, which really drives the creative spirit of our society. I welcome Sandra White’s debate, join her in highlighting the truth about youth project, and congratulate Young Scot on securing the project with the Co-operative Foundation, which is taking forward similar projects in seven cities in the United Kingdom. As Sandra White said, the project challenges the negative perceptions of young people in Glasgow. I was interested in exploring that a bit further and, like Liz Smith, I had a look at the social attitudes survey. I was surprised to see that the most negative views of young people were found not among older people, who are most often thought to be critical of them, but among young adults, aged 18 to 29. The way in which the truth about youth project is developing, with the blogging site for discussion and peer-led workshops, may be a good way to engage with that age group in particular. We cannot ignore the pressures that young people currently face. At lunch time, I was at a National Union of Students Scotland’s think positive campaign meeting. That campaign is to do with mental health issues among students, who are a group of young people considered to be overprivileged or lazy but who are often studying and working, stressed about exams and deadlines, and worried about their future careers. All those pressures impact on their mental health. That is not the popular view that we have of young people. Young people are not immune to the perception that others in society have of them, and negative views can become a self-fulfilling prophecy. A video produced by Young Scot entitled “Perceptions Versus Youth” opens by asking the viewer what their perceptions are of young people in Scotland. It continues: “Too often they’re described as lazy, selfish, intimidating, and anti-social. If someone kept saying that about you, would you not begin to believe it?” A couple of weeks ago, there was a shocking report from Barnardo’s, which had surveyed 2,000 adults, 49 per cent of whom agreed that children are beginning to behave like animals, and almost 47 per cent of whom thought that youngsters are angry, violent and abusive. One in four said that those who behave badly are beyond help by the age of 10. There has been a recent increase—which coincides with the economic and financial pressures that the country faces—in negativity in the media, describing young people as feckless, scroungers and lazy. Only last week in the chamber, we heard disagreement over young people’s attitudes to work, and a description of them as workshy. The project and the work that we are highlighting tonight is to be welcomed, but there are bigger challenges about the extent to which society believes in and values children and young people, which we all have to influence and challenge. In my region, I meet young people every week who are making a contribution to their community. I meet young people who are enthusiastic, young people who are developing their skills and young people who need a bit of support in their schools and communities in order to achieve. I also meet young people who are viewed as being antisocial, but we can usually help to get such local issues resolved with the involvement of partners and organisations. More often, I am impressed by young people and by their initiative. Fife Youth Radio was officially launched just over a year ago, and it is driven by young people who worked hard to get funding for their project, who offer training for all their presenters and who will play requests from 6 pm every evening—although people might have to retune from Radio Scotland to Radio 1 if they are going to request anything that the presenters will have heard of. That is only one example. There are hundreds throughout Scotland, and we need to celebrate young people’s achievements more. I very much welcome the truth about youth project, which aims to challenge misconceptions about young people. Although headlines lead on young people’s involvement in antisocial behaviour, only a tiny minority get into any kind of trouble. Far more young people are involved in volunteering work, studying, working and contributing, and I am pleased to be able to recognise that this evening.

This morning’s debate comes on the back of the bitterly disappointing decision by the UK Government to go ahead with the closure of the Forth coastguard station at Fife Ness and the Clyde station at Greenock. It has been a drawn-out process. The UK Government was forced to go back to the drawing board following the outcry over the initial proposal to leave just one full-time base in Scotland and to reduce the number of coastguard sites across the UK to five. For many people, the second consultation was disappointingly narrow in the areas that it was willing to address.

As Lewis Macdonald made clear in his opening contribution, we recognise the need to modernise—I will go on to highlight that in my speech—but there are real worries about the proposals that are coming forward. The second proposal came under criticism for being flawed, and the Government was criticised for not being prepared to listen to the strong evidence about the needs of Scotland’s coastline. The final decision to retain both Shetland and Stornoway is welcome, but the combination of the downgrading of the Aberdeen site with the closure of Fife Ness and Clyde leaves real concerns about whether the balance of risk has been safely reached. The decision to reduce the number of coastguard sites from 18 to eight across the UK continues to cause concern and is potentially damaging. Indeed, when the announcement was made this week, Charles Kennedy described the decision as having “a considerable element of gamble”.—[Official Report, House of Commons, 22 November 2011; Vol 536, c 166.] The members here who represent the parties that are involved in the UK Government must recognise that there are concerns on their own benches about the decisions that have been taken. Our coastguards play a vital role in safeguarding the communities and industry that use our coastline and seas. In recent days, Fife has had a terrible reminder of the dangers that our sea and coastline can present. The tragic death of three-year-old Eryk Cieraszewski, who was swept off Kirkcaldy promenade, deeply shocked the community. I, along with everyone across Fife, send our sincerest sympathies to his family at this incredibly difficult time. Although in that awful case the response of the emergency services did not lead to the outcome that we all hoped for, in such circumstances the coastguard service plays a vital and pivotal role in co-ordinating responses, and we must be confident that changes to the service will not threaten its ability to deal with life-and-death situations. I recognise that there is a need to modernise, improve and enhance the coastguard service. I agree that a coastguard service fit for the 21st century should operate as a single national network, but there is little doubt that the dramatic cuts initially proposed were overly driven by finance. Although I welcome the changes that have been made in response to the widespread public concern, there are still fears that finance is too dominant a driver for some of the proposed changes. We need to be confident that, while we recognise the financial challenges that all Governments face, safety and service are not put at risk. The UK Government says that it is trying to address problems of co-ordination and communication, but the centralisation of services is not necessarily the answer. The closure of the two stations in Scotland will led to the loss of detailed local knowledge that staff have built up in dealing with a range of potentially life-threatening incidents. There is still a great deal of uncertainty for staff with the announcement that stations will close by March 2015. What kind of service do they deliver until then? Fife Ness and Clyde have been timetabled for early closure. That must be questioned when there has still been no individual assessment of the impact of the closures of the stations. As Lewis Macdonald highlighted, the FBU, which is raising concerns about the future provision of the maritime incident response group, also states that the closure of the Forth and Clyde stations will have implications for the provision of water rescue and maritime safety—an area that the Government is looking to address through the legislation for a single fire service. I would welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments on that. The closure of Fife Ness is of real concern to Fifers and Scotland. I support the strong case that was made for the retention of the Clyde, and I agree that the closure of the Clyde station leaves real challenges for the west coast. However, on the east coast the provision in Fife and the further coastline is being underestimated. Fife Ness covers 344 miles of rugged coastline, from Montrose to the north of England. In the past three years alone, the 14 staff there have dealt effectively and professionally with more than 1,400 incidents, and the number of reported incidents has increased year on year. The stretch of coastline that is served by Fife Ness is varied and demanding. Last year, the lifeboat stations in its area were the busiest in Scotland. In the retention of Shetland and Stornoway, there is a recognition of the importance of local knowledge and expertise in ensuring safety and responding to emergency situations, and yet that does not receive the same attention when the importance of Fife Ness is under consideration. The closure of that station and the loss of the staff will mean the loss of expertise that cannot be replaced. Fife has been described as “a beggar’s mantle fringed wi gowd”. It has a rich coastline with thriving fishing fleets and valuable trading links and ports. Our use of the coastline has changed in recent years. Although it is still an area for commerce, there is an increasing use of the shoreline for leisure and recreation, as well as congested shipping lanes with tankers travelling to and from Grangemouth. The decision to close Fife Ness is shortsighted. The UK Government recognises that the offshore renewables sector is contributing to the increasing demands on the coastguard service. Fife has an energy park in Levenmouth, the potential for greater offshore development, Rosyth dockyard and the ferry port. As the cabinet secretary mentioned, it will also have the new Forth crossing in forthcoming years. It has a busy coastline with potential for growth and development. I strongly believe that we need a coastguard service that matches that potential and I am concerned that the proposals fall short of that ambition.

I welcome the opportunity to take part in this debate on carers. My family chose to be carers—they made a positive decision to take on the responsibility of looking after an elderly relative in their home. Young carers often do not have a choice, however, and I will focus my remarks on young carers. It is essential that Scotland’s young carers are supported and given the same opportunities as their peers to reach their full potential. The price of caring for a loved one should not be a young person’s childhood, their access to education and their right to achieve their full potential. Caring is a huge responsibility that involves complex emotions and relationships. For some young carers, it can be overwhelming and can impact negatively on their health, education and ability to do well at school, as well as on their freedom to socialise and share experiences with their peer group. We must do all that we can to provide support and opportunities for children and young people for whom caring is a part of their life and family. The young carers strategy was welcome as a way to progress the agenda for young carers. The issue now is all about implementation and ensuring that there is no gap between the rhetoric and the reality. We cannot expect overnight changes, but we must be mindful that, although a five-year strategy is perhaps deliverable, five years in the life of a child or young person is a long time and so progress must be further prioritised. The sooner much of the good work that is identified in the COSLA report that was published in August is turned from a pilot into a service that can be embedded in schools, the NHS and communities, the better. This week, the Education and Culture Committee visited St Benedict’s primary school in Glasgow as part of our inquiry into the educational attainment of looked-after children. We went to see the Place2Be project, which is run by a charity that works in schools to improve children’s confidence and wellbeing. Only a small percentage of children in the school are looked after, but the project was overwhelmed by the desire of children to have a safe, welcoming and supportive environment to discuss their worries and fears. We are rethinking the way in which our schools support the health and wellbeing of children. That type of highly accessible and universally provided service reduces stigma and supports children to cope with their life outside school and to focus on their learning when they are in school. That is a valuable approach for all children, but it also goes some way towards supporting young carers in education, so we should extend it. It is estimated that there are more than 100,000 young carers in Scotland, but fewer than 4,000 of them are supported by dedicated young carers services. The young carers strategy identified young carers as being very much a hidden population; they are not recognised by services that could support them and often do not recognise themselves as young carers. The COSLA report this year highlights the groundwork that is being undertaken throughout Scotland to address the situation by improving identification of young carers and information sharing, both in the interests of the young person and by increasing their engagement in care decisions, as the minister highlighted in his discussion of the pilots that some NHS boards are running. That is only part of the solution. We need to ensure that once young carers are identified and they look to access services and support, those services are available. We cannot ignore the financial pressures across the public and voluntary sectors, but we need to build capacity and sustainability into services. That need is perhaps most acute in mental health. Self-help resources have been developed with a toolkit to follow, but we all know that child and adolescent mental health is a Cinderella service with long waiting lists that does not adequately address the needs of too many young people. The Government’s motion gives a financial commitment on carers of older people, but can the minister provide more detail on whether the Scottish futures fund will deliver for young carers? What is the outcome of discussions with COSLA and the NHS on their contribution to the fund? In the previous session of Parliament, serious concerns were raised about the £34 million that was allocated for disabled children and their families. Although the money was passed to local authorities, there was a lack of evidence that it always reached the families and children it was intended for. In his opening statement, the minister recognised that there are similar issues in the delivery of respite care. Today’s announcement of £2 million for a fund for short breaks for disabled children is welcome, but the Government needs to ensure that there is a secure delivery mechanism so that the money for vulnerable children reaches them. Finally, I will mention young adult carers and the challenges of transition to adulthood. Through the fair to care campaign, the National Union of Students Scotland’s women’s campaign is focusing on the particular problems faced by student carers. We all know that financial difficulties impact on students’ studies. Student carers can be forced to choose between student funding and carers allowance and, due to caring responsibilities, do not have the same opportunity as other students to find part-time work. At university or college it can be difficult to access non-financial support such as counselling, but the pressure of caring means that they may need additional support. There is a need for institutions to be more responsive to the needs of carer students and for the student support system to recognise student carers’ responsibilities. I will close with a comment on kinship carers. Alongside the clear need for services, there is the reality of the poverty faced by kinship carers, most commonly grandparents who are struggling on low incomes and face rising prices and increasing pressure on fuel costs while they try to meet the needs of a child or children. There continues to be a postcode lottery of financial support for kinship carers. I appreciate that the situation is complex and interacts with the benefits system, but there is a continuing need for the Scottish Government to take the lead with local authorities and the United Kingdom Government to resolve this frustrating and unacceptable situation. There is much consensus on the issue. Although the Labour amendment challenges the Government on the progress that is being made, we can unite around the challenge that must be met.

4. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy will next meet NHS Fife. (S4O-00301)

No doubt the minister is aware of NHS Fife’s proposal to cut nine hospice beds at Queen Margaret hospital in Dunfermline. In just over a month, more than 12,000 people have signed a petition to oppose the cut, yet NHS Fife has repeatedly delayed an announcement on the future of the hospice ward. Will the minister ensure that the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy raises the issue of cuts to hospice beds and seeks clarity at NHS Fife’s annual review?

Anne McTaggart raises the issue of access. Does the cabinet secretary accept that there is a significant difference between the SNP’s manifesto pledge to maintain student numbers and its pledge to the National Union of Students Scotland and to students to protect college places, and will he say which promise the Scottish Government will keep?

Now that the Office for Fair Access is entering into discussions with some English universities, when will the Scottish Government publish its response to the consultation on rest of UK fees?

I welcome the debate and the chance to discuss improving Scotland’s adoption service and the opportunities and life chances of some of Scotland’s most vulnerable children. It is appropriate, during national adoption week, for us to discuss the Government’s response to the SCRA’s report on care and permanence planning for looked-after children, as well as wider issues relating to looked-after children. While the report focuses on the important issue of reducing the time needed to find a permanent home for looked-after children, Parliament is today giving a clear commitment to the importance of permanence and stability for young children, while recognising that that may mean different things for different families. Long-term stability for a child should and can include permanent foster and kinship care as well as residential care as a positive option. Adoptions, the role of corporate parents and the care of looked-after children have all changed dramatically in recent generations. We have recently seen a dramatic rise—of almost 16,000—in the number of looked-after children, with 9,000 of those children not cared for by their birth parents, yet only a tiny number of those are adopted. Last year it was 218. While we are doing all we can to support birth parents, there is potential to offer increased stability and a family life to some of Scotland’s most vulnerable children by increasing the number of adopted children. As the Government has stated, a number of steps have already been taken to support agencies, families and children who are seeking adoption. The national adoption register is in its infancy but it has the potential to contribute to a more effective system. I share the minister’s hope that all local authorities will sign up to the register by the end of the year. I was encouraged by her comments about showing leadership to local authorities and expecting them to deliver in this area. The implementation of the Adoption and Children (Scotland) Act 2007 simplified the legal framework. The centre for excellence for looked-after children, which gave excellent evidence to the Education and Culture Committee yesterday, has an important role to play in improving local practice and children’s welfare. The SCRA report raises a number of issues about the length of time the adoption process takes. Those delays can have serious consequences and can work against the best interests of the child. As the minister said, bureaucracy should not stand in the way of a child’s future. The two key factors to achieving successful adoption are the age at entry to the care system and the length of time that is then spent in care. Recent research by the University of Bristol shows that every year of delay in the system reduces the chances of the child being adopted by 20 per cent. It is recognised that adoption has the best chance of success the younger the child is placed. There might be truth in that, but it is not always easily realised in the desire to explore all avenues to enable children to stay at home. Getting the balance between those competing outcomes can be difficult. Shortening the length of time in the system will improve outcomes. The Government’s response to the SCRA report comes forward with practical measures, such as setting strict timescales and more effective sharing of good practice. Those measures are all welcome. Labour’s amendment highlights some of the issues being raised by Barnardo’s Scotland. Although the identified actions are welcome, it would be helpful for the Government to clarify the timescales for change, how it will measure improvements for children who are furthest from the possibility of adoption and have the most complex needs and challenging problems, and what resources will be available to deliver on the recommendations. At committee yesterday we heard of the pressure on budgets that deliver for looked-after children and their families. What will be the priorities for the early years and early intervention change fund? The National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children Scotland’s briefing for the debate highlights the pressures faced by Dundee City Council, where the trend towards taking more and younger children into care is having a financial impact on children’s services, although nobody doubts that the right decisions are being made. The pressures are projected only to grow. As our amendment highlights, Citizens Advice Scotland analyses local authority kinship care practice and there is still a gap between the Scottish Government’s ambition for kinship carers and delivery on the ground. There has been a rapid growth in the number of children in kinship care, with an estimate that more than 20,000 children will be living in non-looked-after kinship care arrangements by 2014. My colleague Claudia Beamish will talk more about that group of children. I am sure that the minister will agree that more needs to be done to support those families and provide consistency throughout Scotland. Since its early years, the Scottish Parliament has been concerned with the care of looked-after children. From “These Are Our Bairns” to Scotland’s adoption register, successive Governments have stated their commitment to raising standards and there is a commitment to all partners taking seriously their responsibility as corporate parents and to the child being at the centre of decision making. All Governments have taken action to try to deliver on those priorities but there is much to do before we are all satisfied that the needs of all looked-after children are being fully met. Barnardo’s said this week that Scotland, as a corporate parent, is currently failing too many looked-after and accommodated children and young people, which is an evaluation that no minister will hear without a desire to take action. Barnardo’s is an organisation that works on the front line and often deals with very difficult and challenging children and their families. We need to listen when it states: “The quicker we can make these decisions, painful as they are, the better it will be for the outcome of the child.” Barnardo’s is challenging the current arrangements and assumptions. It is perhaps a sign of the times that this week it is launching its adoption and placement service. However, it is talking not only about the adoption process but about how we approach the welfare of looked-after children and where the balance lies between birth parents and alternative arrangements. Barnardo’s promotes the importance of concurrent planning, whereby plans to move a child into a permanent care setting, such as adoption and long-term foster care, are progressed alongside plans to keep a child with their birth parents. That helps to speed up the process once a decision to move a child from their birth parents is made. Of course, all that requires resources: not only money but time. The minister is certainly right when she says that adoption must be easier to do and quicker. I fully acknowledge the concerns that Gil Paterson raised about the issue and the need for a measured approach. Nevertheless, we need to encourage more people to consider adoption. Professor Ken Norrie sounded a note of caution at the weekend: speeding up the process must be done in the context of the knowledge that many birth parents will fight a decision for their child to be permanently removed. The complexities of the system are, in some cases, unavoidable, but everything must be done to limit the impact on the child. NSPCC Scotland’s briefing also highlights the New Orleans intervention model, which it is piloting with Glasgow City Council and NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde to inform and improve decision making about permanence. The increased recognition of the importance of early years development and strong attachment relationships for later life and of the need for greater early intervention is driving the pilot, which may provide a model to meet some of the challenges being faced by Scotland in caring for our most vulnerable and at-risk children. There is evidence of improved early decision making and in some cases there is increased confidence about what action needs to be taken. In 2009-10, fewer children came into care than in previous years; however, more children under the age of 1 are starting to be looked after. That suggests improvement in the effectiveness of early interventions. As witnesses at the Education and Culture Committee’s inquiry on the educational attainment of looked-after children made clear yesterday, stable and consistent care placements deliver more positive outcomes for looked-after children and young people. This is a difficult and emotive subject but decision making can be easier when the child’s needs are put first. We must be challenged to consider the options that will work best in the child’s short and long-term interests. Multiple short-term placements, too long a wait for a permanent home and insecurity all serve to develop or entrench complex needs and can result in a child being taken further away from the solution that might have avoided some of those difficulties in the first place. As we study the evidence, it is difficult not to become frustrated and overwhelmed by the depth of the challenge. I cannot imagine what it is like for a child in very difficult circumstances, for the professionals working on the front line and for the families, parents and prospective parents trying to find resolution. However, this is a positive debate. If—and when—we get this right, the benefits will be huge. A child will get a proper start in life, will be nurtured and supported, will be encouraged and cared for by a loving family and will learn lessons that they can carry through their lives and into their own families. I move amendment S4M-01197.2, to insert at end: “; calls on the Scottish Government to set out the timescales to achieve the actions set out in its response to the report and state how it will measure improvements for those children with the most complex needs and challenging problems; asks whether additional resources will be available to ensure that the report’s recommendations are achieved, and draws attention to a new study by Citizens Advice Scotland that shows that two thirds of the 19 local authorities that it surveyed are still not paying kinship carers the same as foster carers.”

Will the member give way?

The debate has been wide ranging and it will not be possible for me to comment on all the speeches. I welcome the speeches from Joan McAlpine and Claudia Beamish and I apologise for missing some speeches that have been commended. We are all united on the importance of raising the attainment and achievement of Scotland’s children and young people and I think that we are all united in a recognition that poverty and inequality are key factors in determining outcomes. I argue that there is failure, not of comprehensive education but in relation to the inequality in our society that comprehensive education seeks to address. In 2007, the OECD highlighted the disparity in school performance between the poorest pupils and the rest as the biggest challenge that faces the Scottish education system. Although the Government’s lack of progress in the area can be criticised on a variety of grounds, such as the Government’s inability to balance the promotion of populist policies with the promotion of what works to address inequality, we acknowledge that the attainment gap stretches back beyond 2007 and that the devolution spotlight on early years is overdue. The evidence is stark. At the age of 3, children from disadvantaged backgrounds start to fall behind their more advantaged peers, and by the time they are 5 they are a year and half behind on vocabulary. Socioeconomic circumstances are the defining factor in a child’s early development. The identification of the problem is easy, but politicians still need to accept it to the extent that they are prepared to put their money where their mouth is, particularly in times of financial constraint, and argue that priority should be given to groups and individuals who do not or cannot speak up for themselves. Labour’s amendment mentions the Government’s forgotten pledge on class sizes. In the previous session of the Parliament, the Government thought that class sizes were the central tool that could deliver the progress that we all want. The Government must be clear about its logic for replacing the approach with one that is based on a pupil-teacher ratio. Does it think that the new approach is a better way to deal with the challenges that we face? Even if the Government thinks that a reduction in class sizes is still the best way forward but cannot or will not resource such an approach, it must be bold and use the pupil-teacher ratio in a way that is meaningful and contributes to the sea change in achievement that we all seek. Glasgow City Council was regularly pilloried in the chamber for not meeting the pledge on class sizes. However, its policy of providing smaller class sizes and nurture groups for children who need intense support might be the direction that the Government wants to take if it is serious about getting results. We need to balance the resources that we have and, if we are serious about addressing the impact of educational inequalities on some children and families, we must prioritise them. The Government will argue that the draft budget does that in moving towards a preventative spend model. We all appreciate that this is a difficult budget, but there are political choices to be made and I am not convinced that the budget will achieve the sea change that is needed. The Scottish futures fund is £250 million over the lifetime of the Parliament and includes the sure start fund of £50 million. The three-year spending review, however, has allocated just £160 million of the futures fund, with £90 million being held back for the pre-election year. So we can expect around £30 million over three years from the sure start fund. We will also have the early years change fund, but it turns out that the Government’s contribution to those two funds is the same pot of money, with the rest of the money coming from national health service boards and local authorities. I do not question the commitment of those partners to deliver in that area along with the Government, but there are limitations on what local partners can contribute and it would be helpful to know what commitment the minister has received from those partners, who face the toughest financial settlements that they have ever had under devolution. The strain will come in trying to achieve the shift on scant resources. Money will still have to be targeted at crisis support or more intensive support, and it will be difficult to commit money to projects that embed the kind of change that will ultimately prevent constant crisis management. I will give a brief example from my experience. A small organisation, Community Mums (Scotland), which was based in Methil, across from my old office, provided support to local families. Supported by the Coalfields Regeneration Trust, it was a grass-roots, volunteer-led organisation. However, the Coalfields Regeneration Trust could not support it forever and it could not get other funding, so it closed. Some of the families that it supported moved on to other organisations, but those tended to be the families with more complex needs; the mums—it was mainly mums—who just needed a wee bit more support and guidance, such as they would get from a mum, lost the service. The organisation provided early support that prevented more complex problems, but it could not survive. Given the huge pressure on local authority budgets over the coming years, even with the contribution from the sure start fund, it does not seem likely that Community Mums could have survived. Identifying the problems is easy, but the solutions are complex and wide reaching. Liam McArthur and other members are right to raise the issue of the college cuts that are proposed over the spending review period. I find it astonishing that, although Paul Wheelhouse strongly disagrees with the UK Government’s college cuts, he uses them to justify the Scottish Government’s cuts when it is making exactly the same choices. A few years ago, I visited Westfield Nursery in Cupar, with the then minister, Adam Ingram. The visit focused on the nursery’s commitment to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, but I got talking to the staff about its relationship with Elmwood College. The nursery setting provided an opportunity, where appropriate, to talk to parents about their learning opportunities and to encourage them to think about college. There is evidence that the children of parents who continue education after school or who undertake education while parenting have raised ambition and expectation. A home in which learning and education are valued supports a child’s learning and growth. The planned college cuts will impact most on the mature learner and those studying for non-national qualifications; however, if they get the benefit of second chances, that not only improves their opportunities but contributes to their children’s first chances. Sandra White talked about young people’s perception of others’ negativity. In recognising the importance of parenting, the minister will acknowledge that, for a small number of children, negativity in their own homes limits them. We need increased support for parents, as Susan Deacon recognises in her report, “Joining the dots: A better start for Scotland’s children”. She states: “there are ways that we can work to break the cycle of poor parenting that is blighting the lives of many of our children.” Raising the attainment and ambition of all Scotland’s children and young people should be a defining aim of the Parliament. There are challenges across the age ranges, moving through school, college and university as well as the employment opportunities and training that Kezia Dugdale focused on. However, if we do not get delivery in the early years right—if we do not ensure that all infants and young people get the proper support, encouragement and investment that they need to thrive and grow—we will approach all other life stages with our hands tied behind our backs. It could be said that in the previous session the Parliament was dominated by the concerns of higher education. That sector was at the sharp end of debate and sometimes, even in the new session, it looks as though that might continue. Vulnerable children and their families do not have the influence or political organisation of those who are involved in the university sector. Maybe they should, but they do not present pledges for politicians to sign or documents that demonstrate their contribution to our economy, so it falls to us to make a serious commitment to address the deep-rooted inequalities that too often determine a child’s life chances by the time that they reach primary school. The Government needs to be bold. The motion contains warm words; the “Joining the dots” report makes it clear that the time for warm words is over. We need concerted political and societal effort if we are to ensure that no child is left behind.

I thank the Conservatives for using their parliamentary time to debate the issue of colleges. The Government’s debate on Scottish studies this afternoon is certainly valuable, but it is unfortunate that this morning’s debate has to be so brief, because it is clear that college cuts are of key concern to many members and their local colleges. In last week’s debate on the spending review, I gave my initial reaction to the cuts. As Jenny Marra outlined, a flat-cash deal was the best that colleges could hope for from this year’s budget, and they were prepared to absorb the inflation increases. However, the 13.5 per cent cut in cash terms—at least 20 per cent in real terms—over the spending review period has left the sector alarmed and very concerned. It is not uncommon to hear language such as “shell shocked” from principals. Indeed, Scotland’s Colleges said that the spending review presented a “bleak future” for the college sector. We all know the challenges that the Government faced in the spending review. Whoever was in government was going to face tough decisions. As Liam McArthur said, however, it is a choice of the Government to make such a deep cut. It is difficult to accept such a cut to a sector that plays such a critical role in growing our economy and tackling unemployment. We are facing a crisis of youth unemployment. I acknowledge the Government’s commitment to 16 to 19-year-olds—indeed, it was Labour policy—but there is a concern that, although the Government may deliver on that pledge, the positive reform that it is undertaking means the closing of opportunities for many people outwith that group. As Jenny Marra described, there is a danger of some important non-accredited courses being hit as well as the quality of teaching being threatened. In difficult economic times, colleges have been quick to react. They have worked hard to turn no one away, and they have moved to provide options for those facing redundancy as well as school leavers. They are making it clear that that level of activity will be impossible to maintain with the planned cuts. As well as delivering high-quality skills and excellence, colleges play a vital role in extending opportunity to communities that can be difficult to reach. We know that more than 30 per cent of college students come from the most deprived areas of Scotland and Hugh Henry spoke about the vital social value of colleges in our communities. Slashing budgets by more than 20 per cent over the three-year period will jeopardise colleges’ ability to deliver for their communities.

No, thank you. I have only four minutes. To make matters worse, half of the funding cuts will fall in the first year, compounding the problems created for the sector by last year’s 10 per cent cut. Last year’s cut was a difficult one to absorb. Mary Scanlon raised concerns about the future of school partnerships, and the cut also resulted in a reduction in courses, student-teacher contact time, and student guidance and counselling services—the very services that many of our more vulnerable students need. We know that redundancies in the sector have been significant. More than 1,000 jobs have been cut in the past year—a 7 per cent decline in the sector, which is more than any other area of the public sector. Colleges have questioned their ability to avoid compulsory redundancies with the new settlement. Last year, though, colleges accepted the 10 per cent cut, while promising to maintain places and, in many cases, increase places in response to the local unemployment challenges. However, they made it clear that that kind of cut was unsustainable in the long term. They have made it clear that their ability to meet the Government’s places pledge is seriously compromised by the budget proposals. The big money-saving idea is mergers, but it is clear that, in the short term, mergers will not deliver the level of efficiencies needed to meet the funding gap that the cuts create. Last week’s open letter from Scotland’s Colleges was pretty direct in its concerns and its criticism of the spending review. Although its statement this week states that it will work on a reform agenda, that does not negate the financial alarm bells that it rang last week. Colleges have always been a reforming sector, open to change in the best interests of their learners, so I do not doubt that they will work constructively with the Government on reform. However, to drive through this level of reform while drastically reducing budgets gives rise to a serious danger of compromising colleges’ ability to deliver for Scotland’s communities.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I welcome the opportunity to open this afternoon’s debate for Labour. There has been much commentary on proposals for Scottish studies, but today’s debate gives us the opportunity to explore the proposals, deconstruct some of the myths, and critically question and interrogate the reality and perceived reality—all analytical skills that we would expect students to develop when entering the world of Scottish studies. Dr Alasdair Alison—sorry, I will start again. Dr Allan—sorry! [Laughter.] Dr Alasdair Allan—my apologies—is rightly proud of his academic title, but it is less well known that I too have a doctorate. Members: Oh! Thank you. It is in English literature, more specifically Sylvia Plath. Although the field is known as English literature, I came to it through the study of American literature in my undergraduate degree and doctorate and, although it was a long time ago now, through Scottish literature in my higher English, for which I studied “Sunset Song” and “The Cone-Gatherers”. I also taught “Caleb Williams” and “The Private Memoirs and Confessions of a Justified Sinner” to undergraduates at the University of Glasgow, alongside the poetry of the very English Stevie Smith and the very American Walt Whitman. We should all start by recognising the depth of the understanding and integration of Scottish studies across academia—in this case in English literature, but I believe it is common across other disciplines. It is important that, in any decision to move towards a new subject in the school curriculum, we do not marginalise Scottish studies, but recognise that there is great value in embedding Scottish literature or history, or any other discipline, in a broader context. There is little to disagree with in the Government motion, although there are perhaps some questions to ask about how much we can conclude from a survey that was based on the Gaelic language. However, there are many questions to be answered before we can fully subscribe to the Government’s desire. At this stage, we have little detail about the Government’s intentions for the proposed addition to the curriculum, which is why our amendment draws attention to the considerations of the working group and highlights some of the challenges that it has to address. So far, the working group has been set up with the remit to discuss the implementation of the SNP’s manifesto commitment to create a distinct strand of learning in primary and secondary schools, but I suspect that we are currently some way off the creation or delivery of a new subject as an addition to the curriculum. It is important that the working group brings transparency and rational thinking to the debate. There are many strands in the current curriculum that provide an opportunity for engagement with Scottish studies—as the minister acknowledged—and we have advantages in the current curriculum from the fact that it enables teachers to play to their strengths, which benefits pupils. It is important that the working group recognises the excellent work that is already undertaken in our schools. We have perhaps all made unfortunate comments in the lead-up to this debate, but it is unfortunate that Alasdair Allan made the claim that teachers fail to offer basic information about their own country, thus forcing the Government’s hand.

That is an important point, which the working group needs to look at. As I will go on to explain, many of us have experience—personal experience or experience in our constituencies—of a good level of engagement with Scottish literature and culture in schools. We will wait to see whether the working group identifies any gaps. Any MSP who engages with the Parliament’s education service will know that primary and secondary schools throughout Scotland are engaging with our modern history and democracy, so I do not feel that the minister’s speech reflected the reality in our classrooms, but that is an area that the working group needs to investigate. I am sure that the working group will be delighted to engage with schools that are already celebrating Scots poetry, marking important dates in the school calendar, exploring Scottish culture, discussing the huge influence that entrepreneurial Scots have had on trade and industry, discovering Scotland’s incredible changing landscape and, in history classes, exploring the complex and turbulent history of our great country. The Government has shown commitment to the broad teaching ethos of the curriculum for excellence, and in developing those proposals the working group must adhere to that ethos. The curriculum for excellence provides more opportunities for schools to be engaged in their local communities and brings subjects to life with experiences that are relevant to pupils. Scottish studies have a valuable role to play in that. The working group may find that Scotland is a thread that runs through the entire curriculum, but one that is rightly balanced with an international and a local perspective. There is a danger that the working group could be too prescriptive. The curriculum for excellence is all about having a flexible curriculum that puts teachers’ professionalism at the heart of its delivery. It is important that the working group reflects on that. If there are gaps in the curriculum, it must produce evidence of that and proposals for enriching the curriculum. Complementary to the embedding of Scottish studies throughout the curriculum—although, as I have suggested, that is already the case—there is the matter of the creation of a new subject, which would include qualification development. As a graduate who approached the poetry of Sylvia Plath through an understanding of cultural materialism, I recognise the value of cross-disciplinary understanding in a subject. At university level, American studies is well established and Scottish studies is increasingly being offered, although cuts and lack of research investment threaten the viability of some of those courses and there are clear boundaries in the discipline. If the working group is to propose a model for Scottish studies, it needs to be clear about the relevance and interconnectedness of areas of study. Some of the Government’s comments about Scottish cookery and horticulture raise issues about the need to have a rigorous Scottish studies subject that could lead to a qualification. Proper guidelines need to be developed on what is appropriate, and that will be an important area of work for the group. Our amendment also calls for an assessment of the skills and knowledge of the teaching profession, especially if a new qualification is to be introduced. There will have to be discussion of schools’ ability to deliver the qualification. There are already concerns over provision in modern languages and history, for example; therefore, the question must be asked whether there is capacity in the sector to deliver in this new area if there is to be a distinct subject. Any addition to the curriculum would need to be supported with good resources and continuing professional development opportunities—areas that are under pressure at the moment because of budget constraints. The working group will have to determine whether there is an appetite for the course. One question in a Gaelic survey is not conclusive. How will the college and university sector respond to any new qualifications? Is it development of an area that employers would value? The working group will also have to consider whether any additions to an already busy curriculum would marginalise other subjects that we can ill afford to sideline. We already know the areas that could make a real difference to young people’s employability—for example, modern languages—in which Scotland is particularly poor. We must ask whether, if additional resources are to be allocated or additional time is to be created within the curriculum—it is difficult to see how the proposals could be advanced without those—we are confident that this is the best area to develop to give young people the most advantages. The proposal is now in a transitional period. If it is to succeed, it needs to move from being an attractive, even emotive, hearts-and-minds policy in a party-political manifesto to a fully developed and robust addition to the curriculum that will add value to the school experience and bring advantage to our young people. I move amendment S4M-00959.2, to leave out from “welcomes” to end and insert: “notes the establishment of the Scottish Studies working group and its exploration of Scottish studies as a new subject; acknowledges the excellent practice that is already in place in Scottish schools which is delivering a wide range of Scottish-focused teaching across the curriculum; calls on the working group to audit current practice in primary and secondary schools, including the skills and knowledge of teachers in this area and to determine the way in which a new subject will add to the work that is already being undertaken and to guard against marginalisation of Scottish studies, and looks forward to scrutinising the working group’s recommendations.”

Clare Adamson has referred to Scottish studies as a qualification subject. Does she agree that it is important that the working group examines the detail of how that could be delivered, given the need to be confident about teacher skills in the area and about the existence of enough space in the curriculum to deliver such a course?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Today is a significant day in the parliamentary calendar. It is a day that will, in many ways, define the SNP as a majority Government. We have had the detail of the budget for only a few hours and the Parliament will take time to scrutinise fully the budget for the coming year and the longer-term spending review. Today, however, we can lay out our initial concerns about the budget and the challenges for the years ahead that the Government must deliver on if we are to make Scotland healthier, wealthier and smarter. We all recognise the difficult economic environment that the Government is working in. We, along with other members, have been critical of the economic decisions that have been taken by the coalition Government, which is pushing ahead with cuts that not only are damaging to economic growth but impact on everyone’s day-to-day life as the cost of living increases but wages stay static. In that context, the Scottish Government still has a significant budget and powers with which to shape Scotland’s recovery and growth. Although we are seeing positive investment in Scotland—today, we had confirmation of the extent of Amazon’s investment in Fife—the positive news often masks hidden unemployment problems, such as the high numbers of women who are unemployed or who are working on low wages and in part-time employment. There are real challenges for those who are on the margins of the unemployment market; challenges that are heightened by the on-going review of Remploy. If Remploy closes, many vulnerable people in my region will be alienated. There are also high rates of youth unemployment, particularly long-term youth unemployment. I know that the Government shares our understanding of how damaging youth unemployment can be in the immediate and long term, and we have worked with the Government to increase the number of apprenticeship places, but the issue remains a significant challenge for the Government. We should all recognise the role that colleges play in addressing that very real problem. They have been quick to react and have worked hard to ensure that no one is turned away. They have moved to provide options for school leavers and those who face redundancy. Last year, the colleges accepted a one-year deal involving a 10 per cent cut, while promising to maintain places. In many cases, colleges have increased the number of places in response to the local unemployment challenges that our communities face. However, make no mistake, the cut was difficult to absorb. There have been course cuts, reductions in contact time—a full-time course was recently reduced from 25 to only 16 hours a week—and cuts to student guidance and counselling services, which are the very services on which many of our more vulnerable students rely. There are also the redundancies, with more than 1,000 jobs cut in the past year in the college sector. That is a 7 per cent decline, which is more than in any other area of the public sector. Given the current inflation figures, a flat-cash deal was the best that colleges could hope for, but with what looks like a 12 per cent cut over the period of the spending review, that must surely threaten the colleges’ ability to deliver the Scottish Government’s places pledge or risk affecting the quality, depth and range of education that they deliver. Colleges do not have the universities’ comfort of the First Minister’s guarantee on comparable funding, but they have been facing substantial pressures and, with the budget and spending review, they will continue to face pressures, which will increasingly impact on their ability to deliver. The Education and Culture Committee will carefully scrutinise the issue in the coming weeks and we will hold the Government to account on the figures. The first priority for the college sector is to provide opportunities, but we must ensure that it can do so from a strong position that benefits students. The merger proposal that was announced in last week’s post-16 reform statement has raised serious concerns about the ability to do more with less. The period of the spending review will reveal how sustainable that is.

The college sector has shown, in the deal that it did last year, that it recognises the economic problems that the Government faces. It is important for the Government to work with the college sector. There are concerns about the way in which the merger proposal was announced and colleges feel a bit blindsided by it. The sector appreciates the difficulties that we all face and it has gone the extra mile in trying to address them, but it faces a substantial cut in the next three years in the Scottish Government budget. The sector appears to have been blindsided by the merger proposals. There was no mention of that direction of travel in the SNP manifesto but, less than a week after the statement, the University of Abertay Dundee has received a clear indication that it is under review by the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. The Government must be clearer about its intentions on the issue and about the extent to which it supports college and university mergers. It must make clear whether it will guarantee that educational grounds will always be the determining factor. In addition, universities are facing their own challenges. They have a guarantee that the Government will fill any funding gap, but there are still many unanswered questions for the institutions. Some are taking full advantage of the opportunity to charge rest-of-UK students the highest fees in the UK—a situation that the Government must get a grip of—but there are no details of an equalisation mechanism to ensure that no universities are disadvantaged. Although the Government has announced plans for a minimum student income, that will apply only to the poorest students, leaving many students continuing to rely on commercial debt and on working long hours to supplement their income, with many dropping out because of financial pressures. The measures in the budget are welcome as far as they go, but there is much more to do on creating a fairer student support system. I will close with a comment on schools. At yesterday’s Education and Culture Committee, we had a wide-ranging debate on the McCormac report. Based on the evidence that we received, that report holds many challenges for Michael Russell. However, Drew Morrice, the assistant secretary of the Educational Institute of Scotland, said that the crucial issue for all the reviews that are being undertaken in education is the spending review. While promises on probationary employment are to be welcomed, the flat-cash deal that has been given to local authorities will be passed on to schools that have already seen devolved budgets being cut, vacancies not being filled and the number of support staff being reduced. Within that context, the schools are being asked to implement fully the curriculum for excellence, which presents particular challenges around examinations, and to undertake potentially significant changes to teachers’ conditions. Education budgets will continue to be squeezed, risking the teaching profession and, ultimately, our children’s education. Universities were often a thorn in the side of the Scottish Government. The spending review might be putting that battle to bed for now, but the Government cannot cut the college sector so deeply that, four years from now, we will have to try to rebuild it.

15. To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with the University of St Andrews and Fife Council about plans to replace Madras College with a single-site secondary school. (S4O-00168)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the level of concern about the failure of Fife Council and the University of St Andrews to reach a partnership agreement, which would have meant the building of a single-site secondary school in St Andrews. Indeed, talks between the two parties broke down despite Scottish Government officials stepping in to oversee negotiations. Given that the current school building is D rated, the circumstances are very disappointing, particularly as the St Andrews partnership proposal was forward thinking. Will the Scottish Government make representations to Fife Council to impress on it the need to ensure that a solution can be found as soon as possible?

Although college places have been maintained, over the past two years there has been a decrease in the number of contact hours from 21 to 16 hours a week for full-time college students—a decision taken by college principals—along with cuts in guidance and counselling services and increased class sizes. The cabinet secretary states that he wants to put learners at the centre. How will the post-16 reforms address issues of student experience and course quality? Will national standards in those areas be considered?

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with the Fire Brigades Union in Scotland. (S4O-00119)

I appreciate the minister’s agreeing to a meeting to discuss the situation in Fife, at which I will be able to provide more details. However, according to Fife FBU, Fife Council’s proposal to make further cuts to the Fife fire service next year, in addition to the efficiency savings that are already in place, will lead to a further reduction of 20 firefighters. Does the minister share my concern that that will compromise safety? Will she make representation to Fife Council that it should consider a moratorium on cuts and consider freezing staffing levels ahead of significant changes to the national service?

As I highlighted this morning, if Fife Council’s proposed cut goes ahead in next year’s budget, Fife Fire and Rescue Service will lose 20 front-line firefighters. If that goes ahead, I am concerned that Fife will go into a single service with one hand tied behind its back. Will the cabinet secretary say whether the transitional funding to which he referred could be used to ensure a level playing field for all fire services into the future?

The cabinet secretary has previously stated that an EU service charge will raise in the region of £22 million towards plugging the university funding gap. Can he confirm whether such a charge would be legal? If he is confident that he can pursue a charge, will it be additional to fees and will it have to apply to home students as well, as it does in Ireland?

I am pleased to close for Labour in this wide-ranging and thoughtful debate. I congratulate Gordon MacDonald, Anne McTaggart and Jean Urquhart on their confident maiden speeches. I echo many of Jean Urquhart’s comments on Scotland’s culture. Members may know that today is Bloomsday, which is an important day in Ireland’s literary calendar. We could do more in the Scottish education system to recognise and celebrate Scottish literature and culture. I congratulate Angela Constance on her new role and Alasdair Allan on his appointment to the ministerial team—I wish them both well. I welcome Liam McArthur to the education debate and look forward to his contributions. I am pleased to be on the Education and Culture Committee, along with several members who have spoken in the debate. I keep hearing that last session’s Education, Culture and Lifelong Learning Committee had a bit of a reputation and I hope that this session’s committee strengthens that reputation for holding the Government to account. In a majority Parliament, it is important that the committee is fair, constructive and not wary of being critical when it believes that the Government would benefit from some advice. The Scottish Government faces big challenges in its education and lifelong learning portfolio and, in talking about them, I will try to reflect this morning’s debate. I do not think that the cabinet secretary could miss the pressing issue that several members have raised regarding further and higher education, highlighting the pressure that they face in their constituencies. Alex Fergusson, Aileen McLeod, Sandra White, Neil Bibby and Jenny Marra all focused on the issue. University funding remains a challenge for the Government and there is a broad consensus in the Parliament on the way forward in Scotland. We have an opportunity to take a different approach in Scotland and we will work with the Government to achieve that, but we need some detail on issues such as the fees for students from the rest of the UK and the service charges for EU students.

The Labour Party stands by its manifesto and is signed up to the National Union of Students pledges for no tuition fees and no graduate contributions in education. We are prepared to work with the Government over the next five years to ensure that those pledges are delivered on. We fully recognise the serious challenges to doing that, but we are prepared to be constructive. I am also keen to work with the Government on student support issues and would appreciate the opportunity to discuss Labour’s college maintenance allowance proposal, which builds on the successful EMA scheme. Last session there was an annual furore over bursary pots running dry, to which the Government would respond. I am sure that the new minister would appreciate a more planned approach to the bursary system, as would I and thousands of Scottish students. The employment of probationary teachers continues to be a challenge. We can all produce statistics to justify our positions, but the fact remains that there has been a decrease in the number of those with permanent full-time or part-time employment contracts and an increase in the number of those who are on supply or temporary contracts. In the short term, the Government is committed to providing teaching posts for all probationers this summer. We need to know how that can be delivered and, in the long term, we need clarity on workforce supply. Ken Macintosh focused on the implementation of curriculum for excellence. The Government needs to recognise that there is still a level of uncertainty about that, which must be addressed, as Stewart Maxwell acknowledged. The EIS has confirmed that it will hold a ballot in November on boycotting some development work on the new curriculum, which is very concerning news. That decision is driven by worries that the changes are being brought in too quickly, increasing workload and damaging pupils’ learning. The Government needs to respond to those concerns. Last session, Labour drove the literacy commission. We welcomed working with the Government on that and the work that led to the literacy action plan. In our manifesto, we proposed “up to 1000 teachers, to drive up standards in literacy and numeracy across Scotland”. That is a concrete proposal for moving the agenda forward. The Scottish Government shares the goal of eradicating illiteracy and innumeracy, and I welcome Jean Urquhart’s comments on that. We all appreciate the huge disadvantages that accompany an individual who fell through the cracks at school and never gained those basic skills. We all want real progress in this session of Parliament. That brings me to my final point. Devolution has brought many significant changes to Scotland. The Parliament has been radical at times but has always, regardless of party affiliation, been about effecting positive change for Scotland. Nonetheless, we can all be frustrated that the pace of change is too slow for those who, I argue, need it the most. We all acknowledge that many children in Scotland achieve exceptionally well, but we know that the country’s educational attainment gap remains stark, a point that Marco Biagi highlighted well. Children who grow up in poverty do significantly worse at school than others do. The lack of positive educational outcomes closes off opportunities and ingrains poverty in some families. The situation is further complicated for many looked-after children. Labour will closely examine the educational outcomes report that is due at the end of the month, but we will see from today’s report by Buttle UK the extent of children living with kinship carers and the level of poverty that they experience. A number of members mentioned the Save the Children report. As Save the Children highlighted, an educational gap opens even before children reach school and widens in the following years. By the time children reach school leaving age, there is a huge, 85 per cent gap in attainment between the poorest and the better-off among them. Those figures are unacceptable. They were unacceptable under previous Governments and they are unacceptable under this one. I welcome the emphasis that the cabinet secretary placed on early years in his opening speech and I welcome Angela Constance to that responsibility, which will be increasingly important in this session. There must be greater investment in early years—additional support for pupils as well as greater family and parental investment and engagement. I look forward to the Government’s legislation on that but, if it places new duties on authorities, it must ensure that financial support accompanies those new responsibilities. It can be difficult to make the transformational change that we all want without the necessary resources. Liz Smith made some pertinent points on the operation of the concordat. We must all recognise that there is a real danger that, if authorities are to concentrate resources on statutory delivery in early years, resources will then be cut from non-statutory delivery. Members will have local examples of third sector organisations that are under extreme financial pressure now, but those organisations often deliver vital support to vulnerable children and their families, as Anne McTaggart made clear when she talked about community engagement and community education. It is also important that they deliver services in a way that some families find much easier to engage with than dealing with authority. That matter was highlighted in the recent report “Growing up in Scotland: Parental service use and informal networks in the early years”. There are many positives to recognise and celebrate in Scotland’s education, from the Secret Garden Outdoor Nursery in Fife, which nurtures young minds, to the most advanced research that our world-class universities deliver and share with the rest of the world. Our job as a Parliament is to provide the right circumstances for everyone—regardless of their postcode or surname—to make their way in the world successfully, with confidence and hope.

Today’s debate addresses a significant issue that is facing the new Scottish Government. Scotland has an ageing population. People are living longer but not necessarily more healthily, and they often have increasingly complex needs in later life. The elderly population of the 21st century is much more diverse in terms of income, mobility and health than those in previous generations, so our response needs to be more sophisticated. We must face up to the realities of a changing Scotland, and the services that we provide, whether through public, private or third sector delivery, must reflect a caring and mature society. I will concentrate on a few issues from my personal experience and my experience as an MSP for Mid Scotland and Fife. Relatives who take on the role of caring for an older person are often lauded by politicians. It is a huge task. I know that from my family’s own experience when my grandfather moved into my parents’ home. That is the way in which we all used to look after our elderly. I was at university at the time and I was not particularly aware of, or appreciative of, the commitment that was given by my parents. It can be very hard work and it is not the answer for everyone, but if families are in a position to provide that level of care, they must be properly supported through the benefits and social care system. I am sure that we will reflect more on that area during the forthcoming carers week. While caring for an elderly parent or spouse at home, relatives aim to make that person’s life more comfortable and familiar and to retain them in a home environment. When a family pass complete care to another provider, they look for a level of care for their loved one that meets those hopes. We know from recent shocking incidents that the system can—tragically—fail a family’s trust. Of course, many care homes have good assessments. We are right to rely on such measures as an indicator of quality but, even with them, it is often the intangible and difficult-to-measure human qualities that provide families with confidence in a care setting. That is relevant to the care home situation in Fife and the campaign that families of care home residents there are running. Fife Council has decided to close all the local authority-run care homes and replace them with private provision. I have had meetings with care home residents’ relatives, who believe that their loved ones receive a high quality of care in local authority homes and that such care is better than that in the private sector. Fife Council is undoubtedly making an unpopular decision—more than 70 per cent of respondents to a consultation that was held in November did not agree with it. The care commission has reported that the current buildings need improvement—en suite bathrooms are the major issue—but residents’ relatives overwhelmingly argue that such facilities are not what makes a good care home; it is the level of care and the dedication of staff that make a good care home. Local authority care home staff feel so strongly about the decision that they are prepared to consider their terms and conditions and to change working practices to save resources. Eroding staff terms and conditions is not the best way forward in improving elderly care, but we could be looking at a staff-led, co-operative model of care that provides an alternative solution not just in Fife but across the country, where other authorities face similar challenges. As the Scottish Government will increasingly discover, it is difficult to always make popular decisions and we should not expect decision makers to always be popular. Sometimes, they must make the case for a difficult decision and build a consensus. Of course Fife Council faces a challenge—how do we ensure that older people live in high-quality accommodation that fully meets their needs and where they are properly cared for? However, the council’s proposed solution—a wholesale move to the private sector—is increasingly being questioned. The care home sector benefits from mixed provision. Public sector provision has considerable merits, but—realistically—we could not deliver a service without a contribution from the private sector. The private sector has good-quality care homes and some excellent care homes, although we as a Parliament are highlighting today serious concerns about what happens when the system fails, regardless of the sector. We can add to that mix the growing number of third sector or partnership-led homes. For example, Abbeyfield runs a co-operative model in Kirkcaldy, and many charities are involved in care delivery, although—as Mary Scanlon highlighted—the economics of the sector can make it difficult for them to survive. Mixed provision helps to raise standards in care homes not just for residents but for staff. Care home staff are often undervalued and underpaid. We should aim to raise the value of care staff, whether those they look after are young or old. Access to training and skills supports a more motivated and professional workforce and, overall, the public sector has a better record on that than the private sector does. Southern Cross’s current financial difficulties should cause a rethink of Fife Council’s decision. Unison suggests that other major companies also face financial problems. The difference between the home care fees that local authorities pay the private sector and those that they pay the public sector has long been a social care financing issue that has been raised with MSPs, but it is dwarfed by the problem that we face of large social care companies that are run for shareholders’ profits and now face financial collapse. Many are concerned that this is the tip of the iceberg. Last week, the First Minister said: “Given the difficulties that arise when a private company is on the brink of administration and given the position in which that leaves vulnerable people in social care or the health service, the current situation should be a cautionary note for those who seem to think that private intervention is a solution in the health service or in the social care service.”—[Official Report, 2 June 2011; c 299.] We are all concerned about the future security of healthcare. The cabinet secretary must continue dialogue with Southern Cross and be alert to concerns about other companies. In the current environment, Fife Council should hear that cautionary note and reconsider its decision. There are alternatives—Abbeyfield in Kirkcaldy should be proof of that—and the council should commit to exploring them. The Scottish Government could take a lead in exploring and promoting alternative models to maintain mixed provision if local authorities step away from direct delivery. It should not take crises—whether financial or in social care delivery—to force an examination of the sector, but we must all be confident that the care models that operate in Scotland can meet our future needs and reflect our society’s values.

I am pleased to be taking part in today’s debate, which is important, and congratulate all the new members who have made their maiden speeches today. We have heard thoughtful and meaningful contributions. The debate is wide ranging; I would like to focus on a few of the key challenges that the Government faces in the education portfolio. This is only the first week back, but two education issues have already hit the headlines. First, COSLA’s leaked submission to the McCormac review into teachers’ pay and conditions has reignited the debate on them. Changes to the teaching profession that were introduced in the early years of the Parliament brought stability to the classroom and established a proper procedure for negotiations. Of course, nothing in public policy is set in stone, particularly during times of financial constraint, and it is right that we should reflect on the best possible arrangements in our classrooms to deliver for every child and young person, but the reported COSLA proposals are far reaching and have been met by concern from parents and teachers. The Scottish Government will have a task ahead of it when the review is concluded in the autumn. If it is to make fundamental changes to teachers’ terms and conditions, that must be done in partnership with the teaching profession. If the changes are reasonable and in the best interests of Scottish education, I am sure that they will garner support, but I urge the Government, in approaching the debate that will follow the findings of the McCormac review, to ensure that the reasons for change are clearly articulated. They cannot just be about savings; they must be about how we can raise standards in our schools and ensure that no child is left behind. This Government and previous Governments have invested in education, but we must continue to ask ourselves whether we are seeing the best results—the results that Scotland deserves. We will continue to debate in the Parliament how much progress is being made on the school building programme and whether we are providing enough employment opportunities for probationary teachers, but we need to raise our eyes to the future of Scottish education. Too many inequalities are evident in educational attainment in our schools, and that legacy leads on to inequalities at other levels of the education sector. That is particularly evident in our figures on widening access to university. As Kezia Dugdale highlighted this morning, Children in Scotland has reported a stalling in progress on tackling child poverty, which is a problem that impacts heavily on educational attainment. That is not to talk down Scottish education in any way, but we must not become complacent. Scotland has seen a stalling in pupil achievement in recent years; we have not seen the progress that we all want to see, particularly for the lowest-achieving pupils. We all hope that curriculum for excellence will go some way towards addressing those difficulties, but we appreciate that, for many children and young people, the answer is more complicated and cannot be found in education alone. The second issue that has been highlighted in the early days of this session of Parliament has been that of further and higher education. On Tuesday, the University and College Union and the Educational Institute of Scotland held the first Scottish Parliament lobby of the new session to protest against redundancies and course cuts in our colleges and universities. We have just returned from an election in which the majority of parties that are represented in the chamber supported broad principles about taking a different route on higher education from that being pursued by the UK Government. However, the Scottish Government now has the responsibility of delivering on its promises. No one who was at the rally this week can be under any illusion about the significant challenges in the tertiary sector. There were representatives from many institutions that are faced with the threat of compulsory redundancies and course cuts. The sector seeks clarity on how the funding gap for universities will be closed and it is looking for the Government to take action on governance. As Patrick Harvie highlighted, governance is becoming the dominant issue. Staff feel undervalued and staff and students are not always persuaded by the changes that some principals are pursuing. There are concerns that strategic decisions by individual institutions will impact negatively on course provision across Scotland. The Government proposes to find answers through another green paper, but there is growing concern that we need a more immediate response to the situation. Once some provision has gone, it will be difficult to recover. It might be incumbent on the sector to direct itself towards industries that will drive the economy and deliver greater employment opportunities, but we must be careful that it does not lose the breadth of Scottish education in doing so. The Government needs to be mindful of that and should start to identify its strategy to respond to those concerns. The final issue that I will touch on is that of support for college students. In the previous session of Parliament, there was an annual furore over bursary pots running dry. Each year, the Scottish Government had to step in with more money to keep the system afloat. We could manage the system better. College students should be entitled to the same level of security in their student support that university students have. In the election, Labour committed to building on the education maintenance allowance scheme to introduce a college maintenance allowance of up to £90 a week, which was to be funded centrally but delivered locally. I would welcome the opportunity to discuss with the new minister how we can improve support for college students. I am happy to share modelling on the proposal, which I hope he will consider. Much of today’s debate has focused on the constitution. As I have highlighted, there are pressing issues in education that require no greater power than the willingness of Government to get on with it.

I am pleased to speak in the stage 3 debate on the Public Records (Scotland) Bill. Although there was strong support for the bill and the changes that it set out to achieve, concerns were raised in the stage 1 debate, particularly around the capacity of the third sector to fulfil the bill’s requirements and third sector organisations’ relationships as contractors with public authorities. I am pleased that we reached consensus and now have a better understanding of the issues than we had at stage 2. That is down to the constructive way in which the Government and members addressed the issues that were raised during stage 1. The minister and members lodged a number of successful amendments at stage 2 that shifted the bill’s tone so that the relationship between the keeper of the records, public authorities and the third sector became one of agreement rather than instruction and direction. Although the changes do not alter the power of the keeper, who still has the final approval of any RMP, the bill emphasises agreement and focus on best practice, while allowing flexibility for all partners to achieve a working solution that best fits the service that they are focused on delivering. At stage 2, we also addressed concerns about the relevance of stored information and requests, primarily from the third sector, for the bill to be clearer on the issue of risk. The committee received evidence that the bill could overburden some organisations, which felt that there was not sufficient distinction between relevant information and extraneous or incidental information. Although much of that will come down to judgment, the sector is looking for some direction, so the minister’s attempt to address the issue of risk is to be welcomed. The bill makes it clear that an authority’s RMP may make different provision for different kinds of public records and that, in doing so, it may take account of the different levels of risk in the management of different kinds of records. Although that will still come down to the authority’s own assessment of the level of risk, the bill should provide assurance for contractors that the issue has been recognised and that efforts will be made to keep information relevant and appropriate. Again, the partnership and agreement aspect of the bill is important in that respect, as in many cases the contractors will have a good understanding of the records that are relevant to their service and service users. The minister acknowledged that there are concerns around the voluntary sector’s different contractual arrangements with different public bodies, which could lead to multiple contracts. The bill always proposed common records management plans, but the greater flexibility and responsiveness that were added at stage 2 will, I hope, respond to the voluntary sector’s concerns and provide local authorities with the powers that they require. We will pass the bill today, but the next stage—guidance and practical implementation—will be crucial to the achievement of the outcomes that we all want to see. Issues such as the definition of a public record, what a model records management plan will look like and how risk is determined and balanced will continue to challenge all partners until they get it right and operate a records management system in which we can have confidence. Although it is a short piece of legislation, the Public Records (Scotland) Bill is hugely significant. It delivers a framework for transparent, efficient and relevant record keeping and it is intended to ensure confidence in the keeping of information. It establishes a clear expectation of how public records should be managed, recognising their significance in personal situations as well as in public and historical contexts. Although the bill is in many ways a technical piece of legislation that is more about managing information and relationships between organisations, its true intention is to deliver a public records system in which people can have confidence and to ensure that we protect the rights of individuals to access information that is hugely significant to their lives.

Universities agreed to compensate for a 10 per cent cut in funded places in 2011-12 with an increase in fees-only places. What discussions has the cabinet secretary had with university principals about their ability or willingness to continue that arrangement? If it is a one-year-only deal, how will it impact on the funding gap and university places in future years?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met Fife Council education department and what was discussed. (S3O-13215)

The cabinet secretary is aware that the council’s decision to close Ardroy outdoor education centre has caused a lot of concern among teachers, pupils and parents. It is a popular facility and one that contributes to the wellbeing of children throughout the region, particularly those from deprived communities. One concerned constituent said to me, “My worry is that, if they close Ardroy, many children just won’t get the opportunity to go anywhere.” Does the cabinet secretary agree that Fife Council’s decision is short-sighted and not in the best interests of Fife children?

There is growing evidence of local authorities cutting school support staff; indeed, in my region of Fife, assistants are being taken out of the classroom to carry out other duties. In the light of those challenges, will the national partnership group consider the crucial role of classroom support staff who work with teachers to deliver for every child?

First, I apologise for missing much of the minister’s opening speech. We all recognise the importance of reforming Scotland’s public records system in public authorities as well as in the private and voluntary sectors that work with them. Although it is recognised that public record keeping has, in many cases, significantly improved since the Shaw report—which revealed the truly dreadful record keeping in residential schools and children’s homes, with records scattered across organisations, archives and even countries—there is still a clear need for legislation. The evidence that the committee heard made clear the terrible consequences of poor record keeping for children and young people in the care sector. As a guard against that set of circumstances happening again, the legislation is to be welcomed. The committee supported the view that a scheme that is underpinned by statute is more likely than a voluntary scheme to secure the necessary changes, and would lock in those changes. However, some concerns have been expressed regarding overimplementation of the legislation. Witnesses drew parallels with child protection measures that they suggested are treated at times with such caution that unnecessary measures are taken. We must therefore be wary of misinterpretation of the legislation and we must be cautious about the risk of overburdening the voluntary sector, on which the legislation will impact. I understand that that is not the minister’s intention, but I think that we would all welcome assurances on how that will be avoided. Witnesses spoke of a gap between the understanding of the legislation by the responsible public authority and that of the individual who interprets the legislation at the point of delivery. The minister will be familiar with the voluntary sector organisation’s continuing concerns regarding the obligation that will be placed on them as contractors. As a former policy officer at the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, I have worked closely with the voluntary sector and have continued that relationship with local groups in my region. When introducing new legislation that impacts on the voluntary sector, we must be aware of the diversity of organisations and recognise the flexibility and responsiveness that they offer, and we must foster their development while ensuring that they operate within a framework that meets our legitimate expectations on public care and delivery.

I do not disagree with anything that the minister just stated. It is important that we recognise that the voluntary sector—the third sector—will play an increasing role in service delivery. However, we must ensure that we achieve the right balance. I think that the sector recognises that the bill is important and it wants to work with it, but it perhaps needs help and support with regard to how the eventual act will be implemented. Although the sector has raised concerns regarding implementation, I am confident that it will—as it always does—engage with the process and do all that it can to make it work. However, the bill’s timescales have been challenging, and there are concerns that there is little awareness of it. Given the tight timescales that we are all working to, there may be a case for introducing an order-making power to the bill. I would welcome the minister’s thoughts on that. In evidence, it was made clear that contractors are nervous about the risk of significantly varying records management plans, and they highlighted the fact that many third sector organisations contract with several local authorities. Local authorities also made it clear that they would pass that burden on to contractors. There remains uncertainty over whether a public authority would accept a contractor’s own record-keeping system or whether they would be expected to conform to a system that has been defined by the public authority. Much of that will be contained in guidance, and while we will have to wait for the detail on that and take much of the minister’s assurances on faith, it might be helpful to have consultation and co-operation with stakeholders in preparing plans and guidance documents—that was also raised by COSLA today—as well as guidance that deals specifically with the relationship between RMPs and contractors. Finally, despite the keeper’s assurances to the committee, the voluntary sector is still concerned about the definition of public record, which again comes down to the gap between the understanding of the legislation at local authority level and its implementation on the ground. If changes are to be introduced smoothly and effectively, such issues will have to be resolved, so I believe that help and support for implementation will be welcomed. All of us, including the third sector, should be able to approach the legislation with a commitment to improving service delivery and with the confidence that it will deliver on the crucial need for Scotland’s record keeping to be of the very highest order.

I am pleased that the cabinet secretary agrees with Mr Harvie that perhaps the current model of college bursaries needs to be examined to ensure that college students have confidence in the system and are properly supported. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the yearly negotiations and the annual running out of money is becoming all too familiar and is not helping Scotland’s students?

I congratulate Andrew Welsh on securing the debate. I know how much members value their local colleges, and his enthusiasm for his local college is clear. On Labour’s behalf, I recognise his contribution to the Scottish Parliament. When I was a member of the Audit Committee as a new MSP, I always found him to be a fair and insightful colleague. I wish him the best in his life after the Scottish Parliament. I am happy to join Andrew Welsh in recognising the contribution that Angus College’s staff and students make to the local economy and the part that they play in progressing Scotland’s economy. Angus College faces particular challenges as a rural college. The distribution formula has not always benefited rural colleges, and I welcome the moves to address that issue. Although levels of deprivation and unemployment are not as high in rural areas as they are in the cities, there can be, as Andrew Welsh highlighted, significant concentrations of deprivation. We need to ensure that, regardless of where they live, there are opportunities throughout Scotland for young people and adults who are looking to retrain or upskill. For many young people and adult returners to education, colleges play a vital role in providing access to those opportunities in a friendly and less intimidating environment. Location is also important in that regard. Our colleges are key to Scotland’s economic recovery. Their flexibility, responsiveness, strong links with business, knowledge of their local labour market and ability to respond all add up to a sector that is at the centre of a modern Scotland. In my region, Adam Smith College is at the forefront of modern industry. Once known for heavy industry, particularly mining, Fife has had to work hard to reinvent itself. Fife’s colleges have been instrumental in ensuring that villages and towns that were depressed by high unemployment and its social consequences retain access to opportunities. Fife’s colleges do much more than that. They work actively with agencies to create opportunities. For example, Adam Smith College is a key partner in the hydrogen office, which opened recently in Methil. Over the years, Adam Smith College has actively encouraged people to come to college through a network of local facilities. Johann Lamont stressed the importance to people of having access on their doorstep. The minister recently opened a new facility in Leven that is part of the Adam Smith College campus. Colleges are at the forefront of new technologies. The newly opened future skills centre at Adam Smith College’s Stenton campus in Glenrothes offers state-of-the-art facilities with a wide range of courses in engineering, construction, renewables and science. Fife can be proud of those facilities, which point towards our economic future. Since devolution, the Scottish Parliament has invested in our colleges. There has been significant investment in capital projects, resulting in excellent facilities across Scotland. Of course, there is more that we could do, but we have a well-equipped sector. As we all know, we face significant challenges in ensuring that we maintain standards so that colleges can continue to deliver quality education at a time of financial constraint. The best way out of a recession is to invest in the workforce, including by ensuring that people have access to training and skills. In that way, Scotland can emerge stronger and more competitive. We all know the challenges that we face. This afternoon’s education and lifelong learning questions were dominated by concerns about college places, student support and bursaries, funding and opportunities for young people. Although the minister will highlight Scottish Government investment, we know that for a few years now colleges have been supplementing bursaries from their own reserves. As Andrew Welsh highlighted, Angus College has shown its commitment by funding 2,400 students. Colleges go above and beyond our expectations of them. My fear is that the piece of elastic can be stretched only so far. There are enormous pressures on the college sector. The news of the substantial redundancies at James Watt College is concerning, and the college is unlikely to be alone in pursuing that option. Although the number of places may be maintained, we have to question the ability of colleges to continue to provide a high-quality experience for students once they have fewer staff. The National Union of Students Scotland is campaigning in advance of the budget debate for more investment in bursaries. Those are the big challenges that we all have to face. Colleges are vital to our economic future and, like their students, they must have the resources that they need to make their contribution.

I am pleased to take part in this morning’s debate. Robin Harper has always brought to this chamber complete commitment and a genuine desire to make Scotland a better place. His proposals to improve access to finance for young people who are looking to set up their own businesses, co-operatives or community initiatives are worthy of further consideration. As David Whitton outlined, in government Labour was at the forefront of promoting the Grameen Bank as part of the UK’s international development work. We agree that further exploration of microcredit schemes for young people is to be welcomed and encouraged in Scotland. Young people are facing challenging times. Communities throughout Scotland are feeling the effects of tough economic times, but that is particularly acute when someone is just starting out in adult life with fewer life and employment skills to fall back on and when guidance and support are needed. Without opportunity, all that can be denied or rejected. Any models or initiatives that provide opportunities or options for young people are worthy of our consideration. We must do all that within the context of some of the more positive work that already happens in Scotland. Our amendment and the minister’s highlight some of that work. We face challenges. In Fife, there has been a worrying 57 per cent rise in long-term youth unemployment. The problem is even more concentrated in Glenrothes, Methil and Leven, which together have the highest number of young people out of work in Fife. We have given a commitment to create a Scottish future jobs fund. More than 250 young people in Fife benefited from the future jobs fund. I met young people based at Rathbone training centre in Glenrothes who are benefiting hugely from the scheme and are extremely positive about the impact that it is having on their lives and future employability. We must do all that we can to provide such opportunities. The availability of microcredit offers an alternative option for young people to create new enterprises. However, as Robin Harper’s motion recognises, that must be done with support and mentoring. There is still some way for Scotland to go for it to be a truly enterprising culture that is open and attractive to more people from all kinds of communities. It is about instilling confidence and about understanding success, risk and—increasingly—social responsibility and community investment. Those values and attributes will encourage young people into enterprise. Although Fife has some worrying youth unemployment figures, it is in Fife that I have recently seen some excellent work in raising young people’s aspirations and confidence. Last year, Caskieberran primary school in Glenrothes was the only primary school engaging in Young Enterprise Scotland. The school worked with Lomond Homes, and it is to the credit of Alan Seath of Lomond Homes that a strong relationship was created, in which both partners devoted time and energy to the project. Alan Seath—the Alan Sugar of Caskieberran primary—provided mentoring, support and real business insight.

He hires them; he does not fire them. They are only primary school children. Last year, the pupils made jewellery. This year, they grew into TEAM—“to entertain and motivate”. Caskieberran was the first primary school in Scotland to take part in an exciting enterprise project when it worked on behalf of Tree of Knowledge to organise a corporate event. The event, which took place last Friday at the Balbirnie House hotel in Markinch, was excellent and professionally organised. It was fascinating to talk to the teachers, who described it as being unlike any other event that they have been involved in at the school. They described school projects as being extremely planned and controlled, in contrast to the world of business or corporate event planning, which they had been thrown into with a team of 11-year-olds. The project provided excitement, uncertainty, flexibility and responsiveness in business planning that they could never have provided to the pupils as a school. It was engagement with business that brought them to that experience. I was really impressed with the scale of the challenge that the school took on and in which it succeeded. The teachers talked of the tremendous increase in confidence of the young people. They learned skills in the project that they might never otherwise have had the opportunity to learn. I am confident that in a few years, some of them will be looking for microcredit. I highlight another example of sheer entrepreneurial spirit and spark: Fife Youth Radio. I first met its participants a few months ago when I visited their studio on the day that they launched. They put me on the spot and asked me which record I wanted them to play. It is on such occasions that we realise how old we are. Fife Youth Radio is an online radio station. The skills that the young people are learning are significant and transferable. What is so impressive about Fife Youth Radio is the level of responsibility, self-motivation and ownership that it has given the young people who are involved. They have taken part in training that is run by Young Scot and the BBC and they are entering a major partnership deal with O2. Their approach to the project has been entrepreneurial, and their partners have fostered that approach by providing leadership training and mentoring. The work of Fife Youth Radio shows huge initiative. I want to ensure that the energy, skills and enthusiasm that its participants have gained in the project and that young people have gained in other projects throughout Scotland are given the opportunity to flourish in the social enterprise and/or business sector. We should all work together to explore schemes or initiatives that can help young people to realise what their business dream is and to make it happen.

When did the cabinet secretary last speak to the chair of NHS Fife? Today's Courier  reports a senior member of NHS Fife health board stating that NHS Fife is in crisis over the bed-blocking situation, with staff being run ragged, operations being cancelled at short notice and patients waiting weeks to be discharged. One of my constituents, William Cook, has been waiting for more than 13 weeks to be discharged. Since I last wrote to the cabinet secretary, we are no nearer to a solution to the growing problem. I appreciate that the change fund will be available, but that will not be until April. What action can the Scottish Government take to alleviate the immediate situation in Fife?

I am happy to open the debate on behalf of Labour. As a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee and as an MSP who signed the bill proposal, I very much wish to see action taken on the issues that Hugh O'Donnell has raised. I know that many people who have lobbied for the bill and have provided evidence to the committee are disappointed by the committee's recommendations, but it is the responsibility of committee members to scrutinise proposals for legislation on the strength of the evidence and arguments that are presented to them. In this case, it is regrettable that the committee could not support the bill beyond stage 1, but I believe that that is the right decision. However, I recognise the significance of the bill and what it has already achieved. When Hugh O'Donnell sought support for his bill, Scotland was the only part of the United Kingdom not to have an autism strategy. The Scottish Government at that  time stated that it had no intention of introducing a strategy and that it did not believe it necessary. The clear demand for action that is concentrated in the bill has resulted in the Scottish Government bringing forward a strategy. Hugh O'Donnell's work has changed the direction of the Government; that is to be welcomed and his efforts should be acknowledged. Adults and children on the autism spectrum often face a daily struggle for access to services that many of us take for granted. There is a postcode lottery of services across Scotland, there is a real need to address transitions to adulthood, there must be improved communication and involvement in decision making for parents and young people, there needs to be more access to employment support services, and there must be an increased awareness of the often simple steps that can make many everyday services more accessible. Since being elected, I have worked closely with autism groups in my region and have tried to support them in any way I can. Last year, I met a group of parents of children and young people who are on the autism spectrum. That meeting highlighted to me the key issue of transition to adulthood services, which came up time and again in the evidence that was presented to the committee. For those young people, services seem to drop off just at the point when they are faced with new challenges of further education or employment. The Parliament must take the lead in dramatically improving the services that are available to young people. We are selling the young people short, and we are selling ourselves short as we miss out on the talents that such young people can bring to our communities and economy. As proposed, the bill would place an obligation on the Scottish Government to produce a strategy but it does not detail what a strategy should include. The bill's proposal to place the Scottish Government under an obligation to publish guidance that local authorities and the NHS must "have regard to" in delivering services led to questions about whether that would make a meaningful difference to service delivery. The lack of financial commitment to improve services raised the concern that there was a danger that, although the bill would be perceived as achieving change and giving status to the strategy, the lightness of the term "have regard to" would make it ineffectual and largely disregarded. Labour firmly agrees with the proposer of the bill that there needs to be change. I know that there are still concerns with the strategy that is under consultation. It is important that the Scottish Government listens to those concerns and that we have a robust strategy that will bring positive  change to people's lives. Whether or not we have a bill that says that the Scottish Government must produce a strategy will not make a difference to the significant challenge of producing a properly resourced strategy that will deliver improvements. The production of the strategy is not an end in itself. It is only the beginning of implementation and that is where the greater challenge lies. I welcomed the commitment that the minister gave the committee that there would be evaluation and monitoring of the introduction of the strategy, and I believe that the committee report is clear that we are not satisfied that the Parliament's work in the area is complete. There is every intention to include work on autism in the committee's legacy paper. At the heart of moving forward on the strategy, and in delivering the change that we all want to see is the need for meaningful engagement. Labour welcomes the reinstatement of the reference group, but we believe that it should include key stakeholders, including carers and service users. The group could play a valuable role in monitoring the implementation of any strategy into the future and could have a relationship with Parliament that ensures that we all work together to make life better for service users and their families.

I welcome the minister to her new role. Notwithstanding her earlier comments, there is huge pressure on college budgets and on the delivery of student support, which is leading to cuts in child care provision at colleges and increasing the pressure on that provision, as more adults with caring responsibilities try to return to college. What steps will the minister take to ensure that child care budgets do not run dry, as they have in previous years?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that Scottish students are offered the lowest level of student support in the UK and that our drop-out rate is one of the worst. I welcome the fact that, through the green paper, the Scottish Government finally acknowledges that the current student support  system is unsustainable and that too many students live in hardship and depend on commercial debt. However, the paper says that any solution for student support must use "the current resources". Within those imposed financial constraints, how does he plan to deliver the significant improvement in student support that students need?

To ask the Scottish Executive what it estimates to be the cost to the Fife economy of the extreme winter weather. (S3O-12368)

Will the cabinet secretary say a little bit more about what steps will be taken in future to improve co-ordination and mitigate any adverse effects as far as possible?

I thank Ted Brocklebank for initiating the debate and giving the Parliament an opportunity to express its support for RAF Leuchars. I acknowledge the motion in the name of Iain Smith who, as the constituency member, has made clear his opposition to closure. I also acknowledge the commitment of politicians from throughout Fife and across the political parties, and I welcome the invitation that came this afternoon from the Minister for Parliamentary Business to attend a cross-party meeting in Fife. Reports in yesterday's Scotsman suggest that the decision to close RAF Leuchars is inevitable.  Such threats are concerning. The proposal to withdraw the RAF from Leuchars is short-sighted and wrong, and I hope that the debate will make clear the Parliament's opposition to it. Some people have the idea that RAF bases do not contribute to the local economy—that they operate independently, that all economic activity happens within the base and that they can be removed with little impact. That is not the case. Like many in Fife, I have a family connection with RAF Leuchars. My uncle was an engineer in the RAF and, after being stationed in Germany and Wales, he and his family were stationed at Leuchars. I remember the excitement of visiting their home on the base. Once he had retired from the RAF and moved to Guardbridge, he continued to work on the base at the mess and, like many people in the surrounding community, he still had a personal and economic tie to it. The air force has been in Leuchars in Fife since 1911. The base is an important centre for the north-east Fife economy. It brings diversity to the local economy—a largely rural economy that is built on small and medium-sized businesses—and makes a valuable contribution to it. Fife Council, along with the Fife Chamber of Commerce, is playing an important role in highlighting the economic impact that closure would have on the local community and in stressing the base's importance to local suppliers. However, the case for RAF Leuchars is not only its economic contribution, because the base is also part of the local community. It provides day care services, child and youth clubs and a recently opened, purpose-built community centre. Nor is the case for retention only about the local community. I understand that the decision must be driven by the UK's strategic defence interests, but I am concerned that—as with the strategic defence review—it is being driven by money, not military strategy. I argue that the UK Government's approach to defence is increasingly about the Treasury's approach to cutting the deficit rather than about strategic decision making. A more considered approach to tackling the deficit could mean keeping the bases open. However, I am keen to demonstrate the unity of feeling from members across Fife about RAF Leuchars and to make the defence case as strongly as possible in an attempt to influence the decision positively. RAF Leuchars occupies a unique position, with 80 per cent of Scotland's population being within 80 miles of the base. Its key role is to maintain the UK's quick reaction alert (interceptor) north, which is pivotal in preventing unidentified aircraft from entering UK airspace and in intercepting them. Its location in Fife is vital to the effectiveness of that  system. The decision to restrict the number of Typhoon jets is threatening the viability of RAF Leuchars and driving the move to have only one base. The decision to deploy three squadrons of Eurofighter Typhoon aircraft at Leuchars was based on long-term strategic considerations and, as Ted Brocklebank pointed out, nothing has changed to undermine the rationale for that deployment. RAF Leuchars provides a long-standing centre of defence excellence that would be difficult to replicate elsewhere. It offers history, continuity and expertise. I believe that it has a future and that it should continue to play a key role in the UK's defence strategy.

I am pleased to contribute to the stage 1 debate on the Damages (Scotland) Bill. I thank Bill Butler for his hard work in introducing the bill. He has provided a convincing, rational and passionate case for the proposed legislation. I recognise that the member, the Scottish Government and the committee all wish to secure fair compensation for those who are in the hugely difficult position of having lost in tragic circumstances a loved one upon whom they relied for financial support. However, some key disagreements remain about how that can best be achieved. As members can see from the stage 1 report, although the committee supports the bill proceeding to stage 2, committee members do so with differing levels of enthusiasm. There are differing views on whether the bill should proceed as a separate piece of legislation or whether the Scottish Law Commission's three sets of legislative recommendations on damages should be advanced together. However, we would find the time to deal with the second option only in the second half of the next parliamentary session at best. Therefore, the decision comes down to a judgment on how urgent the need for legislation is and to what extent, and how many, families will continue to be disadvantaged or placed in extremely difficult circumstances without the bill. The committee remains divided on whether the benefits outweigh the risks. On balance, I believe that there is a strong case for pursuing the bill in this parliamentary session. I am not convinced that further delay or the amalgamation of the bill with the Scottish Law Commission's other recommendations would lead to any better legislation. The level of confidence in the extent and depth of the research is one of the problematic issues that the committee has faced in addressing the bill. Mr Butler argued at the outset of the process that there was no need for further consultation on the bill proposal. That argument was rejected by  the majority of the committee, a decision that Mr Butler later endorsed. Extensive consultation has now been undertaken. However, during stage 1, the case for additional evidence and further research was stated. At the heart of that was the committee's problem in coming to a firm view on the merits or otherwise of a fixed 25 per cent deduction for the victim's living expenses. I am persuaded by the arguments in favour of a fixed 25 per cent deduction, principally because it would reduce the need for intrusive questioning at an extremely difficult time—a set of circumstances that often leads to people being prepared to settle for less than they may be entitled to. It could also speed up the settlement of claims. The committee accepted the reality of undercompensation, but remained divided on whether a fixed 25 per cent deduction would be the correct response. However, it appears to me that the evidence supporting the 25 per cent deduction came from actual cases whereas the argument against a fixed deduction was largely based on hypothetical cases. All eventualities must, of course, be considered, but there is also a need for a degree of pragmatism. The committee has considered the merits of the Scottish Government's proposal for a rebuttable presumption, and encourages further exploration of that option if it can provide flexibility without undermining the benefits of the fixed reduction. That is a difficult task, which has now been passed to stage 2. I appreciate some members' cautiousness about the range of the evidence that was presented to the committee. However, I am not convinced that the remaining divisions can be addressed by pursuing further research or evidence. We might have pretty much reached the extent of the research that is available on the issue. It might be that some are still unhappy with the depth of the research that is available, but we are in danger of going round in circles with no resolution. As Mr Butler said in evidence: "There comes a point when it is necessary to cut to the chase and recognise that there is a body of evidence."—[ Official Report, Justice Committee , 28 September 2010 ; c 3550.] I support that view. If we start from the premise that, although there might be concerns that the evidence is not as wide ranging or as varied as we would like, it is as good as we are going to get, the issue comes down to whether a compromise can be reached on the key issues that are identified in the stage 1 report to allow the bill to proceed further. I welcome the commitment that the minister and Mr Butler have  made today to work together to attempt to reach a compromise. The Damages (Scotland) Bill is the first member's bill that I have been involved with at stage 1, and I appreciate the committee's constructive and thoughtful approach to it. Although, as a committee substitute, I was not involved with the bill from the start, I look forward to that constructive approach being continued at stage 2.

Will the minister respond to the concerns that a spokesman for Fife police expressed when he said: “There can be no doubt ... that the scale of the cuts being faced will mean a reduction in the level, and potentially breadth, of service provided by the force”? Does he recognise that the level of cuts to Fife police will threaten the very continuation of diversionary and community projects such as the revolution bus, which he mentioned? The police deliver such projects by going above and beyond their regular services. Does he agree that the cuts will negatively impact on the crime figures in Fife?

I welcome this morning's opportunity for the Parliament to endorse members' commitment to the curriculum for excellence and to improving the educational opportunities of our children and young people. The summer of this year marked the formal dawning of the curriculum for excellence but, as the Parliament has previously recognised, the teaching approach that is central to the curriculum for excellence has been embedding in our schools for a few terms, particularly in primary schools, where child-centred, multidisciplinary learning has been unfolding. Reflecting on my own years at primary school, I think that the best teachers already  recognise the value of that approach, and that imaginative, engaged teaching has been taking place in some classrooms over generations. The curriculum for excellence is much more ambitious than that. Arising out of a national debate on education in 2002, it seeks to ensure that every child and young person who goes through the Scottish education system will leave a successful learner, a confident individual, a responsible citizen and an effective contributor. It aims to offer a more flexible learning path and to simplify the curriculum. It gives teachers more professional responsibility as well as freedom and flexibility in teaching, and it enhances their role as educators. The curriculum recognises that learning should not finish when young people leave school, but that schools should give them the skills, the belief, the confidence and the ambition to do more and to continue to achieve in their adult life. I recently returned to my old high school, Beath high school in Cowdenbeath, during its centenary celebrations. There I saw the principles of the curriculum for excellence in action, as the school used the occasion of its centenary to study a range of subjects throughout the curriculum. That led to a slightly strange experience for me. As I walked into a classroom of first years, the teacher asked, "Class, who's studying the 1980s?" There was a show of hands and the teacher said, "Well, this is Claire Baker, whom you've been investigating." I have become part of the curriculum in areas of Fife, which is quite strange. Beath high school gave me a good education, which enabled me to achieve the exam results that I needed to be able to go to university. However, on my recent visit I noted a change in the young people. I was at school at a time of teacher strikes and school budget reductions, and there was a feeling of hopelessness and lack of opportunity among too many young school leavers. That is a familiar picture of the 1980s, to which no one wants to return as a result of the current tightening of budgets. It was not just the lack of those factors that made a difference in Beath high school; I thought that the young people whom I met were more confident, more optimistic and more focused on the possibilities for them when they left school. The Parliament has helped to achieve that, by seeking to provide direction and renewed focus on the value of a Scottish education. The curriculum for excellence is a key element. There is agreement in the Parliament that the curriculum for excellence is the right direction of travel. We all want to see it—and our young people—succeed. However, its implementation has not been smooth. The concerns of teaching unions reached a low point when the SSTA was removed from the management board for threatening to hold a ballot on industrial action.  During the summer, the EIS voted to pursue a work-to-contract policy and to co-operate with the curriculum only within a 35-hour working week. There was concern about preparedness and course content, and there were tensions about workload. Confidence in subject readiness was and still is a significant issue, particularly in the science subjects—Elaine Murray spoke with insight about that in a previous debate. The lack of confidence in LTS's ability to provide relevant support and materials is also concerning. Recent criticism of the LTS website, which is meant to provide teaching support and resources, is of particular concern, because the criticism focuses on a lack of support for and up-to-date, relevant information on teaching literacy. It is unacceptable at this stage to respond that the website is a work in progress. The cabinet secretary must address the issue. There remains a lack of clarity about assessment arrangements, which must concern young people and parents whose children have begun their first year at secondary school. We have the national assessment resource, but it offers no detail of the exams that young people will sit. I do not commit Margaret Smith's speeches to memory, but I remember that during our previous debate on the curriculum for excellence she said that young people should not be used as "guinea pigs" in education. Of course, a cohort of young people must be the first to go through the system, but that is why it is important that those young people and their teachers have the most information as soon as possible. Parents need to be confident that every school has a clear exam route to higher education. Although entrance to university will continue to be centred on highers and fifth and sixth year qualifications, the national qualifications will be the gateway to choices. The reliance on supply teachers continues to cause concern about teaching consistency and commitment to the new curriculum. The teaching workforce must be maintained at a level that supports the new curriculum. If reports that there are 1,500 fewer teachers are accurate, that is worrying. The curriculum for excellence was never a money-saving option. Although it has been introduced in a financial climate that was not predicted, there must be proper investment in teachers. The new curriculum presents teachers with new challenges in teaching and assessment, and teachers need time and support if they are to deliver the curriculum effectively. Everything that I have talked about is happening against the backdrop of the upcoming budget. There are already tensions as schools begin to struggle with budget cuts. In Fife, the SNP-led council sacked all the playground supervisors and passed responsibility for playground supervision to  headteachers. At the same time, cuts were made to devolved school budgets. Headteachers have been left in an impossible situation. In many schools, support staff are supervising in the playground, so the time that they can spend in the classroom is reduced—by up to 10 hours a week in some schools. There is a lack of coherent thinking in education. Cuts are being made because they save money on the balance sheet, but little time is taken to consider the negative consequences of decisions, which might be detrimental to education and the introduction of the curriculum for excellence. It is good that we acknowledge the progress that has been made, but the debate cannot take place in a bubble. Next week we will know the scale of cuts that are being made to education and the new environment in which the curriculum for excellence must be delivered. I do not doubt the professionalism and commitment of teachers to making the new curriculum work, but there must be a parallel commitment in the budget.

This Parliament is in agreement that underage drinking and the damage that it causes to communities need to be tackled effectively. However, allowing individual licensing boards the discretion to increase the purchase age of alcohol to 21 will not achieve that objective. Richard Simpson's amendment 46 would ensure that the age at which young people across Scotland can buy alcohol remains 18. The Scottish Government wants to tackle underage drinking by creating an additional group of drinkers that it classes as underage drinkers when buying in an off-licence but not when buying in a pub. That is clearly wrong-headed. Increasing the age to 21 for off-sales will not solve the prevalent problems of enforcement or the number of very young people who access alcohol. The most challenging statistics that we have to deal with are that 52 per cent of 13-year-olds and 82 per cent of 15-year-olds have consumed alcohol. We need to enforce the current tough measures to crack down on off-licences that sell alcohol to children. We also need to make it clear that proxy purchasing will not be tolerated. At the age of 18, a person is considered to be responsible enough for many things including voting, raising a family or even drinking alcohol in a pub. It is therefore ridiculous to tell an 18-year-old that they can have a drink in a pub but not buy  a bottle of the same drink at the off-licence down the road. I know well the problems that underage drinking and antisocial behaviour cause, but I am not convinced that the measure would address those problems. Scotland is a small place. It would not be difficult for over-18s to buy alcohol, even with the measure. The policy is unworkable. The Scottish Government has pointed to pilot projects such as the Armadale pilot, but research on the pilot showed that the police received five calls about youth disorder in the week before the trial and four during it. The Royal Statistical Society branded the statistics as "insignificant" and "disappointing". We cannot make legislation that will affect so many young people on the basis of such questionable figures. Underage drinking and youth disorder require a sensible approach that gets to the root of the problem and does not needlessly penalise scores of Scotland's young people. The views that I have expressed are shared by organisations including NUS Scotland. I recognise the contribution that it and others such as Young Scot have made to the debate. I oppose amendment 7, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, and support amendment 46, in the name of Richard Simpson.

I am pleased to speak in this debate on the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill. As a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, I know that we have no shortage of legislation at the moment, as those of us who were in committee last night will confirm. This afternoon, we are showing the full range of our committee's responsibilities, and I am pleased to contribute to the debate. Although the bill is largely technical—it amends three acts and introduces some new provisions—its aim is to improve the way in which the historic environment is managed by the regulatory and planning authorities in a way that is both sustainable and secures the historic environment for the enjoyment and benefit of future generations. Much of the dry description of what the bill does makes it sound fairly uninspiring, but what does our historic environment offer us? For children, it provides a springboard for the imagination and an insight into a world that is dramatically different from the one that they live in. The increasing engagement work that agencies such as Historic Scotland undertake helps to bring that to life for a modern audience.  The historical environment provides us all with an understanding of how Scotland emerged and how Scottish society took shape and left its mark on our landscape. In my own region of Fife, 280 sites and monuments have been designated as being of national importance and are protected under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979. The sites cover all aspects of human occupation of Fife over the past 10,000 years, ranging from Mesolithic hunter-gatherer camps, dated to 7,500 BC, to the Royal Observer Corps bunkers of the cold war. Many of the remains are a fragile and non-renewable resource, and we must all work together to preserve and enhance them. Fife Council archaeological unit offers information and advice on Fife's sites and monuments to assist in achieving that goal. Fife also maintains a register—the Fife sites and monuments record—of all known archaeological and historical sites in the region, with the details of approximately 10,000 archaeological sites in the database. The debate gives us a chance to acknowledge the work of those who provide the guardianship of historic buildings, sites and monuments, preserving them as records of Scotland's history. That historic environment, which is regionally and nationally significant, adds to our rich culture and tells the story of Scotland and its people to visitors and historians. However, the bill also recognises and attempts to accommodate—and at times encourage—development and change where it is appropriate. Continuing development is essential, but the greatest care must be taken to ensure that our heritage is preserved and protected. The preservation and study of Scotland's historic environment is important to our understanding of our predecessors and will be our legacy to future generations. The three existing pieces of legislation, aided by the addition of this bill, must create a framework whereby decisions are transparent, justified and fair, and achieve the right balance between development and conservation, though those two are not always incompatible. I will highlight a couple of provisions in the bill. The bill introduces a new power to allow Scottish ministers to issue a certificate of immunity from listing, which will guarantee that a building will not be listed during the following five years. As others have observed, the proposal promoted an interesting discussion at committee and it is a good example of an attempt to try to get the balance right for all interested parties. The driver for the introduction of certificates of immunity is the need to give certainty to developers or owners who are preparing  proposals for a building or group of buildings. Of course, the outcome of the application for a certificate might be a decision to list, which would also provide certainty for the developer, albeit that it would not be the outcome that they had hoped for. Some witnesses argued for a restriction on who could apply for a certificate, suggesting that only owners or occupiers of land or buildings should be able to do so. Other people argued that the approach should be consistent with the approach to applications to list, and that anyone should be able to apply for a certificate of immunity. The committee thought that limiting who could apply could exclude potential buyers who were looking for certainty. We were persuaded by the parallel with people who can apply to list. However, as the minister knows, we received representations from the Law Society of Scotland and the Scottish Property Federation, who continued to question the need for such consistency of approach. They argued that applying to list and applying for a certificate of immunity were significantly different, so the right to apply for the latter should be restricted. Those bodies also expressed concern that there is no time limit for ministerial issue of a certificate of immunity. I pursued the matter in the committee, and although there is no timescale, the minister gave a commitment to issue guidance on the application process, to try to address such concerns. We were told that it typically takes four to six months to list a building, and that there is no obligation on anyone to pursue a certificate of immunity. I welcome what the minister said about those issues during her opening speech. When she sums up, will she say whether further discussions are planned with the people who remain to be convinced? As the minister said, the Built Environment Forum Scotland argued for a strengthened legislative context and expressed concern about the current and future capacity of local authorities, in particular, to deliver good outcomes for the historic environment. The forum's concerns are reflected in annex C of the committee's report, which includes letters that the Finance Committee received. When local authorities were asked to comment on the bill, they said that the discretionary nature of the responsibilities made it difficult to provide an accurate figure. One authority welcomed the flexibility that the additional powers in the bill will provide, but said that it would have to consider carefully "on a case-by-case basis" whether to use the powers. The minister might want to comment further on the challenge for local authorities of meeting their responsibilities to the historic environment in a tightening economic environment.  I encourage members to support the conclusions of the stage 1 report and I look forward to stage 2.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it can guarantee the completion of its announced school building programme on time and on budget. (S3O-11817)

I thank the minister for that brief answer. He will be aware that Auchmuty high school in Glenrothes is to receive £18.7 million from the Scottish Futures Trust towards a new build, construction of which is due to begin in 2012-13. Can he guarantee that Fife Council is in a position to meet its portion of the funding  agreement, given the likelihood that local authorities will receive only a one-year budget with no guarantees beyond that? Indeed, does he share my concern that a one-year local authority budget will be very damaging to the school building programme?

I am pleased to take part in this debate. We are now in a very different world to that which we lived in when the skills strategy was first published in  2007. As the Liberal amendment reminds us, at that time, there were concerns that the strategy would not measure up to the task. We have welcomed the efforts to refresh and refocus the strategy. The economic challenges that Scotland now faces, and which it will face over the coming years, are greater than in 2007. If the skills strategy is to deliver everything that we need it to deliver, increased focus, greater effort and sustained investment will be demanded of it. From reading the refreshed strategy, it is clear that we have a lot to do. There are advantages to offering a wide range of services and providers, but it can also lead to confusion, particularly for employers and employees, those returning to the workplace and those leaving formal education. I very much agree that the principles of flexibility, responsiveness and partnership working that the Government has outlined are key to making the strategy work, but I have concerns that those principles are not being met as they could be. We still have some way to go before we have a coherent, simplified and unified approach to qualifications in particular, and to engagement with the learner and provider. The refreshed strategy presents a complicated landscape. I welcome the section on simplifying the skills system, but I would like that to become a central focus for Skills Development Scotland. Unfortunately, there has been slow progress in addressing that, the reasons for which need to be identified. If there are barriers to greater partnership working, they must be addressed. The aims of improving accessibility and providing better information, advice and guidance are all crucial to making the skills agenda real and achievable for the learner.

The minister mentions one example where he believes that there could be simplification; my concern is the plethora of different providers and agencies. We need to take a much more strategic look at how we can improve the overall system. Although the strategy is welcome, I found it hugely frustrating, and at times impenetrable. There is a menu of skills providers. If we had started with a clean slate, I am sure that provision would not look like it does at present. Everything has developed at different rates, responded to  different needs and got different levels of funding. The recognition that lifelong learning is integral to modern industry is fairly recent. Surely it cannot be beyond the wit of partners to simplify and streamline the service. Doing so would ultimately be of benefit to the learner. Providers cannot be protectionist; they must work together better if we are to be successful. Our skills base in Scotland has improved. The trade unions have been at the forefront of pushing the agenda. They know that skills development promotes employment and growth and that we continue to have significant gaps in the workforce that cost us contracts and development. In its report "Towards Ambition 2020: skills, jobs, growth for Scotland", the UK Commission for Employment and Skills said: "By global standards, Scotland has too large a group of low skilled and unskilled people, alongside a relatively strong proportion of people with high level skills, with a very narrow 'waist' of Intermediate Skills"— the skills that are vital if we are to attract and retain new sectors and investment. The college sector plays a critical role in closing that gap, but are we really making best use of opportunities? For many learners, there is no seamless path from the workplace to further education or higher education. There also needs to be greater commitment to articulation paths. There are some good examples, but there is also too much resistance to the recognition of some qualifications. I know that there is a strong need to protect excellence, but there is also a need to recognise that excellence resides not just in one place or institution. There must also be greater coherence around some of the key growth sectors and upcoming economic opportunities. There are some good examples of that. In Fife, we have recently seen the opening of Adam Smith College's new future skills centre in Glenrothes, which will focus on engineering, construction, renewables and science. I am pleased that that ambitious and forward-thinking centre has been recognised by members throughout the chamber. A new Forth crossing is also being planned, and we want to ensure that Fife and Scotland are able to take full advantage of the opportunities and start planning. The reality, however, is that we must deliver now for those upcoming opportunities. We all continue to make the case for  the aircraft carriers at Rosyth. Rosyth provides a good example of how highly skilled people can work together with employers to secure contracts and present an unrivalled workforce. That has been achieved through trade unions, employers, colleges, training providers and Government all working together to ensure that those people have  the right set of skills in the right place at the right time. We need to be clear that the additional investment in modern apprenticeships and training places is targeted and strategic. I have welcomed the additional places that have been provided for colleges over the past few years, which have tried to meet the increasing demand and offer opportunities for those who face unemployment. However, that investment has often been delivered on fairly short timescales. It would be good to have some evaluation of that funding; it cannot just be about addressing a short-term problem. Those places must deliver for the future demands of our economy. Like Margaret Smith, I make a more general plea for effective evaluation and measuring of targets. The refreshed strategy certainly says a lot, but it contains only two paragraphs on monitoring and evaluation. As it says, "There is a collective responsibility for implementing this strategy", but we need to be confident about demonstrating that it is delivering. We face difficult financial times, and we all agree on the importance of skills. The challenge in the coming months and years will be to secure all partners to the commitment that, although the skills agenda is not necessarily the cheap option, it is the right one and the smart one.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

The member talks about a progressive taxation system. Does she support Vince Cable's proposals for a graduate tax?

I am interested in the member's view on the position of NUS Scotland, which is debating what a true graduate contribution would look like as a means of increasing student support. He has expressed concerns about student hardship. Does he agree with the NUS that discussing a graduate contribution is a way of resolving the present situation?

I am pleased to open the debate for Labour and thank the Conservatives for providing us with the opportunity to debate this important and pressing issue. Since I was elected to the Scottish Parliament, and during all my time as spokesperson on further and higher education for the Labour Party, the funding of the university sector has been a key concern. Over the past three years, there have been continuing calls for the Scottish Government to take measures to secure a stable, long-term funding solution for the university sector that meets the challenges that we face in Scotland. As the Conservative motion acknowledges, there is an increasing recognition that the way in which we fund universities is no longer sustainable. Even the cabinet secretary admitted that. However, it is a situation that the Scottish Government has allowed to develop through its policy decisions and it must take responsibility for allowing the uncertainty in the sector to build. Although the Scottish Government is now calling for a debate, it is the body that has stood in the way of the debate and, as the debate moves on, it is in danger of being the body that is left behind. Since the 2007 comprehensive spending review and the removal of the graduate endowment, there have been persistent calls for an examination of university funding, reflecting fears that the SNP Government is offering no direction or leadership on the issue. The Government's initial move to address those concerns, the joint future thinking task force, completely failed in its objective of providing answers on the long-term sustainability of the sector. Criticised for being exclusive in its membership, its focus was far too narrow to provide any lasting answers, and it was excluded from discussing the one area that everyone wanted to talk about—funding. Every Holyrood conference, every parliamentary debate on universities, every HE evidence session at the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture  Committee and every newspaper's comment piece has asked how we can properly resource our universities in the future, how we can ensure that our university sector remains competitive and world leading and how we can properly support students so that they can focus on their studies. Those questions have been consistently posed over the past few years; yet, disappointingly, the Government has been short on answers. Now, at the tail-end of a Government that has run out of ideas, we have the promise of a green paper; however, I fear that the SNP's green paper may be too little too late. We are being asked to put all our faith into a so-called green paper that is being compiled from conversations that the cabinet secretary will not reveal, the content of which is unclear, and a set of options that have the very real prospect of never being pursued by the Government, as it is running out of time. The Government's lack of action is letting down students in the sector. The SNP talks up its achievements, but student hardship continues to be the pressing concern of Scottish students. Sure, we have seen a slight increase in support levels for many students this year, but that has always been a sticking-plaster solution. NUS Scotland's report "Still in the Red", which was published in the summer, warned that student hardship has reached crisis proportions, with 80 per cent of higher education students stating that they were more concerned about having enough money to live on than about reducing their student loan debt. Fifty per cent of students had been forced to access commercial credit to get by, and 36 per cent had considered dropping out because of financial worries. We should not allow that level of poverty to continue for the poorest students; we must meet their need by finding ways to give them more pounds in their pockets while they are studying. It is clear that the sector will enter a more challenging period. In the past few weeks, the principal of the University of Glasgow has warned that it will run out of money by 2013, but there has been little response from the Government to that concern. According to the NUS, there is a real-terms cut in university budgets this year, and universities anticipate a 3.2 per cent cut each year from next year. That is all coming at a time when we are seeing a record number of applications and gifted students being denied places. The Browne review is due to report next month, and that will be followed by the UK Government's spending review. Those will present further challenges for the Scottish sector, but such a divergence in policy is a reality of devolution that the Scottish Government must deal with. We cannot predict the outcome and, although we will soon have the Browne report, we do not know when the UK Government will provide a response.  One thing that is certain is that it will require a re-evaluation of the Scottish Government's approach. Labour has consistently called for an independent review, and I believe that that is needed now more than ever. At the centre of any review must be the outcomes that we want: properly resourced universities that are able to deliver high-quality teaching and compete internationally; universities that undertake world-class research that is successfully translated into business opportunities; a student support system that is fair, funded and affordable; and a sector in which access is widened and retention improved.

I very much respect the Conservatives' proposal and the ideas that they are putting forward. Nevertheless, they must recognise the fact that there is no consensus on their proposal in the sector. An independent review that considers the range of issues, recognises that there is no consensus and takes the matter out of the hands of politicians and gives it to the sector has more chance of producing a long-term, lasting solution. Labour has consistently called for an independent review. Although we acknowledge that there is debate in the sector over graduate contributions, this is the wrong place to start the discussion. We must be clear about what we want to achieve and then ask how we can fairly fund it.

These are complex issues that we believe an independent review should examine in detail. They are issues that the UK Government—including the Liberals, who are now in partnership in the UK Government—must deal with at a different level. Of course, we must prioritise the funding of the sector and find a financial solution, but unless we re-examine the structure of the tertiary sector and how that can best meet the needs of the students, focus on a curriculum that delivers for the learner, strengthen the links between further and higher education and offer flexible education to best meet the needs of the learner, we will be missing an opportunity. We very much recognise the need for early action in the area and, along with other parties in the chamber, we have been calling on the Government for action. Nonetheless, we also  recognise the need for expediency in undertaking a review. There are more questions to be asked of the sector than how it is funded.

I am sorry, but I need to make progress. There is much of which we can be proud in the Scottish university sector. We have excellent examples of innovative universities, exceptional strength in key sectors that lead the world in their field and research assessment exercise ratings that reflect the fact that our universities consistently punch above their weight. However, there are other areas in which the Government must show greater leadership. Scotland's drop-out rates remain persistently high. It is even more concerning that the problem is concentrated in particular universities, which have an inverse relationship with Scotland's widening access figures.

Yes.

I am pushed for time, but Margo MacDonald raises an important issue. We need to look at the complex reasons for the drop-out rate. A combination of issues is involved, including hardship and how we support students from non-traditional backgrounds once they get into university to ensure that they are successful in their courses. In Scotland, people from a non-traditional background have less chance of getting a university place than such people anywhere else in the UK. As a Parliament, we should challenge that and take bold decisions to address that educational inequality. Mike Russell likes to talk about creating consensus. The only real consensus is that the SNP has got things wrong. It has had three years' worth of chances to secure the sector's financial future, and it has failed. It is only right to take politics out of the equation. It is time to formalise the debate through the appropriate process, which is an independent review.  I move amendment S3M-7109.3, to leave out from "welcomes" to first "education" and insert: "acknowledges the growing consensus among key groups within and outwith the university sector that recognises the need to examine the various graduate contribution options; calls for an urgent and independent review of institutional funding and student support".

To ask the Scottish Executive what actions it has taken to improve the A92. (S3O-11403)

The minister may be aware of the increase in serious accidents on the A92 over the summer. He has previously received representation on the A92 from members and the Glenrothes area futures group but, in light of increasing concerns about the safety and suitability of the A92, will he agree to meet me and other interested parties to discuss a way forward?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to promote music in Fife. (S3O-11352)

Will the minister join me in recognising the launch of Scottish Power's second powerful performance competition, which encourages young people to celebrate their traditional musical heritage and gives them the opportunity to perform at the Celtic Connections festival? Does she share my concern that the 25 per cent cut that has been made to music tuition in Fife schools, and the uncertainty that remains over the proposal for a further 25 per cent cut, will deeply damage the ability of young people, particularly those from poorer backgrounds, to develop their talent and to take part in exciting opportunities such as that competition?

Can the minister assure Parliament that any additional resources, such as the all-age modern apprenticeships, will be directed to where they will have the greatest impact and meet industry needs? For example, although the new Forth crossing will be a major job-creating project, Fife colleges have told me that they are finding it very difficult to provide the number of apprenticeships in areas such as welding. Will today's action plan deliver to young people skills that are matched to industry needs, including those of major projects, and will the minister take steps to address the issues that Fife colleges have raised?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure pupil safety in schools. (S3O-10947)

Is the cabinet secretary aware that about 140 playground supervisors in Fife are to lose their jobs, which will compromise the safety of pupils in schools such as Methilhill primary and community school, where the playground is also a public right of way? What action will he take to address parents' concerns about pupil safety in the playground because of Fife Council's decision?

The Parliament has held the SNP to account many times. The gap between what the SNP manifesto promised Scottish parents, children and young people and what has been delivered is significant.  The SNP's promises were easily made, but they are proving extremely difficult to deliver because of the Government's failure to protect and prioritise education. The SNP Government has tried to move the goalposts for many pledges, but the fact remains that delivery has fallen far short of what was promised. Class sizes of 18 for primaries 1 to 3 were promised. The Government might find it hard to accept, but parents thought that that would be delivered. Now we have an extremely watered-down policy that relies more on falling school rolls than on any positive action to reduce class sizes. The SNP made commitments to deliver free school meals, to provide access to qualified nursery teachers and to deliver two hours of quality PE a week by a qualified teacher—all policies that, if they are being delivered at all, are being delivered inconsistently throughout the country and with no guarantees that they are reaching the children who need them most. The Government gave a clear commitment to maintain teacher numbers—that was central to its plan to deliver smaller classes. The Government has rolled out the excuses for not maintaining numbers, but that was its commitment. The failure to deliver has meant that teachers are unemployed and that public investment has been wasted on student teachers who cannot obtain jobs. That is a waste of enthusiastic and well-informed graduates. Promises were made on school buildings. The SNP inherited a programme of new build and refurbishment that has stalled. The previous Labour-Liberal Executive created momentum in the school building programme that has been lost. Cuts are now being made to education budgets throughout the country at a time when the sector faces new challenges and needs to be resourced properly. That is the context for the curriculum for excellence. No one in the chamber relishes having to return to the debate on the continuing concerns about the roll-out of the curriculum for excellence. In August, pupils will start secondary school who expect a fundamental shift in their learning experience. They and their parents deserve to have confidence in the changes that will happen. We all have a stake in the curriculum for excellence. It has had a lengthy passage through Parliament yet, weeks from its introduction, an unacceptable level of uncertainty and unease about its implementation continues. When Michael Russell took over as Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, we were told that the curriculum for excellence had been taken in hand. At Easter, we were assured that the timetable was realistic and could be delivered. It is  unfortunate that that confidence is not shared throughout the sector. It is understandable that parents are cautious about significant educational change, particularly when it involves a change to examinations. It is unacceptable that, as their children are about to begin secondary school, parents remain uncertain about the exams that their children will sit and the curriculum for those exams. Parents are not sufficiently reassured that every school has a clear exam route to higher education. Uncertainty remains about the expectations of higher education under the new curriculum. Although entrance to university will continue to centre around highers and fifth and sixth-year qualifications, the national qualifications will be the doorway. Concerns among teachers and parents about examinations and preparedness cannot continue into the new school year. There remains uncertainty about preparedness, concern about course content and tensions over workloads. Caution continues about subject readiness. It might be easier for some subjects to adapt to a multidisciplinary approach to teaching, but in subjects such as science, a lack of confidence remains. The reliance on supply teachers raises concerns about teaching consistency and classroom commitment to the new curriculum. We need to raise the status of teacher education and provide proper resourcing of continuing professional development in the future. Cuts to school budgets are having an impact not just on some subjects but on devolved school budgets—the pots of money that can deliver flexibility and innovation in schools and support the holistic learning that comes with the curriculum for excellence. I am concerned about the limitations that are being placed on school buildings that the Scottish Government will partly fund. The Government's provision of only partial resources on a like-for-like basis lacks the ambition that is needed to create modern and contemporary buildings that can deliver the new curriculum. If the new curriculum is to be delivered imaginatively and creatively, colleges and universities should be engaged, as they can provide opportunities for pupil education as well as teacher education. It is a curriculum for three to 18-year-olds, and more can be done to engage adult learning institutions in delivery and supporting delivery. The Scottish Government urgently needs to improve the context in which the curriculum for excellence will be introduced. The announcements from the EIS conference at the weekend are concerning. The EIS has been supportive of the  curriculum for excellence, but it is now calling for a delay in the exams and has voted to pursue a work-to-rule policy, which is extremely worrying. The Government must urgently address its concerns about implementation. The continuing worry around resourcing must be addressed. Teachers are struggling with current funding settlements; rightly, they are also worried about the future. The Government must show commitment to Scottish education and the introduction of the curriculum for excellence. If we are to have confidence in the changes, it must reach an agreement with local authorities to protect education funding and staffing levels.

I am pleased to take part in the stage 1 debate on the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill. The committee is grateful for the engagement of all stakeholders in the consideration process, and I extend my thanks to Professor Kenneth Norrie for his advice and support on the bill. Along with the changes that it seeks to introduce, the bill has given the committee and the Parliament an opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to the principles on which the children's hearings system is founded; namely, that it is rooted in the welfare principle and the consideration of needs alongside deeds, and that it is firmly fixed in its local community, with volunteers and the work that they do being at the heart of its success. However, we have perhaps not had the opportunity to reflect on the effectiveness of the children's hearings system. Everyone supports it, but the bill could have given us a greater opportunity to better understand what makes decisions successful. The bill is more about how decisions are made than it is about why they are made.  It is sobering to note the changes that have been made over the lifetime of the system. As others have outlined, there has been a significant shift towards the vast majority of referrals being made on non-offence grounds. In 1972, just over 3,000 cases were referred on non-offence grounds, but by 2009 that number had risen to just over 39,000. We live in very different times. There is no doubt that too many children and their families now face drug and alcohol dependency problems but, as Nigel Don argued, that might indicate that the system is working and that we are more alert to the needs of children and young people. Our understanding that it is the responsibility of us all to care for children and young people and our understanding of their place in families have certainly changed over the past 40 years. That might be too positive a reading of the figures, but it is difficult to tell whether the actions of children and young people have changed or whether it is our understanding of their actions that has changed. If it is our understanding that has changed, the children's hearings system has had a valuable role to play in that. Our convener provided a good overview of the issues of which the committee believes that further consideration by the Government is needed, and I look forward to a productive—if lengthy—stage 2. There are a number of issues that I would like to focus on; I acknowledge that they have been raised by other members, but I think that that shows that committee members have common concerns. The committee discussed the mechanism of a feedback loop and how it will operate. It is clear that panel members can sometimes become frustrated by the way in which decisions are implemented, or by the fact that, frankly, they are not implemented. The Government intends that the feedback loop will broaden and deepen panel members' knowledge and understanding of the implications of how hearing decisions are implemented, but it will focus on general rather than specific information on the implementation of compulsory supervision orders, which will be requested from local authorities by the national convener. Although such data collection is important, and we appreciate that it is intended to provide a better understanding of how effectively decisions are implemented, it will provide a snapshot of decisions at national level that might have limited relevance to local panels. Ken Macintosh's analysis of that was a helpful contribution to the debate. Panel members want to be better informed about the outcomes of their decisions and the impact that they have had on the child or young person. In light of that, the committee feels  that an opportunity might have been missed and that, as the convener outlined, more could be gained from a feedback loop if the information were to be collated and circulated at local level. We would welcome the minister's consideration of a localised feedback loop. There was also a wide-ranging discussion about the enforcement process against the local authority. The current enforcement process is rarely used to its full extent and the system relies more on effective communication and engagement of all partners when it is trying to resolve non-implementation issues. The enforcement process requires a delicate balance, but it is important to retain the lever of application to the sheriff court, although it is very rarely, if ever, used. We recognise that the implementation of hearing decisions does not just reside with the local authority but includes a number of different agencies including health boards, as Christina McKelvie highlighted. Any move towards extending the enforcement process must be treated with caution, and it must be clear who is ultimately responsible for the child or young person. The committee welcomes the minister's openness to amendments that would encourage multi-agency working and recognise the role of other agencies in delivering decisions. Finally, significant concerns were raised that the proposal to narrow the definition of "relevant person" could result in the exclusion of a person who is important to a child's life who falls within the current definition. That could include guardians, adoptive parents, foster parents, grandparents who look after children, and some parents, mainly unmarried fathers, whose only responsibility and right is that of contact. Although the bill includes a mechanism for such a person to be recognised as a relevant person, the process is cumbersome, potentially lengthy and might lack consistency in its application. An argument was also made for a mechanism to allow for review of relevant person status in recognition of how a child's life and the significant people in it can change, and of the fact that those who are involved in making decisions about that life should be able to reflect on that. The evidence suggests that there is support for the retention and some updating of the current definition of a relevant person. Although it was accepted that the minister made proposals to address the grey areas in the definition, there was sufficient concern about the proposals to convince the committee that this attempt to achieve clarity might make a complex matter even more complex. The stage 1 report explores that in some detail, and I look forward to hearing the minister's reflections during stage 2.  The bill is complex, but that reflects a complex system that has many parts that must work in harmony so that it does not seem to be overly complicated and impenetrable to children, young people and their families and carers. We all want to ensure that the bill goes some way towards future-proofing the children's hearings system so that that unique system can continue to serve Scotland's children, young people and communities.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Achieving a secure, sustainable, long-term funding settlement for Scottish universities is an issue that has been lacking direction from the Scottish Government for the past few years. The Government has so far refused to address the challenges and failed to provide a serious response to the pressures that universities face. The Government motion on the Browne review is a distraction from the real issues that face Scottish universities. Michael Russell is known as a man who has been prepared to grasp the thistle, and he has been in post for long enough now to know that university funding is a particularly prickly one. The Government motion focuses on decisions that are to be made by the UK Parliament, and regrettably the Liberal amendment does the same. Although that appears to be an attempt to influence the decision in England and Wales, it ignores the political reality of the UK Government. It is for the UK Government to make the decision on where to go following the Browne review—a Government that is dominated by Conservative members who were honest enough not to sign the pledge and supported by the Liberals who, although they signed the pledge and even went as far as bringing forward a plan to scrap fees in their  UK manifesto, have now put aside their principles for power. Although we all recognise that any changes to the fees system in England and Wales may lead to a funding gap for Scottish universities, such a divergence in policy is a reality of devolution that the Scottish Government must deal with. It is true that academics and their research will go where they can access the best departments and work with the best people, but it is a mistake to think that that will happen only within the UK. Departments do not compete only with others in Cambridge or Manchester, but with departments in Boston and Tokyo. We should not narrow the debate to focus only on the impact of decisions that the UK Government has yet to make. It is not good enough to say that if the cap comes off in England and Wales, Scottish universities will have a problem, or that if that could only be avoided, the Scottish university sector could carry on as before. It is not accurate to suggest—as both the Government motion and the Liberal amendment do—that if only the fees remained the same in England and Wales, Scottish universities would not face severe financial challenges. We should look at the Scottish National Party's record. In 2007, the comprehensive spending review short-changed Scottish universities, delivering an amount that was far short of what they had argued for in order to remain competitive and play their part in growing the Scottish economy. The Scottish Government's response to the sector's concerns was to establish the joint future thinking task force. That body was criticised for being too exclusive and too narrow in its focus and for not involving students and trade unions, and it was exempt from discussing resources, which was the very issue that had prompted its creation. During the past few years we have seen real-terms cuts in university funding and increasing pressure on the sector. Scottish students continue to face financial hardship, which impacts on their ability to finish their studies. Redundancies are being announced and there is tremendous pressure on places, with the prospect of talented people being denied the opportunity of a university education. Although we can identify the Scottish Government decisions that have led to those problems, the Government's real failure has been its reluctance to engage meaningfully in addressing those and future challenges. As we face a future of real economic challenges and a tightening of public spending, the SNP can no longer continue to put its head in the sand.

The very real concerns about the sector, which Michael Russell has identified, are why Labour is calling for an independent review. Those are serious problems that need to be addressed. We agree with the cabinet secretary that the issue should be taken forward on the basis of consensus, but we think that a review would be the best way to achieve that. On student fees, Labour in Scotland is clear about its record. In the Scottish Parliament, Labour, in coalition with the Liberals, abolished up-front tuition fees, and the political consensus on that exists to this day. Different decisions were made by the United Kingdom Government, but that is devolution. Following the Cubie review, Labour introduced a graduate endowment alongside the young person's bursary. That supported the principle that graduates should make a contribution when they are working to help to ensure that others, especially those from low-income backgrounds, are given the opportunities from which graduates have benefited. Following the scrapping of the graduate endowment, it became clear that the SNP was not prepared properly to plan for the future financial sustainability of the sector, in respect of both universities and students. Since the SNP came into government, there has been a reluctance to tackle the long-term challenges of future university funding in a way that would maintain Scotland's competitiveness; sustain the level of research excellence that we have been proud of and which is so important to our economy; produce the graduates that are needed to grow the Scottish economy; and continue to extend opportunities to more students while ensuring that students are properly supported and receive a high quality of teaching. We believe that an independent review is the right way forward because we are serious about finding a long-lasting solution to the difficult challenges that the sector faces. An independent review is not about the great and the good getting together but about being transparent and fair. By involving people in the sector and beyond in the debate, a review would take forward policy based on reason and insight. Crucially, it would build consensus. Given the comments that have been made by Professor Bernard King of Universities Scotland, by NUS leader Liam Burns and by Sir Andrew Cubie, it is clear that the sector wants that debate. I agree with the cabinet secretary that the future of  university funding should be about building a consensus. We all need to agree on the continuing, if not growing, importance of the sector, which needs a clear financial route for the future. Although I welcome the whispers that are coming from the cabinet secretary's office that the current financial situation is not sustainable and that new solutions must be found, I question whether he is going about that in the best way. So far, the Government-led attempt to address university funding challenges through the joint future thinking task force has failed to tackle the big issues but has tiptoed around the debate. Similarly, the Scottish Government tried to control the consultation on "Supporting a Smarter Scotland: A consultation on supporting learners in higher education" by presenting three options, which were then widely rejected. The track record of such Government-led debate is not good. However, the Government appears to be floating other solutions. It claims to have lots of ideas on university funding but refuses to detail any of them. There is no need for the cabinet secretary to be so shy. He might find that others are willing to take part in the debate. From answers to parliamentary questions, it appears that the cabinet secretary is having a wide-ranging discussion that does not exclude the option of a graduate contribution. I think that the Parliament would appreciate some clarity and transparency on the Government's direction of travel. What is the scope of those considerations and discussions?

I have already answered that question. We recognise that the sector is facing serious challenges to which there are no easy solutions. There will be difficult decisions for whoever is in government. However, the best way to achieve a long-term funding solution for the sector is to have an independent review that looks at university funding along with student support. I imagine that, as the afternoon wears on, members will rehearse some old arguments, but we have already had those debates in Scotland. We abolished up-front tuition fees, and there is a political consensus to keep matters that way. We must now turn our attention to solutions that will provide universities with a secure, long-term financial future that allows them to flourish and which provides a fairer funding model that ensures  that students are properly supported while they study. I move amendment S3M-6472.1, to leave out from "commends" to end and insert: "supports the continuing political consensus against the introduction of upfront tuition fees in Scotland; recognises the funding challenge facing Scottish universities if they are to remain internationally competitive, continue to achieve research excellence and widen access to higher education, and calls for an independent review of university funding."

I congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing the debate and bringing to the chamber an issue that is important not only in her constituency but throughout Scotland. As the economy recovers from the worst recession in 60 years, we should all agree that efforts must be focused on equipping people with the knowledge, skills and fresh ideas to help to secure economic recovery and develop Scotland's economy. As Jackie Baillie and Willie Coffey said, the EDGE programme is a valuable project that brings together senior school pupils and students from Scottish and international universities to gain important business skills and experience, but it also greatly benefits the small and medium-sized businesses that take part. Since its creation in 2005, EDGE has given 600 students a greater practical knowledge of business, enabling them to generate fresh ideas, to develop small firms and to gain valuable experience to equip them for the global economy. EDGE is based on strong partnership working, and it has been highly praised and independently positively assessed. As Jackie Baillie discussed, Scottish Enterprise found that the programme generated more than £24 million in turnover and 264 jobs, and found £1.1 million-worth of cost savings for the small and medium-sized  enterprises that have been involved. Those would be impressive figures for any Government department, never mind a programme whose annual costs total just £360,000. A criticism that is often levelled at graduates by employees is that, once out of university, they lack the full range of skills that companies need. Universities are increasingly alert to that and we have seen efforts to address the issue and make graduates more relevant to business. They include the University of Aberdeen's curriculum reform and the way in which the University of Abertay Dundee's games department engages positively with the sector. In addition to what universities can do, providing opportunities such as EDGE, with direct support and involvement from Scottish Enterprise among others, gives students valuable experience, which is often difficult to get. EDGE is also valuable in the way that it involves senior school pupils in working alongside university students. The experience provides school pupils with an understanding and appreciation of the value of a university education and gives students life skills and confidence to take into further or higher education. We have seen a significant expansion in the numbers of young people entering further and higher education, but Scotland still has a significant problem retaining some groups of students. By providing young people with greater confidence and certainty about what they can achieve, programmes such as EDGE can play a role in addressing drop-out rates. EDGE has also been shown to encourage some young people to go into business who might never previously have considered that as an option. We often talk about the reluctance and lack of confidence among certain groups of young people. Programmes such as EDGE can go a long way towards raising their aspirations. In future years the Scottish economy will have much to offer, but we need people with the skills, confidence and understanding to develop and grow new businesses. Programmes such as EDGE can also benefit university students who come from non-traditional backgrounds. Such students often find it more difficult to make use of networks and contacts and often find it more difficult to take advantage of unpaid internships or work experience. EDGE provided such students with rewarding experiences that opened up more opportunities to them. In an increasingly competitive work market, a degree that is boosted by practical experience and a proven track record in business can give many students a head start. For all those reasons, I share Jackie Baillie's concerns that the EDGE programme for the coming year has been cancelled and its future  funding has not yet been secured, despite the scheme's benefits being very relevant in the current economic climate. Following the cancellation of the graduates for business scheme—we are still waiting news on what will replace that—the cancellation of EDGE raises further concerns. In those changes, the Scottish Government must ensure that it does not damage our ability to get the dialogue going between young students and businesses, as that dialogue will reap benefits not only for those involved but for Scotland as a whole.

I congratulate Jim Tolson on bringing the debate to Parliament and I welcome the opportunity to highlight the initiative that has been shown by Fife's hard-working police officers—it is often the dedication and enthusiasm of one officer that drives such projects forward—and by their partners in taking forward the bluelight project. We in Fife are proud of our forward-thinking police force, which is committed to finding community-based solutions to the many challenges that communities face. The problem of youth disorder is not new, but Fife police and their partners have recognised the need for new solutions. Fife Constabulary is often at the forefront of progressive policing aimed at tackling underage drinking and antisocial behaviour. It has a track record of taking the lead, having been at the forefront of test purchasing in Scotland. It is also prepared to give new solutions, such as bottle marking, a trial. However, it is making an especially positive contribution with the effort that it is putting into the bluelight initiative, which is having great success. The initiative was imported from Australia and New Zealand, where it has been successful for more than 25 years. Fife officers saw its potential and successfully adapted it for Fife. As Jim Tolson has outlined, in 2004, local police and partners began a six-month pilot, with the first bluelight disco in Dunfermline. Since then, more than 30,000 young people have attended a range of bluelight events throughout Fife. The events are targeted at high-school pupils, and tickets, which are sold in advance, include the cost of safe travel to the event. Too many communities in Fife struggle with varying levels of youth disorder, particularly at the weekends. Bluelight has been successful because it provides young people with what they want—an  opportunity to socialise, relax in a safe environment and engage in age-appropriate activities—their idea of that and ours are sometimes different. Bluelight goes a long way in providing the kind of activities that young people are looking for. It encourages independence and good decision making among young people. The growth of the bluelight projects in Fife has allowed an expansion in the services that can be provided. In Levenmouth, the street:live project has grown out of the bluelight initiative and has an excellent reputation. When I was first elected, I was impressed by the commitment that was being shown by Fife police to bluelight and I inquired about the correlation between bluelight events and community safety. The figures are impressive: in some areas, there has been a drop of up to 80 per cent in calls to the police when a bluelight event is on. It is about much more than simply putting on a disco for under-18s. Following the success of bluelight, some commercially run clubs have tried to offer an evening for under-18s, but those tend to finish at about 9 o'clock when, for most young people, the night is still young, and they might go on to get hold of alcohol, get drunk, become involved in antisocial behaviour and create disturbances—and sometimes worse—in their communities. Bluelight discos, however, are much more sophisticated. They go on until 11 pm and young people are encouraged to go home afterwards; entry is controlled and those who have been drinking are unable to get in; and the police will often call on the support of an agency such as the Drug & Alcohol Project Ltd to address the young person's relationship with alcohol. Each event is staffed by police officers, youth workers, health workers and volunteers and opportunities are provided to build relationships with young people. We will all agree that the bluelight project is a good thing and should be properly supported. Unlike in Australia, however, the Scottish project does not have significant sponsorship and there is a high reliance on volunteers. I certainly hope that the minister will consider Fife Constabulary's recommendations. It would be good if this successful project could be developed throughout Scotland and I hope that ACPOS can be encouraged to play a full role in that respect. As we will all agree, this type of cohesive approach to tackling underage drinking and resultant antisocial behaviour should be welcomed and supported. I am very pleased to acknowledge the remarkably positive results in Fife thanks to the dedication of local police officers and their many partners.

I am pleased to support Labour's amendment. It is right that members consider how we can all improve education in Scotland. We have become a fairly familiar team in the chamber on Thursday mornings, although we are joined this morning by  others such as Peter Peacock, who gave an excellent speech and has brought a great deal of knowledge and understanding to the subject. He demonstrated clearly that Labour is engaging in the debate from a position that holds to our belief in an inclusive education system that works to reduce the attainment gap and meets the needs of every pupil. The Conservatives are arguing that this is a debate whose time has come; however, I question whether that is the case. In recent weeks, the Parliament has been concerned with the introduction of the curriculum for excellence and, although concerns are being raised over preparedness and resourcing, we have all been united in recognising its value and its potential to address many of the educational challenges that our young people face. Surely, we must question whether this is the time to unpick the education system, fracturing the delivery of education and potentially destabilising the system. No one believes that the system of delivering education in Scotland is set in stone and that we should not be open to innovation and change, but I question whether this is the time for the Scottish Government to be working on an options paper on models of school organisation when there is so much else in education for the Government to be giving its attention to. Of course, the Scottish Government is happy to pursue an option that is driven by the argument that the system is failing rather than accept that it is the Government's stewardship of education that is failing. The Conservatives' proposal also appears to pre-empt the inquiry of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee into the management of schools—a proposal that was agreed by all parties and that is surely more suitable as an investigation of the issue than a Government options paper that implies that an option must be chosen.

I fully accept that point. If the Government is to pursue an options paper, it must be extremely wide ranging and recognise the value in the current system. However, the concern is that the committee is already committed to a detailed inquiry into the issue. The Conservatives' choice this morning is, no doubt, influenced by the fact that there is a general election around the corner and they are struggling to find a positive alternative. They are not the first to be attracted by a Swedish model, as has been made clear in some of the speeches this morning. In calling for an alternative schools system to be  run in parallel with the current state system, they are returning to familiar arguments for independently run schools that compete for pupils in order to drive up standards. But where is the evidence for such a model? The argument that competition will drive up standards is familiar Tory territory but it has many failures. There is very little evidence to suggest that such a stepping stone to a subsidised free market would tackle inequality. The United Kingdom Conservatives' admission that they would have to place artificially 220,000 pupils from the poorest backgrounds into their academy schools raises more questions than it provides answers. How would those pupils be selected and supported?

They are quite different models. The models down south look for contributions and have a wide-ranging board, whereas the Conservative model is directly funded, privately independent schools.

Yes, it is. In recognising that they would have to create the demand artificially, the Conservatives are admitting that families and parents who have the resources and a high level of engagement with their children's education will be able to negotiate the proposed system more effectively. They claim that their model will not be selective, but if demand for state-funded independent schools grew, would they not be forced into a selective position and draw more state money, leaving struggling schools in poorer areas with less money and investment? John Dunford, the head of the Association of School and College Leaders, has stated: "It will be the disadvantaged who suffer if the school system splits into 20,000 autonomous units". There is also the issue of staffing. An alternative schools system would present challenges for pay scales and terms and conditions, which could run the risk of draining state schools of their most talented staff. In addition, where is the accountability? The Conservatives' proposals would set schools free from any accountability to the Government or the education authorities, leaving the Government with very little responsibility for education. Of course, the Conservatives will argue that parents can vote with their feet if they are unhappy with a school, but where does that leave schools' long-term sustainability and planning? Does such instability  not create problems rather than solve them, and who will pick up the pieces when there is failure? The Swedish example suggests that it will be the municipals. At the heart of the argument is the proposition that if we want standards to rise, teachers to have more control and parents to have more choice, we must break the state monopoly. However, that is an inaccurate interpretation of the reality of schools in Scotland today. The suggestion that improvements can be achieved only by allowing direct state funding of new, independently run, free schools that compete with existing local authority-run schools creates more problems than it solves. All parties agree that we should be open to learning from experience in the rest of the UK and abroad, although I have often heard in the chamber that other countries around the world look to Scotland for a model for delivering education. We must take a critical look at the positives and negatives of other models. Although there is much to learn from the Swedish model, it faces increasing concerns and challenges around attainment levels, which other members have mentioned. Of course, we want to see diversity in the education sector and greater opportunities for young people to make choices that meet their needs and interests. We must properly support school and college liaison, look further at national centres of excellence, such as that at Plockton, and get on with introducing the curriculum for excellence and the new exams framework. There will always be the opportunity for parents to make placing requests and exercise a degree of choice. Nevertheless, I know from my region that schools that previously experienced a high number of placing requests from pupils and parents who chose to pursue alternative schools have seen a drop in the number of parents who are making that choice. More pupils and parents are positively choosing their schools because they have received increased investment and improved facilities, because excellent leadership has been demonstrated by the headteachers and because more involvement of parents has led to raised aspirations. Those factors have changed and are changing schools, and that is where our attention should be focused.

I am pleased to take part in this debate. Although there is nothing to disagree with in the Government's motion, it seems removed from context. It has taken the amendments from the Opposition parties to bring to the debate the pressing issues that Scottish education is facing. I appreciate that it is merely a week since our previous discussion, but, as they say, a week is a long time in politics. In that time, we have seen increasing speculation about a delay in the introduction of the curriculum for excellence, a report on the GTC that has generated its own debate and a lively discussion on class sizes in yesterday's meeting of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee—and yet the Government motion seems to exist outwith those issues. Although the motion recognises the challenges that children and young people face at the beginning of the 21 st century, it does not really offer any solutions or policies about how to equip them to respond to those challenges. The motion "recognises" plenty, but it does not really respond to the challenges, although it does contain an important recognition of the interconnectedness of Scotland's place in the world. Only last night, in Bill Butler's members' business debate on Fairtrade fortnight, we discussed the fair trade ethos, which is built on the co-operative principles of community ownership, democratic membership control, equitable distribution of profits and commitment to building long-term, sustainable trading relationships. Those values safeguard the rights and welfare of workers and consumers alike. If we want to equip young people with the skills and capacities to succeed in the global marketplace, we have to ensure that they have a greater understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of global markets. We are experiencing dramatic economic changes throughout the world. There is increasing debate about the creation of new markets and, increasingly, people recognise that Scotland does not sit alone and that our actions have consequences throughout the world. It is about children and young people not just competing internationally but contributing to change and recognising their global responsibility. That brings us back to the curriculum for excellence, which offers greater opportunities for children to appreciate those complex issues. In many ways, it offers a response to many of the issues raised in the motion. This week, we have  heard calls from the SSTA to delay; we have also heard that the EIS plans to survey teachers and is considering a delay and that the Scottish Parent Teacher Council has emphasised the need for better preparation before implementation. I know that the cabinet secretary is well aware of those concerns. Any decision has to be taken in the best interests of pupils, but it would be unfortunate if there was to be a delay. The cabinet secretary was quite right to say last week that he did not agree to "delay for delay's sake", but he also recognised that secondary education desperately needs to change and that delaying the new curriculum will have a cost in relation to the chances and opportunities for secondary pupils—chances that relate very closely to the Government's motion. It is concerning that we are again talking about a delay. When the previous Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning announced a delay at the end of 2008, it was recognised to be a sensible move—there was broad agreement that more time was needed. However, this is almost a year and a half later and we seem to be in the same situation. Surely in that period the issues identified could have been resolved. There are now legitimate concerns that there has been a lack of leadership, and there are increasing concerns about resources. The cabinet secretary recognises how important the changes are for young people and how important it is that the curriculum meets the challenges outlined in the Government's motion. Although pupils, parents and teachers must be confident and there must be clarity around the exams framework, the cabinet secretary cannot allow the introduction of the curriculum for excellence to drift. He agreed to make a decision in the next few months. There is still time for him to keep this on track. The Labour amendment raises continuing concerns about the skills strategy. The Government motion recognises the demand for a flexible, highly skilled, adaptive workforce. We all know that employment opportunities have changed dramatically in recent decades—not many long-service carriage clocks are handed out these days. We need a workforce that is not frightened of those changes but is supported to embrace them. A responsive skills strategy that fully recognises the current economic climate is essential. I am sure that my colleague Dave Whitton will say more about that later. The Government motion talks about "the international reputation that Scotland enjoys for excellence in education". Of course, we are recognised for an education system that produces good results—excellent  results in many cases. In the university sector, we are world leading in many areas, with forward-looking universities such as the University of Aberdeen pursuing an innovative curriculum that is intended to meet the demands of the modern world. However, we must not be complacent and rest on that reputation. Exam results are improving and the highest pass rates are being achieved in many subjects. There are more graduates and postgraduates. However, the Scottish survey of achievement, which was published the other week, revealed concerning figures on children's reading skills. Only one child in three can write properly by the age of 13. We all agree that there is a need for a literacy action plan, and the findings of the literacy commission gave rise to concern about many areas. Such realities do not sit well with the idea of Scotland's excellent reputation for education. There are two sides to the legacy that the Scottish Government has inherited. Politicians always want to take credit for the good results and blame their predecessors for the poor results, but we are all responsible for working together to ensure that Scotland has an excellent education system that is recognised not just internationally but by parents and pupils and by students and adult learners. I think that the current Government and all members of the Parliament are committed to realising that aspiration, but we sometimes disagree on how to do so. The Parliament must resolve the pressing issues if we are to give people the opportunities that they deserve in the 21 st century.

To ask the Scottish Executive what will be discussed at its next meeting with representatives of NHS Fife. (S3O-9457)

Does the cabinet secretary share my concern that Levenmouth in Fife has a population of almost 40,000, a high density of older people, families with young children and households with no access to a car, and no local pharmacy that is available on a Sunday—a day when there are poor public transport links to Kirkcaldy and Glenrothes? Does she agree that that leaves many in the Levenmouth area vulnerable? Will she support my request for a pilot for increased provision and raise it with NHS Fife?

I am pleased to be taking part in the debate. I welcome the consensus view of the chamber that, if we are to achieve economic recovery, skills must be at the heart of the discussion, for both businesses and individuals. Today, Labour is calling for the early publication of a refreshed skills strategy that acknowledges that we face greater challenges than ever before and that we must ensure that we have a responsive skills strategy that exploits fully the potential of Scotland and its people. This week, we have seen reports that the UK has come out of recession, although we all recognise that the economy is still fragile. We must continue to invest in recovery, an essential part of which is investing in skills. Although unemployment across the UK has fallen, it has risen in some areas of Scotland and, while the unemployment rate in Scotland remains lower than that in the rest of the UK, the situation is concerning. I am sure that the minister appreciates  how important it is for the Scottish Government to do all that it can to support jobs and to help people who lose their job to get back into employment. Earlier this week, Jim Mather raised the important issue of credit to companies and welcomed the UK Government's announcement on the issue. That said, it is clear that the Scottish Government has a job still to do to ensure that the necessary resources are in place to deliver programmes such as training for work and get ready for work, as well as the modern apprenticeship schemes. Like David Whitton, who highlighted the issue at First Minister's question time, I would welcome an assurance from the minister on a replacement for the graduates for business scheme. Graduates often seem to be seen as outside the skills debate, but they need to be as engaged in the lifelong learning agenda as everyone else is. They need to have access to upskilling opportunities. The UK Government has announced a new graduate guarantee under which any graduate who is unemployed after six months will have access to an internship, training or help to become self employed. I am interested in the minister's response on that and to hear the detail of the opportunities that the Scottish Government intends to offer graduates. As Marilyn Livingstone outlined, colleges play a key role in the economic recovery. They have always been at the forefront of the delivery of new skills. They are ready to adopt innovative responses; being close to business, they can readily meet its demands. Ten years ago, the Scottish colleges biotechnology consortium was set up to develop a skilled workforce to support Scotland's emerging biotech sector. That is an example of forward-looking and responsive planning that delivers the skills that emerging businesses and sectors need. Again and again, colleges are seen to be at the forefront of new sectors such as renewables, as well as leading in the delivery of skills in more traditional sectors, such as the innovative engineers of the future programme, with which the minister is familiar. As the minister knows, the First Minister gave a warm response to the point that my colleague raised at First Minister's question time on the increased demand that colleges are experiencing and which is leading to some colleges having to reject potential students. Will the minister ensure that any capacity in colleges includes investment in student support? This week saw the publication of Save the Children's report "Severe Child Poverty in Scotland 2010" in which 95,000 children in Scotland were identified as living in severe poverty. Save the Children stated that the families of those children are £113 a week short of what  they need to cover essentials such as bills, clothes and transport. It said that children in single parent households are three times as likely to live in severe poverty as those who live in two-parent households, and that more than two thirds of all children in severe poverty live in families where no adult works. As part of its response, the Scottish Government has called for increased investment in and reform of the benefits and tax credits system. However, Save the Children made it clear that it is calling on the Scottish Government to do more to be part of the solution. It called on the Government to implement an extension of free child care for low-income parents, give more support to parents who want to take up part-time work or undergo training, and target support at those who live in severe poverty so that they can get help to get back to work. That call is closely tied to the need for a refreshed skills strategy. I think that we all agree on the central importance of skills to the economy. We all want Scotland to compete at the high-skilled and knowledge-driven end of the economy, but we must ensure that we deliver access to those opportunities to everyone and that policies aimed at getting people into employment and reskilling opportunities reach the most difficult to reach in society. The minister may have seen briefings that members have received from Carers Scotland, which highlighted the difficulties that unpaid carers experience in engaging with skills opportunities. It is important that we are mindful of equality issues when revisiting the skills strategy. We must consider how the learning, skills and employability infrastructure can more effectively support unpaid and young carers. We must ensure that, when developing practical initiatives, we recognise that one size does not fit all and that support that people need to develop their skills—more flexible delivery, increased child care or maximised access and support—is made available. Barnardo's has also made a contribution to the debate, raising the concerns of disadvantaged young people. It is crucial that employment and training schemes meet the needs of young people who are furthest away from the labour market. There is a danger that those young people, often from highly disadvantaged backgrounds, will miss out on employment opportunities. They may, therefore, become permanently excluded from the labour market before the age of 25 and develop into a lost generation. Real opportunities are offered by the third sector, the private sector and the public sector working together. As the Barnardo's examples illustrate, those opportunities achieve results in delivering on-going learning and  equipping young people with skills that will lead them into work. I hope that the minister will be mindful of the huge potential of his portfolio to contribute to tackling inequality, meeting the 2010 target on child poverty and getting Scotland back on track to meet the 2020 target of eradicating child poverty. Clearly, that is a greater challenge in an economic downturn, but a refreshed skills strategy that recognises its role in tackling poverty and disadvantage and ensures that opportunities reach out to all communities would be welcome. We are in a different world from that of 2007, when the skills strategy was first published. Even then, there were concerns that it did not measure up to the task, but the economic challenges that we face now demand even greater focus, effort and—dare I say it—resources if the strategy is to deliver what it needs to deliver.

Does the minister agree that, with colleges such as Adam Smith College and Carnegie College receiving less than half the money they said they would need to support new students, there will be increased pressure on discretionary funds? Will he therefore commit to ensuring that discretionary funds, such as those for hardship and child care, do not run dry?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to tackle fuel poverty in Fife. (S3O-9096)

I urge the minister to take immediate action to introduce a boiler scrappage scheme, funded through Barnett consequentials, that would give households some £400 towards an energy-efficient boiler. I know that the minister has said that it is possible to do so, and I ask him to make it happen as soon as possible. Why should people who have high fuel bills and old and inefficient boilers have to wait while the minister, uncharacteristically, dithers?

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Justice last met the chief constable of Fife Constabulary and what was discussed. (S3O-8866)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the large increase in the number of charges for knife crime offences in Fife, particularly in Glenrothes and Levenmouth? Does he agree that, although the increase shows that the police are working hard on the issue, it also points towards an increased presence of knives on our streets? Will he join me in calling for a knife amnesty in Fife?

I am pleased to have secured a debate that will enable all of us to acknowledge the huge role that the Open University plays in Scotland's education system, and I am pleased to welcome to the gallery Peter Syme and Lorraine Hunter of the Open University in Scotland. It is 40 years since the Open University was established. During those years, it has helped more than 2 million people to expand their knowledge and skills and to realise their potential more fully. The Open University is the largest academic institution in the UK by student number, and it qualifies as one of the world's largest universities. We can take some pride in the fact that the UK has created and nurtured a model that has benefited so many people. I am pleased that although we are at the end of the Open University's 40 th year, we have managed to find the time to celebrate the institution's history and, more important, to recognise the significant contribution that it does, and can, make to the modern economy. In 1963, Harold Wilson, as leader of the Opposition Labour Party, sketched out his plan for a "university of the air". We live in a digital age, in which communication and information now flow freely, so we can see how innovative and ambitious Wilson's plan was for the early 1960s. However, that was also a time of new  broadcasting technology, which Wilson believed could be harnessed to meet the education needs of learners. Once in government, Labour moved forward with those ideas. It is often said that if Harold Wilson was the father of the Open University, Jennie Lee was the midwife. She brought determination, and was described as "a politician of steely will, coupled with both tenacity and charm, who was no respecter of protocol and who would refuse to be defeated or frustrated by the scepticism about the university, which persisted not only in the Department of Education and Science (DES), but also in the universities, among MPs and among the community of adult educators." Jennie Lee ensured that the Open University overcame educational reluctance in some quarters and civil service resistance in others, and that it was established with a reputation that has only grown over the years. Once in the House of Lords, Jennie Lee retained a passionate commitment to the OU. She said: "the very essence of the OU is that it should not be for the rich or the poor, for black or white, for men or for women, but it should be judged on its academic standards and be available to all."—[ Official Report, House of Lords , 18 June 1975; Vol 361, c 969] That understanding is at the heart of the OU. As we progress through the 21 st century, the OU has as great a role to play in the modern economy as it had 40 years ago. It remains at the forefront of the widening-access agenda of increasing social mobility and delivering flexible learning around which people can fit their lives and work. Increasingly, the OU plays a key role in articulation paths. More than one in four OU students in Scotland comes from the college sector and builds on his or her higher national qualifications to gain a degree. The Open University signs agreements with colleges. As part of the 40 years celebrations, it signed the Jennie Lee partnership agreement with Adam Smith College in the redeveloped miners' institute in the village of Lochgelly, which was at the heart of Jennie Lee's childhood. When the OU first came into existence, stay-at-home mothers who were looking for a diversion rather than career advancement were among the key groups that were identified as potential students. The world is now a very different place, of course. People use the Open University for many different reasons and have many different expectations and aspirations. It now meets the needs of returning learners, learners who are in employment and are looking to upskill, students who balance other responsibilities with their studies, people who are looking for affordable higher education, and students in more remote and rural areas of Scotland.  The Open University plays an important part in promoting education opportunities and social justice in Scotland. In 2008-09, more than one in four Open University students was on benefits or a very low income and was able to study because he or she received a fee waiver. Since 1989, the OU has been the main provider of university-level study in Scotland's offender institutions. The number of people who use individual learning accounts for Open University courses is 69 per cent higher than it was last year. Last year, 14 per cent of students who joined the university came from 20 per cent of the most deprived areas of Scotland. That rivals the record of many other universities. The idea of the Open University was partly sparked by the new technologies of the 1960s, which influenced its delivery and the range of courses that it offered. In the 21 st century, it fully utilises modern communication methods—for example, it launched the OU YouTube channel last year. That innovation led to a letter being sent to the OU magazine, Sesame , that said: "Bearing in mind that I started studying with the OU 'way back' in 1978 and I have just turned a 'young' 60 years old, I feel behind the times—what are blogs, podcasts and fun areas? Oh, and iPODs!?" Perhaps it is the letter writer's willingness to ask questions and take on new ideas that marks them out as an OU student. We must address a serious point about broadband access throughout the UK. The issue is not just access and connectivity in rural areas in particular; it is also to do with digital participation in deprived communities. Glasgow, for example, has one of the lowest levels of digital participation in the UK. We all need to work together to address the barriers to digital participation. The motion mentions resources. It is important that the Open University's significance and potential are not overlooked in discussions about future resourcing of the college and university sector, and about the support that is provided to students. The OU does not have only a social role. In the UK's latest research assessment exercise, it climbed 23 places to 43 rd and secured a place in the UK's top 50 higher education institutions. Therefore, it is also a major research player. The Open University can make an even more significant contribution to supporting Scotland's skills agenda and promoting education opportunities and social justice. It may be a model that was designed more than 40 years ago and which then looked like a vision of the future, but 40 years on, the Open University still offers a relevant, exciting and innovative vision of the  future of learning that we should all embrace and support.

I am pleased to take part in this morning's debate on education issues, which we have returned to again and again during Opposition debating time. The recent significant drop in teacher numbers prompted not only this morning's debate but a change on the front bench, so let me take this opportunity to welcome Michael Russell to his new role. That role is not without its challenges but, as we have heard, those challenges are of the Scottish Government's own making. The SNP entered Government with big promises on class sizes, teacher numbers, school buildings and nursery teachers. The First Minister said that the pledge on class sizes would be delivered on by the end of this parliamentary session, but that promise now hides under the cover of the concordat. The SNP promised to maintain teacher numbers to deliver smaller class sizes, but the number of teachers has fallen by more than 2,000. The promise to deliver access to a fully qualified nursery teacher for every nursery-age child has been undermined by a fall of more than 150 pre-school teachers. The Scottish Government is not delivering on the key promises that it made to the electorate, but Parliament will hold it to account for that. The Parliament's committees have been right to probe ministers about how policies will be delivered, and to question the historic concordat and its value as a method for central Government delivery. The question has always been this: What does the Scottish Government do if local authorities do not deliver? With a new cabinet secretary for education, we might be about to find out. I will concentrate my remarks on teachers. Many members have expressed concern at the decline in teacher numbers, but there have also been worrying declines at other points on the student's path to becoming a teacher. Figures in a recent answer to a parliamentary question show that the number of graduating student teachers who have been granted provisional registration has dropped by 529 since 2007. Behind those figures lie concerning data on the number of postgraduate diploma in education graduates. Between 2007 and 2008, there was a significant drop—25 per cent—in the number of graduates deciding to pursue education as a career at primary or secondary level. That is cause for concern, because we must attract specialist graduates into teaching and ensure that the most talented graduates consider teaching as a career. The new cabinet secretary must address that issue and  ensure that teaching is seen as an attractive profession and as a career with prospects. In August, the Times Educational Supplement Scotland showed that only 15 per cent of last year's probationary teachers had found permanent full-time employment, compared to 32 per cent in the 2007 survey. I hope that the new cabinet secretary recognises that that must be tackled. We all recognise that new teachers cannot all expect to walk into jobs, but the level of disappointment and disillusionment that probationary teachers face—with only 12 per cent gaining full-time employment—needs to be taken seriously. The future of Scotland's education sector relies on supporting and training today's young people who might have a talent for teaching. They must not be abandoned in favour of rushed attempts to find short-term solutions. There are real concerns that instead of solving the problem, the Scottish Government's cuts to teacher training places risk storing up problems for the future. In particular, the UCU is concerned that the number of places on BEd degrees will be cut by 40 per cent—that would mean 950 fewer places for graduates to train as primary school teachers—and that places on courses through which people can qualify as secondary school teachers might be cut by 12 per cent. Real concerns exist about the impacts that such policies might have on the teacher training sector, with cuts in teaching budgets and, ultimately, redundancies.

Peter Peacock made an important contribution to the debate, but now that the SNP is in Government, it is up to the Government to come forward with effective levers to ensure that national priorities are being delivered. The point behind this morning's debate—and the reason why the Government has lost a cabinet secretary—is that the concordat is clearly not working or delivering the education policies that Scotland needs. Recently, the University of Edinburgh reported that the budget for Moray House school of education will be reduced by up to £2.4 million, with the resulting loss of 40 full-time posts. The initial teacher training courses at the University of Strathclyde, the University of Dundee and the University of Stirling also risk being in the firing line. The SNP's approach to the issue risks doing permanent damage to Scottish education. I urge the new cabinet secretary to take into account the  long-term implications of his Administration's rush to reduce the stream of young teachers entering education. On top of that, as the new cabinet secretary will doubtless be aware, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council is proposing to enforce a 10 per cent cut to the budget that is available to teaching departments at Scottish universities. The data that were returned in response to the Scottish funding council's request for submissions suggest that serious concerns exist about how those deep cuts to a number of subject areas have been calculated. The cuts will affect the lives of lecturers and department staff at universities, and the lives of people who have ambitions to go into teaching, so we are talking about a serious decision that requires serious contemplation of all the options, and detailed research. I urge the cabinet secretary to take the matter seriously and to intervene to ensure that the funding council's proposals are best for the higher education sector and Scotland's wider interests. As Malcolm Chisholm said, there are still serious concerns about student support and hardship, particularly for further education students. Only this week, the funding council managed to provide only half the funds that had been requested for bursaries and child-care support for FE students. The policies on which the previous cabinet secretary floundered are still policies of the SNP Government. We have a new Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, but the challenges remain. A change of personnel alone is not enough; there must also be a change of policy if we are to provide the education opportunities that our people deserve.

Adam Smith College, in my region, is experiencing the same financial strain on bursaries, hardship and child care funds as other colleges across the country. It appears that more colleges are claiming money than are putting money back in to be redistributed. Can the minister confirm whether extra money will be allocated to meet the needs of colleges such as Adam Smith, in my region and throughout Scotland?

I am pleased to take part in this stage 3 debate on the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill. Although I was on the Education and Lifelong Learning Committee during the scrutiny of the bill, it felt as though much of the hard work had already been done. The issue of school closures and how the decisions to close schools are made has been a heated one for the Scottish Parliament. Its first look at the issue came when I was a researcher in the Parliament, some 10 years ago, when Cathy Peattie undertook the role of reporter to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee on rural schools. That led to a new code of practice on school closures, which was a significant step forward in improving the system. Perhaps as a Highland MSP, Peter Peacock had a greater interest in and commitment to improving the lot of rural schools than most. As Minister for Education and Young People, he sought to improve the system further, producing stronger guidance on how to improve consultation. Also within the Parliament, Murdo Fraser proposed a member's bill that would have introduced a presumption against the closure of rural schools. That also provided momentum to the campaign. Alongside all the parliamentary activity on the issue, there has been the huge commitment of the Scottish rural schools network, which has conducted an effective and reasoned campaign. It is fair to say that the network has had more involvement, over the years, with Richard Baker than with me, but it has always sought to build cross-party engagement and consensus on the issue, even going so far as to send its best wishes when my daughter was born. As a campaign group, it has always sought to avoid playing  politics with the issue, which is to be commended. The bill is an excellent example of what can be achieved by constituents engaging with parliamentarians and effectively using the levers of the Parliament. I was fortunate to come to the matter once most of the thorny issues had been wrestled with by the Parliament and a consensus had largely been reached. Of course, during stages 1 and 2 we again considered what would constitute the right balance between local decision making and national accountability, the educational needs and financial demands that are placed on educational authorities and how the needs of pupils in rural and urban settings are being addressed. The bill does not presume against the closure of rural schools, but offers a more nuanced solution of clear consultation and clear expectations of all the parties that are involved so that the difficult process of proposing the closure of a school and, possibly, closing it, can be done fairly and with the confidence of all who are involved. The bill is about empowering people and stakeholders to participate in the process. Although we know that there have been good examples of that in some local authorities, there have also been poor examples, and the bill will go a long way towards addressing that situation. We all agree that the bill offers a robust system that parents and communities can have faith in, although, as with all legislation, the proof of that will be in its implementation. There are key issues that remain to be addressed through guidance, and I welcome the cabinet secretary's assurances on some of those issues this afternoon—including her assurance to Margaret Smith on statutory consultees, which was very helpful. Another area that requires clarification in guidance is that of the definition of a material consideration. As other members have said, alongside other reforms in the bill there is a power for the Scottish ministers to call in any closure decision after that decision has been made if they consider that there has been a failure to comply with the requirements of the bill or when an authority has failed to take appropriate account of a material consideration that is relevant to the decision. The interpretation of what constitutes a material consideration is a key issue for guidance, and I would welcome further assurances on that this afternoon. The issue of correcting inaccuracies and omissions—something that was pursued by Margaret Smith and addressed through Government amendments today—is important. There is an argument that placing a duty on the local authority to investigate inaccuracies will make the system more robust and self-policing. If any disagreements arise, and if parents or  campaigners challenge information in the proposal paper, the local authority will remain the adjudicator with regard to information, which may seem a bit weighted. However, as any remaining dispute over information will be recorded and the local authority will be required to publish in the consultation report its reasons for any decision that it makes on allegations of inaccuracy, its argument will be transparent and its reasons for not upholding a disagreement will be clear. In many cases, the inaccuracy will be a typographical error or a fact that can be easily established, such as a journey time to school. However, other challenges may centre on matters such as projected demographic changes and roll projections, on which it is more difficult to distinguish between opinion and fact. Such matters may remain disputed, although I accept that they will be aired. This is a challenging area for parents and communities, who need the support and skills to access evidence and to be confident in presenting their case. That is often where the rural schools network can provide support and advice. As I said in committee, it may be unimaginable, but Sandy Longmuir will not be around for ever; we should be mindful of the support that parents and communities may need in the future. The content of the educational benefits statement and the merits of a cost benefit analysis were discussed in the committee, and the committee welcomed an indication from the cabinet secretary that statutory guidance is being positively considered. I welcome the cabinet secretary's earlier comments on that. In the early stages, the committee considered evidence on and debate about the merits of small rural schools and disagreements over the costs of closure, but the fact was that the Parliament could not directly address such issues. Instead, in acknowledging that such decisions were best made locally, we sought to ensure that they could be explored in a structured and transparent way and that each proposal was considered on a case-by-case basis. I am pleased that people on all sides of the debate supported that approach. Of course, a school closure can be very divisive. We cannot overstate the significance of a school to an area; indeed, people make a huge emotional investment in schools not just because their own children are pupils at them but because their association with teachers and families alike can go back generations. Although it is not always best to be asked, "Are you your brother's sister?"—an experience that Ken Macintosh's children will have to go through several times—it shows that a school is a vital part of a community, often going a long way towards sustaining a community's spirit and ensuring its sustainability.  I am pleased to have been part of what I hope proves to be the final leg of this journey for the Scottish Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it remains  committed to the provision of concessionary travel. (S3O-8496)

Is the minister aware of concerns in Fife that the SNP-led Fife Council is to end the flat rate concessionary rail ticket, which is a policy that brings clear health and wellbeing benefits to our more vulnerable constituents? Will he join me and my Labour colleagues in condemning the move? Will he intervene to ensure that a key benefit that is enjoyed by people throughout the region is not taken away?

Does the minister accept that, in the eight years prior to 2007, the number of schools in Fife that were in a poor state and condition was starting to move in the right direction and was going down? As I pointed out earlier, since 2007, 16 more schools have fallen into C and D categories.

Does the member acknowledge that two more secondary schools and 14 more primaries in Fife have fallen into the C and D categories since 2007? That has all happened under the SNP and Liberal administration.

I am a bit wary of getting in between the Conservatives and the Liberals on this, but I will give it a go. I am happy to take part in this evening's debate, and I congratulate Ted Brocklebank on securing it, although I feel that the lack of cross-party support for his motion will be reflected in this evening's contributions. I recognise his consistency in calling for a Tay bridgehead school, and I congratulate him on highlighting the issue for those who are involved in the campaign. It is good that we have  members' business debates to highlight issues about which local people are passionate. I suspect that Mr Brocklebank's motivation in this debate is as much to have a pop at the Liberals in Fife as anything else—or even to have a pop at Iain Smith, although I am sure that he can speak for himself. However, Mr Brocklebank is right to say that, prior to the most recent local government elections, the Liberals in Fife campaigned for two schools in north-east Fife. They made promises that they have abandoned now that they are in power in Fife with the Scottish National Party. It is regrettable that members' business debates about Fife always seem more suited to the cut and thrust of Thursday mornings than to Thursday tea times, but education in Fife is a concern. The rate of progress from the local authority on improving Fife schools and undertaking new builds is woeful—it has been far too slow. If there was more progress on Madras college, the needs of secondary pupils in the Tay bridgehead area would be better met. I appreciate that Ted Brocklebank made a persuasive argument for a new school in the bridgehead area, and Fife Council did not help itself with the fiasco over the leaked figures, but there are questions to answer about having two new-build schools in the north-east. Where will the money come from? Some £40 million has been committed to a new Madras college, there is a pressing need for a new school in Kirkcaldy, and there are far too many C condition schools in Fife that need to be improved. A new school in the Tay bridgehead area is financially unachievable. House building and community expansion is planned for St Andrews and Cupar, which is where the majority of the pupil numbers will be and where the resources must be focused. I appreciate that there are real issues with transport and that parents will often appreciate having a school close to their home, but there must be other considerations in the provision of secondary education. We expect our modern secondary schools to be able to offer choice in the curriculum, such as a range of languages, drama and the sciences, all of which an improved single-site Madras college, with links to the University of St Andrews, could offer. It is debatable whether a smaller high school could deliver the same variety and breadth and the opportunities that pupils and parents expect. Although having a school nearby has its attractions, it is not the only factor in a decision about where a young person goes to school. In parts of Fife we already have fairly active use of placing requests at secondary level. We have to question whether travel would be the most  pressing concern for parents and young people when choosing between a school with an established reputation, a wide range of courses and a modern environment and an untested school offering more limited educational choices. The issue of locality is different for secondary pupils and primary pupils. We must deliver the highest level of education for all our pupils. The Labour Party in Fife has made no secret of the fact that we are committed to a single-site school for Madras college and that building two schools in the north-east was never realistic and is not the right solution. There is the clear potential to develop Madras college as a state-of-the-art school that is able to deliver a modern, broad education with links to one of the top universities in the world, never mind in Scotland. It is regrettable that in nearly three years of the current Fife Council administration we have not seen the progress at Madras that is needed. Madras college needs to be a centre of excellence that will benefit pupils throughout north-east Fife. I thank Ted Brocklebank for the opportunity to discuss the issue this evening.

I am pleased to take part in this evening's excellent debate—I congratulate Shirley-Anne Somerville for securing it—on the Scotland-Poland connection. Please accept my apologies that I cannot stay for the minister's closing remarks. The motion highlights the significant contribution that Poles have made to Scotland, beginning with the significant influx of Polish soldiers in 1940. As the motion explains, that relationship also goes back generations, to a time when many Scots emigrated to Poland. Indeed, when I attended Neal Ascherson's lecture on the subject at the University of Edinburgh earlier this month, I was given a fascinating journey through the 400 years of that relationship, from the 17 th century to the present day. What struck me about the special relationship is that it has been fostered by ordinary people rather than by kings or queens or governments or states. The Scotland-Poland connection has been one of individual relationships: of marriages between Polish soldiers and the Scottish women who were left behind to fight the war effort at home; of Scottish families who took in Polish lodgers, who became part of their homes and communities; of Scottish emigrants who went to Poland in the 17 th century to find and explore new opportunities and to gain a better life for themselves and their families; and of the young Poles who continue to come to Scotland to help to grow our economy and to settle here with their families. Through the generations, there have been many lasting relationships between Scottish and Polish families, and new ties are being developed all the time. In recent history, many Poles settled in Fife, and it is significant that so many Fife members have taken part in the debate. Many Poles came during the war, and Fife has worked to recognise the contribution that Polish servicemen made. To name a few highlights, there is the statue of General Sikorski in Kinburn park in St Andrews, the monument dedicated to the 1 st Polish parachute brigade in Leven's festival gardens, the commemorative plaque on Earlsferry town hall and the mosaic in St Andrews that commemorates the relationship between the townspeople and  their Polish allies. The museum in St Andrews also hosts a collection of Polish military objects that were gathered by a group of Polish ex-servicemen who were based in Fife during the war. Although they perhaps often go unnoticed by locals, those symbols of the Polish alliance with Scotland and the defence of Fife are scattered throughout the kingdom. As has already been mentioned, Fife has a well-established Polish ex-servicemen's club in Kirkcaldy, which has provided a focus for the community. In 2006, Fife Polish Association, or Most, was formed by a group of young and enthusiastic Polish migrants. They chose the name Most, which is Polish for bridge, to symbolise the integration of Polish people among themselves and with Scottish people living in Fife. They work hard for integration of Polish people in Fife and to support and help them as they arrive here. We are fortunate to have that organisation to engage with the younger Polish community and those who have recently come to Scotland. Following the war, many Poles settled in the mining communities in Fife. Tricia Marwick talked of her experience growing up in Cowdenbeath. She might not appreciate the comparison, but my dad, who grew up in Kelty in the 1950s and went to St Joseph's primary school, remembers that half his class had Irish surnames such as O'Donnell, Brennan and O'Reilly and the other half had Polish surnames such as Nowak, Jerneki and Muszynski. Like many people throughout Scotland, my dad gained a Polish uncle who came over to Scotland during the war, when he was stationed at Kinross. Uncle Marion Makinski was noticed by his Scottish bride to be because she admired his uniform, which, as a tailor, he had made himself. He was typical of the generation that came to Scotland, who arrived with the forces but brought other skills to the Scottish economy. We know that, unfortunately, those skills were not always directly employed. We can trace the issue back to that period as well as observe it among young people who come over from Poland, as Chris Harvie highlighted. Many officers and teachers who came over during the war ended up finishing their careers as labourers in Scotland. The Poles brought excitement and interest to Scotland in the 1940s. Pruszynski's book "Polish Invasion", which was first published in 1941, is a fascinating account of Poles' and Scots' mutual impact on one another during the second world war. The book describes how real affection grew out of initial misunderstanding, as the Pole "took the other for a kind of Englishman, and was rewarded by being taken for a kind of Russian".  There is a section in which Private Nowak's English is better than that of the rest of his company not because of his diligent study, more "due to Elsie and her method of instruction rather than to the good old schoolmaster". It is a fascinating account of a time of innocence that is hardly recognisable now. As co-convener of the recently established cross-party group on Poland, I recognise the challenges that Poles face coming to Scotland. Other speakers have highlighted those. I encourage members who have taken part in the debate to join the group and to help us to highlight some of the issues that face Polish people who live in Scotland and continue the celebration of the relationship between Scotland and Poland.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of her statement. Although I wish to welcome the statement, it must be acknowledged that it is because of the consistent calls and pressure from Opposition parties, along with the student movement, that the Government has been forced to listen and shift its position. I am glad that the campaign, which has been led by Labour, Liberals and the Conservatives, along with the student movement, has resulted in a package that will put more into students' pockets and that has recognised that tackling student hardship must be the Parliament's priority when addressing student support issues. Is the cabinet secretary able to explain why her junior minister—who I understand is rushing to a photo call at the University of Edinburgh after the statement—dismissed this exact same proposal out of hand last week? Surely that was a low point in what was largely a constructive dialogue. Does the cabinet secretary agree that £30 million does not go far enough towards addressing the levels of identified student hardship? It is but a sticking plaster over the hardship problem. Does  she agree that more needs to be done to tackle the levels of commercial debt and the long working hours that many students will continue to experience? Finally, the cabinet secretary agreed that the grants and loans system needs to be examined. Will the Government acknowledge Andrew Cubie's comments today that the time has come for a broadly based, comprehensive review of funding and support an independent review?

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government is doing to provide financial support  to students from lower-income backgrounds or who have dependent children. (S3F-1948)

We have known about the £30 million that the First Minister mentioned for the past two years in the budget. On the details that were published yesterday, as always with the Scottish Government, we find that the devil is in the detail. Today, however, I want to press the First Minister on bursaries. Does he recognise that reports suggest that almost 20,000 students are still waiting for their bursary support from the Student Awards Agency for Scotland, despite having started their courses? Will he give an assurance that those reports will be fully investigated?

I am pleased to open the debate for Labour this afternoon. I offer Rhona Brankin's apologies, as she is unable to join us for the debate. I welcome the Government's decision to bring to the chamber a debate on the significant contribution that Scotland's colleges are making to the economic recovery. It gives us all an opportunity to recognise the support that Scottish colleges are giving people in the current economic climate and to acknowledge the central role that colleges play in delivering high-quality skills that help to grow Scotland's key industries and shape new industries. As the Government motion recognises, colleges offer truly responsive flexible learning, in which the needs of the learner are at the heart of the education that is delivered. We recognise the huge social contribution that colleges make in encouraging people back into education by accepting learners at all levels and helping them to develop their full potential. During this period of economic uncertainty, colleges have been the first to step up to the challenge by providing opportunities for people who want to reskill and delivering opportunities for young people. Those opportunities ensure that people are active and improving their employability, and they also play a key role in fostering enterprise and ambition in learners. I recognise that the Government has built on the previous Administration's legacy in supporting and recognising the value of Scottish colleges. In response to the increasing demand for college places, Labour called on the Government to use the consequentials from the UK budget to increase college places. We welcome the Government's decision to invest the £28 million of consequentials in an expansion of college places. We also welcome the decision to focus those resources on the provision of additional places for young people. We are all too aware of the devastating impact that the lack of opportunity and high levels of unemployment in the 1980s had on young people. Many communities are still trying to recover from that legacy. However, the cabinet secretary will be aware that there are some concerns about the distribution of that funding. Indeed, I have written to her about that. Labour will support the Conservative amendment this afternoon. I appreciate that difficult funding decisions have to be made and that the Government and the Scottish funding council have aimed to direct the additional resources to the areas of greatest need, but a pattern is emerging in the distribution of the additional funding and rural colleges believe that  they are losing out. We would welcome an assurance from the cabinet secretary that the Government is alert to the issue and will engage with the Scottish funding council on the matter. I do not think that anyone would deny that colleges in more rural communities are also facing greater challenges at present. Labour's amendment recognises the central role that colleges play in delivering apprenticeships by further developing links with business, including the additional 7,800 apprenticeships that were secured in last year's budget. That is part of the contribution that colleges are making to the economic recovery. Labour's commitment to the issue has sharpened the Parliament's mind on the value of apprenticeships. Colleges are key to providing the knowledge behind the hands-on experience that is gained through an apprenticeship. In challenging economic times, apprenticeships and workplace learning are often the first areas to suffer in businesses. Colleges play an important role in supporting and encouraging businesses to remain committed to improving and training their employees. We know that, when an apprenticeship place is at risk of being dropped by a business, the college is often instrumental in ensuring that the apprenticeship stays on track. We welcome the Government's adopt an apprentice scheme, but it is concerning that only 406 of the 1,179 apprentices who have been made redundant since February have been able to secure another job.

We recognise that the Government has invested in the area and we know how difficult it is to persuade sectors that are struggling with the recession to adopt apprentices. I welcome the initiatives that the cabinet secretary outlined in her speech, but she will agree that it is vital that young people do not miss out on the opportunity. The Government and Skills Development Scotland must redouble efforts in the area. However, I welcome her assurance that the matter is a focus for the Government. While the Government and colleges are delivering an expansion in college places in response to the unprecedented increase in  applications, we are seeing greater pressure on the bursary pot. A sharp increase in self-supporting students is one factor that is leading to a greater demand on bursary funds. There are reports that demand is running in excess of the available funds. The Scottish funding council must do all that it can to address the issue. We must also ensure that the hardship and child care funds keep pace with the increased number of students. Last year, hardship and child care funds came under immense pressure, so we support the call in the Liberal Democrat amendment for a review of the system for the distribution of child care funds. In a response to a parliamentary question that I received this week, the Government appeared to be open to the suggestion of a change to the scheme. I appreciate the cabinet secretary's comments on the matter this afternoon, but more work needs to be done to consider whether a changed scheme would continue to match the needs of Scottish students. I recognise that the Government and the Scottish funding council responded to pressure on discretionary funds last year, but there was a period of uncertainty, particularly around child care. The colleges and universities requested just over £12 million to meet demand, but just under £6 million was made available. In meeting college principals, I have been struck by their huge personal commitment to their students and their personal interest in their students' welfare. We know that colleges regularly use money from their reserves to invest in hardship and child care funds, but there are concerns about their ability to do that this year and the Scottish funding council's ability to respond to the pressures. Scottish college students are facing difficulties in finding part-time work and, in many cases, their families are finding it more difficult to support them, particularly as some school leavers are no longer entitled to education maintenance allowances. There are reports that colleges are running out or have already run out of hardship funds, which could make it difficult for some students to continue their studies. Surely that is the exact opposite of what the Government is trying to achieve through the expansion of places. We ask the Government to be alert to such concerns, because we fear that the pressure on the funds this year will be greater than that experienced last year. Finally, concerns remain over how the increased demand for places for the September intake will impact on the January intake, particularly for Christmas school leavers. Colleges are facing challenges with regard to their capacity to accommodate Christmas leavers and to meet the needs of students who are seeking a second or  third chance at college courses. I know that colleges prepare plans for the January intake but, with the increase in demand on applications, we can expect the same demands in January, when it can be expected that more young people will look to the college sector for opportunities. At the Scotland's Colleges briefing last week, there were concerns that colleges might have to turn people away or be forced to be more stringent in the number of second chances that they allow. I know that the cabinet secretary does not want that situation to develop and I urge the Government to report back to Parliament on the action that it is taking to address those concerns. I move amendment S3M-4956.2, to insert at end: "notes the contribution that colleges are making in further developing links with industry that can help deliver the 7,800 apprenticeships promised in the 2009-10 budget; recognises the concerns that exist regarding the ability of colleges to fully accommodate the increase in applicants, including the 2009 Christmas school leavers, and to cope with pressures on childcare and hardship funds, and calls on the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to report to the Parliament on how she intends to address these concerns."

I am pleased to open this debate on child protection for Labour. Along with all members, I appreciate how important child protection is for our society. It is unfortunate that Karen Whitefield cannot take part in the debate. There might be heated exchanges in the Parliament during the debate, but I hope that members will acknowledge Ms Whitefield's commitment to the issue and accept her apologies. Public tragedies have brought us to this debate. We all know that far too many children live in family circumstances that put them at risk. There might have been more tragic outcomes but for the dedication and professionalism of social workers and other family support workers. The death of Brandon Muir shocked and sickened people and awoke many to the chaotic, dysfunctional and dangerous circumstances in which some children live. I am the parent of a young child, and the circumstances into which Brandon Muir was born and raised would be unimaginable for my child. Many people in Scotland reacted similarly to the terrible circumstances of Brandon's death. Social workers have witnessed dramatic societal changes in recent years. We do not underestimate how difficult their job is. More unborn babies are being placed on the child protection register because their mother has a drink or drug problem, and the number of babies who are born suffering from drug withdrawal symptoms is increasing. There are more families in which there are generational substance misuse problems. Social workers and other professionals are at the sharp end of those issues. They carry the responsibility of making informed judgments and they must be supported in that. We acknowledge that they do a difficult and pressured job and we want to make their job as easy as possible. I hope that the debate will be constructive and that members will acknowledge how difficult child protection is. There might be disagreement about the way forward, but we will all take part in the debate for the right reason: to ensure that our child protection system is as good as it can be. I think that we all agree that the significant case review and review for chief officers reports into the death of Brandon Muir identified significant gaps and inadequacies in the sharing of information between agencies that were concerned with the  child's care, which contributed to the inability of services to protect him. Concern about local child protection is not unique to Dundee. Since 2007, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education has published critical reports on Midlothian Council, Moray Council and Aberdeen City Council. The recent "Summary of Indicative Quality Indicator Results from HMIE Inspections" showed that 23 per cent of local authority child protection services in Scotland were evaluated as "weak" or "unsatisfactory" on at least one indicator. We acknowledge that more than 75 per cent of services are performing well, but any squint at the figures will confirm that 23 per cent are underperforming, which is far too many. How can we improve services and ensure that no child is vulnerable? We must all acknowledge that we still have inadequate systems for the sharing of information that is vital in the protection of children. Labour thinks that the Government is not doing enough to address that. The Government's actions certainly do not match what was intended in the draft children's services (Scotland) bill. We need to be better at identifying the problem. The "Hidden Harm" report estimated how many children are affected by parental drug or alcohol misuse. We would welcome action to ensure that those children are identified and supported. I hope that members will support our call for the Scottish Government to report to the Parliament on the steps that it has taken to identify children who are at risk because they live with parents or carers who are alcohol or substance dependent. We acknowledge the road to recovery approach, which is mentioned in the Government's amendment, but it involves considering children in the context of an adult's drug or alcohol problem and is too light on how we can measure the impact on children. We would like the Government to make more progress on implementing the recommendations in "Hidden Harm", and we would welcome a statement on how the work will be taken forward. In light of that, I do not see the point of the amendment in Robert Brown's name, which seems to add little to the debate. The Government needs to show leadership. It is not easy dramatically to increase placements for children who are removed from their homes, but we cannot stand back and leave children with parents whose addiction puts them at risk every day. Of course, time and resources must be dedicated to helping families to stay together, but child protection services must be supported financially and professionally to take difficult decisions unhindered. We must listen to Barnardo's chief executive Martin Narey, who says that we have a system in which we are more  content to try to fix families than to do what is in the best interests of the child. We should think about what would be acceptable for our own children before we leave other children in situations in which they are vulnerable. We welcome many of the actions that the Government has taken, which are set out in its amendment, but we fear that the Government is not going far enough and is presenting proposals that tinker around the edges of a significant problem. The national review of child protection guidance is welcome, but it will not get to the heart of the issue. Do we need to challenge the orthodoxy? Do we have a system of child protection that is able to meet the challenges of our modern society? Do we have the right balance between the welfare of the child and the needs of parents and carers? Are we properly resourcing child protection services? Do the resources properly reflect the scale of the issue, particularly drug and alcohol misuse? Do we need to re-examine and change our view on intervention? That is not a criticism of the people who provide child protection services day to day. As policy makers, we are responsible for the direction of travel and for resourcing the system. That is why the Labour Party believes that we need a national inquiry into child protection in Scotland. We need to take stock of the serious concerns that HMIE and the reports into Brandon Muir's death have raised. The Scottish Government needs to redouble its efforts to deal with the problem. The First Minister's recent response at question time that "We have a very good child protection system in Scotland"— [ Official Report , 25 June 2009; c 18905.]  is in danger of being seen as complacent, but it does not reflect the Government's amendment, which "recognises that further improvement is necessary". In light of the recent HMIE reports, it cannot be denied that we need to improve child protection services pretty dramatically for some children. Labour believes that it is time that we questioned the system. I move, That the Parliament notes with grave concern the Summary of Indicative Quality Indicator Results from HMIE Inspections , published on 17 September 2009, showing that 23% of local authority child protection services in Scotland were evaluated as weak or unsatisfactory; further notes with similar concern the findings of the significant case review and review for chief officers reports into the death of Brandon Muir, revealing gaps and inaccuracies in the sharing of information between agencies concerned in his care and the terrible circumstances of his life as well as death; believes that the situation highlighted by these publications cannot be tolerated in a civilised society; acknowledges and commends the efforts and dedication of  staff involved in the safety and care of Scotland's children, often under considerable pressure but believes that these reports confound the comments of the First Minister on 25 June 2009 that we have a very good child protection system in Scotland; recognises the initiative taken by the previous administration in tackling this problem by bringing together a series of actions contained in the Hidden Harm report; calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward a report and to make a statement to the Parliament on the progress that it is making in implementing the recommendations of Hidden Harm and also what it is doing to build on those recommendations, and also calls on the Scottish Government to report to the Parliament on the steps it is taking to identify those children who are at risk as a result of living with parents or carers who are alcohol or substance misusers.

Will the cabinet secretary outline the new monitoring and surveillance measures that the Government will introduce to ensure that in future we do not see a repeat of last year, when child care funds were exhausted at numerous institutions throughout the country? Does she agree that there is increasing demand for a fundamental look at how child care funds for students are distributed so that student parents can be confident that they will receive the right financial support and provision?

Does the First Minister recognise that, in all the debates on student and university funding, there are huge concerns about the levels of support that students receive while they study? Will he consider seriously the proposal from the Opposition parties to make maximum use of the  £30 million that is allocated for student support?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that NUS Scotland's report "Overstretched and Overdrawn - A survey of student hardship, Summer 2009" shows clearly that tackling student hardship and the increasing reliance on commercial debt must be the Government's priority in responding to the supporting a smarter Scotland consultation?

This is a serious debate on a proposal to annul an SSI, which no member takes lightly. It has been suggested that members who have raised concerns about the SSI have done so out of party-political bias, but such a suggestion undermines the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, whose members have approached their work seriously. The minister's comment to the committee yesterday that it had sunk to "a new low" was unfortunate, and demonstrated that he was not listening or responding to concerns that had been highlighted. I hope that in today's debate we can at least listen to the arguments. The matter is complicated, but I want to approach it simply. Not one member of the committee disagrees that there should be appropriate support for vulnerable parents or carers when they are involved in important decision making about a child's future. Not one member does not think that when there is a breach of the ECHR, action must be taken to address it. However, the question is whether the SSI properly addresses those needs. Committee members received representation from the children's panel chairmen's group prior to last week's meeting. In its letter, the group made it clear that the introduction of the changes that the SSI had brought about was flawed, and the group specifically asked us not to approve the SSI at this point. It is clear that panel members lack confidence in the changes and that there has been a lack of training and information for panel members on when and how to make the decision to appoint legal support. That has led to concern that the changes will undermine the ethos of the children's panel system and introduce an increasingly legalistic approach. There are concerns that the rushed introduction of the SSI has meant that there has not been proper consultation on, or consideration of, the impact of the changes. The minister said that there was consultation of the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council, but it is clear that the process has been inadequate in comparison with the process that was followed when state-funded legal support was introduced for some children. The  concerns that panel members expressed demonstrate that the SSI would have benefited from greater involvement of stakeholders and panel members. The minister argues that the rush has been necessary, but we have as yet had no judgment from the Court of Session. It is a complicated matter, and I understand that the discussions on the current legal case seek to determine what level of support needs to be provided, and by whom. There are concerns that the Government's proposal presents problems—such as who would be appointed for legal support and whether that person would be known to, and familiar with, the family—rather than providing a definitive solution. The Government is pre-empting the court judgment, but part of the problem is that there has been no opportunity to explore those issues. It is disappointing that the minister has continued to state that there is a risk that panel members would be in breach of the ECHR. I believe that that is not the case. As I understand it, panel members have to comply with the law as it is and, with no decision from the Court of Session, cannot be in breach. The Government has handled the SSI badly with the committee and with panel members. It has rightly delayed the introduction of the children's hearings bill on the basis that it wishes to get it right; the committee asked it to take the same approach with the SSI. The change must, of course, be timely but it must also be right and the committee has not been persuaded that the SSI achieves that.

I congratulate Willie Coffey on securing this debate, which is on an issue that is important to his constituents and to Scotland, and I recognise his commitment to the Diageo workforce. I also recognise Patricia Ferguson's efforts in fighting for the Diageo workforce at Port Dundas, and that there has been cross-party support for the motions lodged by her and Willie Coffey. MPs, MSPs, councillors, unions and the workforce have shown what can be achieved by people working and campaigning together. I commend their efforts to save jobs and communities. Today, I was pleased to meet Unite members and show my support for their efforts and their campaign to keep jobs in Scotland. The situation that families in Kilmarnock will face if the plant closes and jobs go will be devastating. We all accept that it is an area of Scotland that will find it  difficult to absorb unemployment, and we know how difficult it can be for an area to recover from the loss of such a significant employer. The workforce and the unions must be satisfied that every option to secure the plant has been explored and that Diageo is listening and giving serious consideration to alternative proposals. It is disappointing that the cabinet secretary has not provided us with more details on the task force's proposals, but I look forward to details of the options being presented. We are all bitterly disappointed by Diageo's announcement to cut jobs in Scotland. As a Fife MSP, I know that the company has been a good employer in the area and that it has strong relationships with its workforce, the trade unions and the community. I think that we all recognise that Diageo has been a valued company in Scotland. Now we are looking for it to show that it values the workforce in Scotland. We know that, in difficult economic circumstances, Diageo announced healthy profits just last week. It must seriously consider its commitment to Scotland and the extent to which its success and profitability are due to what it has gained from Scotland. I believe that we cannot have a debate in Parliament about Diageo in Kilmarnock without having a debate about Diageo in Leven, and I am concerned that that is where the Government has been short-sighted. Members will know that it is not often that I find myself in agreement with Tricia Marwick, but as the constituency member for Glenrothes, she is right to stand up for Diageo in Leven. As a Fife MSP, I will support her in her questioning of the Government's approach to the Leven plant. I am afraid that in its intervention on Diageo, the Government does not appear to appreciate fully what the investment that is proposed for Leven will achieve. During this afternoon's statement, we found out that there had been no engagement or discussion with Fife officials on the issue. The investment in Leven is not just about jobs; it is about securing the long-term future of the plant. I was disappointed that when it was pressed during the statement, the Government could not give assurances that any proposals concerning Kilmarnock that it makes to Diageo will fully take into account the impact that they might have on Fife in future. The Government must be careful that it is not seen to be prepared to sacrifice investment in Fife for investment in Kilmarnock without giving any consideration to the impact that that will have on the Leven area and, importantly, on the long-term future of the Diageo plant in Fife. I need to be convinced that any plans that are produced in the interests of Scotland take full account of the impact on Fife. Reflection on the cabinet secretary's statement indicates that that  does not seem to be the case. As the trade unions have made clear and as Diageo's profits show, Diageo is a profitable company, so we should all try to maximise its investment in and commitment to Scotland. While members in the west rightly fight for their communities, members in Fife will show their commitment to the Leven plant. I know that the constituency MP and MSP have visited the site in recent days and I, too, will visit it in the next few days, because it is important that local members show their support for a workforce whose members are at risk of feeling unsupported by Government.

Having considered the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill, the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee recognise it as a valuable bill that will improve the way in which school closure proposals, which always present challenges, are managed. It was encouraging to hear the broadly supportive evidence from stakeholders, which is reflected in the committee's stage 1 report. I thank the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning for showing willingness to respond to the concerns that arose. Other members in this afternoon's debate have examples of school closures in their constituencies and regions, and have been engaged with the passions that such closures generate, but the committee has not raked over the coals of previous decisions. Instead, we seek to ensure that we deliver a transparent and robust system that instils confidence in the process. If we have a  process in which there are clear expectations on all the parties involved, we can ensure that the difficult process of proposing and conducting the closure of a school is carried out fairly. The committee is pleased to recognise that many local authorities have good practice in this respect, but the bill will enshrine that good practice in legislation. As the convener outlined, the committee identified three areas of concern: the role of HMIE, the three additional factors that will apply to rural schools, and the need for clarity about the ministerial call-in process, particularly in relation to the definition of "material consideration". Additionally, members will have received representations from Consumer Focus Scotland, which has reservations about the time limits for consultation on school changes. That issue was raised during our evidence taking and different views were expressed on the appropriateness of the time limits. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will indicate the Government's views on that in her closing statement. The closure of a school can be a polarising experience and the evidence that the committee received strayed into debates about the merits of small rural schools, and disagreements about the costs associated with closure, but the evidence from all witnesses was strongly in favour of case-by-case consideration. That approach was supported by people on all sides of the debate. The framework that the bill proposes should provide support for that approach. The suggested requirement for an educational benefits statement as part of the proposal paper at the start of the consultation process was widely supported, although there was a desire from witnesses for consistency among local authorities. That generated some debate about how prescriptive the bill should be. The committee welcomed an indication from the cabinet secretary that statutory guidance is being positively considered and it welcomed the listening approach that the Government has taken to the issue. The committee also proposed that consideration be given to extending any guidance to cover the entire proposal paper: I welcome the cabinet secretary's earlier comments on that. There is also merit in encouraging local authorities to include as part of the proposal paper a cost benefit analysis that looks at factors such as the condition of the buildings and additional transport costs. Again, I welcome the cabinet secretary's earlier comments on that. When witnesses highlighted past examples of decision making in school closure cases, it became clear that trying to establish fair, transparent and hopefully agreed costs could be fraught, and that it  would be good practice for a council to commit to a cost benefit analysis. We would welcome more clarity from the cabinet secretary on the basis for a call-in. For example, at stage 1, I asked witnesses about how inaccuracies would be corrected. Some argued that placing a duty on the local authority to investigate inaccuracies would make the system more robust and self-policing. However, if any disagreements arise and if parents and communities challenge information in the proposal paper, the local authority will remain the adjudicator with regard to information. Any remaining dispute over information will be recorded and the local authority will be required to make public its reasons for any decision that it makes on allegations of inaccuracy. In many cases, the inaccuracy will be a typographical error or a fact, such as the journey time to school, that can be easily established. That said, certain information, such as projected demographic changes and roll projections, in which it is more difficult to distinguish between opinion and fact, might remain disputed. This is a challenging area for parents and communities, who need the support and skills to access evidence and to be confident in presenting their case. Indeed, in evidence, the Scottish Rural Schools Network stated: "In one case ... a financial justification was given for the closure of a school, but in the spreadsheet analysis the totals at the bottom were all wrong. It took us the best part of a year to get the council to admit that it had totalled up the columns incorrectly."—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture  Committee , 13 May 2009; c 2349.] Of course, the timescales in the bill are nowhere near a year, and I hope that the measures will effectively address communities' ability to challenge information and local authorities' ability to deal with such disputes.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her intervention. I am just about to mention the other safeguards in the legislation.  When asked whether the corrections procedure in the bill was enough, the SRSN said: "If there were not a referral or a call-in process to provide the option of subsequent challenge, it certainly would not be enough."—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 13 May 2009; c 2351.] There is therefore a recognition that, after the initial challenge, the option of a referral or call-in exists. However, it is for that very reason that we need to be clear about how the call-in process will operate. Moreover, we need more clarity about what constitutes a "material consideration" to assist in cases in which information remains disputed. Good progress has been made on the bill at stage 1, and I welcome the commitment that was made by the committee and the Government to look positively at the issues that need to be addressed at stage 2.

The cabinet secretary said in his statement that Fife Council was kept fully informed. Has the Government met Fife Council officials to discuss the ways in which alternative proposals might impact negatively on sustainability and investment in the Leven plant? In taking a lead on this, the Government must ensure the involvement of all interested parties, including Fife MSPs. I ask the cabinet secretary to prioritise a meeting with Fife members.

To ask the Scottish Executive when ministers last met Fife Council to discuss transport priorities and what in particular was discussed. (S3O-7302)

I record my thanks to the minister for being helpful regarding the campaign for dualling the A92 around Glenrothes. He has met me and members of the Glenrothes Area Futures Group, and we now have proposals for some minor upgrades at two local junctions. I was disappointed, however, to receive a letter from the minister that seems to close the door firmly on dualling the A92 around Glenrothes. Will the minister confirm that? If so, will he outline when the next opportunity for consideration of that transport scheme will be?

Tricia Marwick seems to be much more vexed about me than about the day-to-day crime and antisocial behaviour that is faced by the communities that she is meant to represent. Does the cabinet secretary recognise that there are areas in Fife where violent crime is increasing, including the Levenmouth area, where it increased by 24 per cent last year according to Fife Constabulary's own figures? Is it not complacent to use the relatively low crime rates in parts of Fife to hide the reality of living with violent crime in other areas?

In England, there has been an expansion of 54,000 in the number of college places. If the First Minster is not able today to commit to using the £12 million in consequentials from the Westminster budget to increase the number of college places in Scotland, when can we expect that decision to be made? Colleges will need to start planning for any future expansion.

Does the minister accept that the choices that are offered in the consultation document have been completely rejected by student leaders? Will he agree to meet, along with the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, the main Opposition party spokespeople to discuss our specific and fully costed proposals, which have the in-principle agreement of student leaders?

I welcome the announcement of the extension of the ILA schemes. The changes will undoubtedly increase demand for college courses, over and above the huge increase in applications of up to 300,000 this year. Will the minister commit today to using the £12 million in consequentials from the Westminster budget to increase the number of college places in Scotland?

Will the minister commit to giving serious consideration to the proposal from the Opposition parties that students should be allowed to choose whether to borrow the amount that is currently available to them as a loan or to take a reduced amount as grant? That could halve the average amount of graduate debt.

rose—

Will the member give way on her point about the ASC?

Does the member acknowledge that the part-time student grant of £500 goes towards the student's tuition fees and does not give them a penny to tackle their hardship issues?

Does the cabinet secretary accept that the vast majority of the £44 million to which she referred is spent on tackling graduate debt, not student hardship, which is the subject of this morning's debate?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

We know that the Scottish National Party promised much for students in its manifesto but has delivered far short of that. Promises easily made during an election campaign have been dumped in government. Little has been done to boost student support or to tackle hardship among the poorest students in Scotland. Students have criticised the Government's limited actions for the same reason. Gurjit Singh, the president of the National Union of Students Scotland, said recently that abolishing the graduate endowment had had "little impact on the day to day life of students and does nothing to tackle the issue of financial hardship students face while studying." Billions of pounds-worth of promises have been boiled down to £30 million for student support next year. That sum, which was announced in the comprehensive spending review, must be the most debated pot of money in the history of the Scottish Parliament. There has been a protracted bidding process that has set poor student against poor student. Worse still, we have £12.5 million of efficiency savings in the student support budget—a means test change that has cut the support of tens of thousands of students halfway through their degree—and recent changes to the education maintenance allowance that will impact heavily on college students. It seems increasingly that, with the £30 million, the SNP is just giving students their own money back. There is a missed opportunity in the Government's proposals for how the money should be used. Even the most generous option would increase student support by only a few hundred pounds. The proposal by the Association of Scotland's Colleges, too, does not go far enough. I welcome the focus on college students, who are often forgotten in discussions about higher education, but I have two main concerns about the ASC's proposals. First, its research  does not distinguish between Government loans and commercial loans. Secondly, the proposal does not address student hardship, which is as much a concern in colleges as it is in universities. In March, the Parliament rejected the proposals outlined in the Government's consultation because they failed to address the issue adequately. Students say that although graduate debt is a concern for them, not having enough money to live on is a bigger problem, which the SNP is failing to address. The SNP needs to swallow its pride. Students are being forced to choose between fuel and food, books and bus fares. The poorest are increasingly saddled with credit cards, bank loans, overdrafts or even loan sharks, as part-time work and parental contributions dry up. Student hardship is the real issue. The SNP is not doing much to address Scotland's high drop-out rate. Boasts of the return of free education ring hollow for students who are struggling to get by and have been pushed into commercial debt by a student support system that is no longer fit for purpose. It is no wonder that the patience of students at colleges and universities across Scotland has run out. Since the previous debate on student support, the NUS, student leaders from colleges and universities across Scotland and all three main Opposition parties have signed an open letter to the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning demanding a new direction from the Government and delivering a wake-up call to the SNP. The letter agreed joint principles: a minimum income of £7,000, or as close to that as possible, for the poorest students; focusing available resources on tackling student hardship, not graduate debt; increasing the availability of student loans; addressing students' continuing reliance on commercial credit; and increasing the funds that are available for hardship and child care funding, while looking at the potential for reform.

The proposals that the main Opposition parties have put forward, which are supported by the NUS, are covered by the £30 million in the 2010-11 budget—they require no additional resources from the Government. Scottish Labour, with the other main Opposition parties, has taken forward the principles that I have outlined and presented alternatives to the Government's proposals. This is an opportunity for the SNP to work with a ready-made cross-party majority in the Parliament,  and a consensus among students, to deliver for the poorest students in Scotland—investing in the short term, through this economic downturn, to invest in the long-term future of Scotland. I acknowledge and welcome the difference in tone in the SNP's amendment. Although initially alternative suggestions to the Government's position provoked calls of "Grow up" to the students—and, possibly, the Opposition—there seems to have been a period for reflection. The amendment suggests a more sensible, perhaps even pragmatic, approach, which is to be welcomed. However, while the Labour motion makes clear that there are key principles that the Government needs to take on board, the Government's amendment does not recognise that. I would like today's debate to be constructive. To that end, I would like to hear from the SNP three things that are not contained in its amendment. I hope that Fiona Hyslop will address each of them in her speech. First, I would welcome a cross-party dialogue on tackling student hardship, with an urgent meeting on the subject, if the cabinet secretary is willing. Secondly, I would like the SNP to agree to the joint principles that were outlined in the open letter to Fiona Hyslop, which was signed by students and the main Opposition parties. Thirdly, I would like to work with the SNP on Scottish Labour's and the other main Opposition parties' proposals for tackling student hardship. The position of Scottish Labour and the other main Opposition parties is that existing resources should be used to provide a £7,000 income—as called for by students throughout Scotland—for 20,000 of the poorest students, including more than 6,000 college students, to take them over the poverty line; an increase in grant of £500 for the poorest students; an increase in support of £200 for all students, through non-means-tested loans; and investment of nearly £2 million in hardship and child care funds, which have been stretched to breaking point across Scotland this year. By giving the poorest students the choice of a mix of loan and grant that suits their circumstances, the proposals would allow those students who do not want to take up the full £7,000 entitlement to choose to take a lesser amount in grant, close to halving their graduate debt. We would be treating students like adults—the choice would be theirs. The proposals are affordable, achievable and fair, would reduce hardship and would help many through the economic downturn. Scottish Labour will not support the Liberal Democrat amendment, despite our agreement on many aspects of student support. Although I have sympathy for the idea of a minimum income, it is not realistic or achievable in this session.  Furthermore, we cannot sign up to a policy that has not yet been costed. We will not support the Scottish Government amendment. I recognise that it represents an olive branch, but I was hoping for a white flag to be waved not at any party represented in the chamber but at Scottish students, recognising that their views will be listened to and acted on, not fought against.

I am sorry, but that was my last sentence. I move, That the Parliament calls for a cross-party approach on tackling hardship among the poorest students in Scotland; believes that students have been severely let down by the SNP's broken promises, actions and inaction in power; further believes that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning's efforts have been misplaced in focussing solely on reducing graduate debt rather than student hardship while student demand for hardship and childcare funds increases, commercial borrowing among students continues and student support levels in Scotland fall far behind the rest of the United Kingdom; notes the open letter to the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning signed by NUS, the main opposition parties and student leaders across Scotland calling for the Scottish Government to increase levels of student support through increased loans and for a new direction from the Scottish Government; further notes that on the 12 March 2009, through motion S3M-3675 as amended, the Parliament rejected all of the proposals contained in the Supporting a Smarter Scotland consultation, which closed in April 2009, for not adequately addressing student hardship, and calls on the Scottish Government to work with the main opposition parties on their joint approach to tackling student hardship by using the available resources to provide £7,000 in support for the poorest students, a £500 increase in grant for the poorest students, an increase in support of £200 for all students through the non-means-tested loan and almost £2 million to discretionary funds for childcare and hardship funding.

As I said in my earlier comments, amendment 18 is supported by Children in Scotland, ISEA and a range of other organisations. I accept that the minister supports the provision of advocacy services for the tribunal process and that he is committed to delivering such services, but I believe that the best way to secure that commitment and to provide the service with the  certainty that it deserves is to translate that commitment into the bill. I am afraid to say that we have seen too many organisations lose political support and funding when priorities change. I believe that advocacy services for parents and young people at tribunals should not be left vulnerable to that possibility. I will press amendment 18.

I am delighted to speak to amendment 18, on the provision of advocacy services during a tribunal. I would have preferred to lodge an amendment on the provision of support services and advocacy, because it is clear that action needs to be taken in both those areas. If there was greater availability and uptake of support services, there would be less need for advocacy services at tribunal. However, I have been limited by the bill's financial restrictions, so amendment 18 focuses solely on the provision of advocacy services.  Amendment 18 is a simple amendment that would place a duty on ministers to secure provision of an advocacy service that would be available free and on request for tribunal proceedings. It addresses the anomaly that although the 2004 act created the right to advocacy, it did not create an accompanying duty on anyone to ensure the delivery of, or access to, advocacy services. Amendment 18 is supported by a range of bodies, including Independent Special Education Advice (Scotland) and Children in Scotland. During stage 1, the committee heard evidence of the increasingly adversarial nature of some tribunals and of the need for parents and young people to be properly supported during the process. Amendment 18 would begin to level the playing field, particularly for those without the financial resources to hire an advocate. Ensuring the provision of an advocacy service that is available on request and free of charge to all parents is an important right that should be introduced to the bill. The provision of mediation and dispute resolution is in the 2004 act, and the opportunity should be taken with this bill to include the provision of advocacy services. At stage 1, the minister recognised the importance of advocacy services, saying: "I want to ensure that parents have access to advocacy".—[ Official Report , Education Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 21 January 2009; c 1905.] During discussions at stage 2, the minister explained how the Government would achieve that: "I am committed to establishing a representative advocacy service at tribunals for all parents and young people throughout Scotland. I propose the allocation of £100,000 per annum for a service to represent and/or support parents and young people effectively at tribunals."—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 22 April 2009; c 2194.] Amendment 18 will deliver a service to which the minister has already committed in principle and financially. I believe that it is important that that commitment be secured within the bill to give certainty and security to parents and young people who require advocacy services. I move amendment 18.

How will the Government ensure that students from lower-income backgrounds will be more able to take up exchange opportunities, given that universities report that they are the students who are least likely to take up such opportunities?

For our children to learn, teachers have to be able  to get on with their job and they need support through resources and the school culture and from the community. Debates around school discipline often seem to focus on problem children disrupting the studies of the well-behaved majority. There often seems to be an implicit assumption that if those problem children were separated from the rest, all would be well, and that the inclusion agenda has caused the problem. However, that analysis is too simplistic. School indiscipline is not always about problem children. Often, it is about problems at home, problems with literacy, bullying, undiagnosed health or learning problems and, sometimes, there are problems with individual teachers. We should not be surprised that while antisocial behaviour by and against young people has become more of a concern in our communities, it has also become more of a concern in our schools. The statistics are concerning. Although we have seen an 11 per cent decrease in the number of exclusions, we have to be assured that that has happened for the right reasons. As has already been said, exclusions for carrying a knife increased by 28 per cent last year. However, thankfully, such extreme behaviour is still perpetrated by only a small minority. General, day-to-day, low-level disruption is much more common and much more corrosive. As has been said, the previous Executive did a great deal to address the issue, including setting up the national discipline task group and other actions that are outlined in the Labour amendment. However, more is required from the Government. Overall, we need parents to take greater responsibility. The behaviour displayed in school is a reflection of behaviour in wider society, so we have to work with families in communities throughout Scotland to reduce antisocial behaviour in schools. We have to encourage families to value education and involve them more in education in school, and in education in general, so that it is not alien or irrelevant to them. Last year, the Minister for Children and Early Years and I visited Cupar nursery, which provides a good example of integrating children's education with parents' education in partnership with Elmwood College. Schools have to have the resources to identify problem behaviour and its cause and to intervene to address it. Tackling illiteracy and bullying and identifying learning difficulties or health problems at the earliest opportunity is crucial. Cuts in school budgets and the numbers of teachers, classroom assistants, support staff and truancy officers will do nothing but harm in the area of school  indiscipline and to Scotland's education system in general. Schools need the correct leadership to get the culture right for children and staff—members have commented on the importance of headteachers in that—so that pupils know where the boundaries are and teachers are supported fully when those boundaries are crossed. At the extreme end, when we are talking about exclusions leading to expulsions, we have to ensure that the alternatives to school are working properly. We have to ensure that children know the consequences of their actions while minimising the long-term damage to their education and life chances. A temporary exclusion is a punishment and, we hope, a wake-up call, but it should also be an opportunity to intervene with the child and the family. Having a child at home for a few days, excluded from school, sometimes serves the needs of the school but not the needs of the child. To improve school discipline we must address problems as soon as they arise, and we must consider not just the poor behaviour but the reasons for it. We have to get school right for the majority of well-behaved children, but that cannot be done at the expense of cutting loose the minority for whom school is not working. We cannot write off any child at any age. I hope that the SNP raises its game, as someone said recently. So far under the SNP Government, education has not been given the priority that it deserves. I hope that the Government makes changes fast, so that our schools, teachers and pupils get the support from the Government that they deserve.

To ask the First Minister whether reducing graduate debt or tackling student hardship should be the priority for the Scottish Government. (S3F-1649)

The First Minister is missing the point yet again. Did he not hear the wake-up call from students on Monday, or was he just not listening? Students' patience with the Scottish National Party has run out. The First Minister's Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning is completely out of touch with the reality for students in Scotland today. Under the SNP, Scottish students are living in far greater financial hardship, student support levels are far behind  those in the rest of the United Kingdom and hardship funds are being stretched to breaking point—all that from a party that promised students so much at the last election. Will the First Minister now respond to the wake-up call from students, swallow his pride and work with us to deliver the real help that students want and need?

Is the cabinet secretary aware that 22 dietetic students at Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen are waiting for a placement in the national health service so that they can complete their degrees and that there are similar problems at Queen Margaret University and Glasgow Caledonian University? At a challenging time for graduate employment and employability, it is vital that that obstacle is removed so that those students can complete their courses. Will the cabinet secretary pledge to work with her health colleagues to ensure that every dietetic student gets a placement as soon as possible?

Does the minister recognise that there is significant support in the Parliament for a tenant deposit scheme in Scotland? Now that we have the research results, we can see that it is indeed a significant problem that the Parliament must address. Will the minister outline today how and  when the Government will proceed in the event that it cannot secure consensus between landlords' and tenants' organisations?

On the funding for knowledge transfer, the strategy clearly commits to greater investment in the area, but does the cabinet secretary have any idea what the timescale for that will be? At present, the horizon fund is a limited pot of money and the funding has already been accepted by universities. When and how will the cabinet secretary create the shift to greater investment?

I am pleased to take part in the debate. Like many arts graduates, my connection with science came to an end not long after second year at high school, when it no longer seemed relevant, yet our day-to-day contact with science and all that it generates has become greater and greater. Our growing interest in our health, in the environment and in meeting our energy needs increasingly demands a science-literate society. There has been a broad welcome for the science for Scotland framework, and a will throughout the Parliament to see it implemented. As many members have said, Scotland has been a world leader in scientific research, but the environment in which that reputation has been built is becoming increasingly competitive. Scotland faces challenges to its position, with the prospect of those who work in the sector being attracted by developments abroad. We need to be ready to respond to that. We all want Scotland to remain a magnet for talent and investment but we need to be serious about the challenges that we face, particularly on university funding. Many concerns have been raised recently by university leaders regarding Government investment.  In its briefing for members, the Campaign for Science and Engineering in the UK raised its concern that the strategy is weak on the policy and budgetary commitments that would deliver the vision, with which it is broadly in agreement. The Government's intention to monitor and report to the Parliament on progress is welcome and perhaps goes some way towards that. However, in the current economic climate, a bolder response is needed. If the Government heeded Rhona Brankin's call to match the Prime Minister's commitment on science funding, that would be a welcome start. I look forward to the minister's response on that in closing. Several key issues have been addressed in the debate. The TIMSS survey clearly identifies challenges for schools, and those points were well made today by Malcolm Chisholm. The survey paints a picture of Scotland standing still while other nations make progress; the weak stages for science are identified as late primary and early secondary education. The RSE, in its briefing, raised wider concerns about the implementation and content of the curriculum for excellence. Again, those points were made by Malcolm Chisholm. I appreciate that discussions on the issue are continuing. The cabinet secretary might want to refer to those in closing. Students must be confident in the nuts and bolts of science subjects, and it is vital that teachers are suitably supported through greater investment in CPD. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the TIMSS report has led to major increases in staff CPD. However, as Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education's chief inspector, Chris MacIlroy, said in evidence: "There was no parallel massive-scale CPD here."—[ Official Report, Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 11 February 2009; c 2027.] Nevertheless, I very much welcome the forthcoming schools science summit, which the cabinet secretary mentioned. There are clearly issues that need to be addressed. I am pleased that the contribution of colleges was recognised in the debate by Hugh O'Donnell. Science has always been seen as something that happens only in universities, where the significant bulk of the research takes place, but that is not the case. The different learning styles that are offered by colleges in science, engineering, technology and maths offer routes to achievement for students who might not otherwise consider working in those sectors. As the briefing from the Association of Scotland's Colleges identifies, Scotland's economic recovery will rely to a significant extent on innovation, and colleges play an important part in that. The breadth of skills that is needed in the science-based industries is delivered not just by  universities. Well versed in partnership working, colleges can provide a key route to the improvement of skills and the generation of new knowledge. A great example of that is Forth Valley College and Heriot-Watt University, which, in partnership with INEOS, have created a five-year programme that offers students a blue-collar/white-collar qualification. That programme is merging research and skills with industry and creating the kind of graduates that we need to build the science sector. I acknowledge Alison McInnes's contribution to the debate on the subject of women in science. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary is responding positively on the issue. Several members focused on the contribution to science that is made by universities. Scottish higher education institutions currently receive around 12 per cent of UK research funding, which, as other members have recognised, shows that Scotland is punching above its weight. Scottish universities recently demonstrated that they are at the cutting edge of innovation in the latest RAE. Nevertheless, we are familiar with the funding challenges that Scotland faces, as outlined by Murdo Fraser in his closing comments. As Wendy Alexander said, only this week we heard reports of chancellors in English universities calling for the cap on tuition fees to be raised. Although we do not know when or whether the UK Government will go down that road, it presents the potential for greater pressure on Scottish university funding, especially as the "New Horizons" report commits funding in Scotland to broad comparability with funding in the rest of the UK. If we see increased investment in universities in England, how will the Scottish Government keep up? There are questions around the additional funding that has been mooted in the strategy for knowledge exchange. The simple question is this: when will that funding be made available? What is the timescale for the shift in priorities within the horizon fund? I look forward to the minister addressing those points in closing. The Scottish Government must do better than the financial settlement that has been offered to universities for the current spending review period if we are to ensure that universities and research institutes in Scotland are able to compete within the UK and globally for research funding, for talented individuals and for corporate investment. I welcome the strategy's recommendation that the Scottish Government enhance links with the UK Government, research councils and the EU. It is important that Scottish ministers engage in UK and EU policy debates. In closing, the minister may be able to give an update on the work that Lord Drayson, the UK science minister, is  undertaking on the future direction of UK science funding. Although our universities lead on research, our businesses do not engage with R and D to the level that they must if we are to grow and innovate. There are notable successes in Scotland, which have been highlighted by Linda Fabiani and Ian McKee, although Jeremy Purvis probably won the competition with references to successes in his constituency. A continuing challenge is how to translate the excellent research in our universities into a greater research base that is utilised in R and D. We need a much stronger pull from business—I welcome the challenges to business that are set out in the framework—but we also need a greater push from Government to stimulate demand in the business sector. We need to link and match research and researchers in universities and colleges to private, public and third-sector bodies. Scotland was built on Scottish ingenuity within the UK. Many of the leading scientific breakthroughs in history have happened in our country within the UK and in partnership with UK institutions. Indeed, today's huge breakthrough in research into quantum computers that the cabinet secretary mentioned involved the University of Manchester and the University of Edinburgh. In science as in other areas, Scotland clearly benefits hugely from being part of the UK. It is naive to assume that we would have the same relationship with the research councils under a changed constitutional arrangement. The Labour amendment highlights the RSE's strong concerns about the need for Scotland to continue to engage with UK research councils, so I was disappointed by the cabinet secretary's dismissal of those concerns. We all know that science graduates are crucial to the future of our country. Science graduates get jobs. Research shows that 58 per cent of science graduates are in full-time employment within six months of graduating, compared with 50 per cent of business graduates, 38 per cent of sport, leisure and care services graduates and 26 per cent of arts graduates. As we are all aware, our universities and colleges are capable of producing world-class researchers and have been doing so for hundreds of years. The challenge for the Government is to bring together those winning ingredients by backing up the science strategy's warm words with funding and with action.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government will take to address student hardship among those at university. (S3F-1534)

SNP actions in government have been wholly inadequate in tackling student hardship. Just this morning, the president of the National Union of Students Scotland, Gurjit Singh, said that abolishing the graduate endowment had "little impact on the day to day life of students and does nothing to tackle the issue of financial hardship students face while studying." What will the First Minister do to address the needs of the 35 institutions that have requested additional funds to tackle student hardship, considering that more than half of what is requested—more than £6 million—is not being met by the Government? Will he today pledge to bin his inadequate student support consultation and to produce new proposals that provide a minimum of £7,000 for Scotland's poorest students, relieving pressure on hardship funds and finally acting to address student hardship?

Will the minister take an intervention?

The member talks about the increasing pressure on hardship funds. According to my calculations, the SNP Government has spent £56 million so far on tackling graduate debt.  How much has been spent on tackling student hardship?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

On the issue of hardship funds, does the member accept that, once the £1 million ring fenced for part-time students is removed, the general discretionary funds are increased only to £15 million? That increase is no higher than inflation.

I am pleased to open the debate for Labour. It is fair to say that the SNP has avoided holding debates on students, and it is not difficult to see why. The SNP has a list of overpromised and underdelivered policies on students. The Scottish Government was elected on several headline-grabbing promises to students that it never intended to keep. It promised full grants for every student and no more loans; it also promised, on seemingly every leaflet that it produced, to dump the debt. However, instead of writing off the debt, it has written off Scotland's poorest students. The SNP amendment trumpets the £38 million for part-time students, but the fact is that the SNP's efforts to replace loans with grants fall incredibly far short of its manifesto commitment. The £30 million that it has made available for student support next year is wholly inadequate to address the hardships that students face.  Without apology and without shame, the SNP has reneged on almost every promise that it made to Scottish students and graduates at the most recent election. It made a series of multibillion-pound pledges that, in a typically cynical and short-term move, was simply designed to get the student vote. Not content with breaking promises, the SNP in Government has made changes that contribute to student hardship.

That was obviously in a different election. The point is irrelevant to this debate. Labour's record shows that we abolished top-up fees and reduced student hardship by introducing the young person's bursary. Labour's commitment is to address student hardship issues. We now get to the SNP's record. It has made a £12.5 million cut in the student support budget that will result in fewer students receiving any support and, crucially, fewer students receiving full support. It has made a change to the means test, which has cut funding for some of our most vulnerable students midway through their course. That change will affect up to 33,000 students—thousands of mature students, and students from single-parent families who until now were exempt from means testing.

I am aware of that letter, but I think that the cabinet secretary will share my disappointment that only five universities responded to her request for information. Current pressure on hardship funds does not mean that there are no issues with the changes to the means test. The Government's 16-plus proposals include cuts in education maintenance allowances for our college students and cuts in the income threshold, which would reduce further the number of college students who would qualify. Those are all policies that take money from poor students to give to even poorer students. In addition, the SNP was set to introduce a local income tax that would have hit more than 50,000 of our poorest students who work long hours. We are now starting to see the consequences of the SNP's actions. In just two years, the SNP has managed, through its actions and inaction, to  create intolerable pressure on student hardship funds. Government support for students is inadequate. In prioritising graduate debt, it has ignored student hardship. Too many students on limited budgets have to make choices between heating, food, books and bus fares. That will do nothing to address Scotland's drop-out rate, which is the highest in the UK. All of that is taking place in the context of difficult economic times, which puts additional pressures on students' budgets. If the SNP Government was a responsible and responsive Government, it would take action. It would drop its inadequate student support proposals. It would help students through the current economic difficulties and prevent them from falling into hardship and having to rely on a dwindling supply of hardship funds. It would help students who lose their part-time job. It would help students to meet their child care needs. It would help students who see contributions drying up from parents who can no longer afford to help. However, the SNP has not taken those actions. The situation that the Government has created has stretched hardship funds to breaking point. The University of Abertay Dundee, for example, has exhausted its supplies of hardship funds twice, which means that it can no longer help students with serious money worries. Student support here is now so far behind that in the rest of the UK that a Scottish student studying at the University of Stirling, which is in my region, will get more than a third less money to live on than their English, Welsh or Northern Irish counterparts studying at the same university. The fact is that there is almost £2,000 less for the poorest Scottish student. An English student with a family income of £50,000 gets more support from their Government than the very poorest Scottish student gets. The poorest student studying in England receives more in grant support from their Government than the poorest student in Scotland receives from their Government. The student support system in Scotland is no longer fit for purpose. The overriding priority for students in Scotland is student hardship, because they need money in their pockets to help them complete their studies. NUS Scotland president Gurjit Singh said this morning that abolishing the graduate endowment had "little impact on the day to day life of students and does nothing to tackle the issue of financial hardship students face while studying." The SNP has failed on student hardship.

Sorry, but I need to finish.

Yes, but does Margaret Smith accept that Gurjit Singh said that that should be achieved through grants and loans, not grants, loans and parental contributions? The SNP has failed on student hardship. It has spent £18 million on abolishing the graduate endowment and is moving £38 million from loans for part-time students to grants for tuition, but students get not one penny in their pockets while they are studying. Further, at a time of increasing student hardship levels, the SNP has flatlined general discretionary funds. Scottish universities have the highest drop-out rates, the lowest participation of students from low-income backgrounds and the most underfunded students in the UK. That is unacceptable, and it is why Labour will work for a £7,000 minimum income for our poorest students, which represents the Joseph Rowntree Foundation poverty line and is the level called for by student representatives across Scotland. That proposal is deliverable within available resources, and it would tackle student hardship for our most vulnerable students and support those whose financial position might discourage them from pursuing higher education. It is fair, affordable and achievable. We have sought to amend Margaret Smith's motion, as we believe that students in Scotland have had enough of false hope and hollow promises. Although we agree with the direction taken in the Lib Dems' motion, students have had enough broken promises without more being added to the list. Margaret Smith's press comments this morning and her comments in the debate suggest that she agrees with the proposal that to start by providing £7,000 for the poorest students is the way to go. In light of that, I hope that the Lib Dems can support our amendment. Rather than promise the unachievable, I urge Parliament to support our amendment, which calls on the Government to focus the resources that are available in the present spending review period on the poorest students, to tackle student hardship, to invest in the long term and to help students through economic difficulties in the short term. I move amendment S3M-3675.1, to leave out from "its proposals" to end and insert: "all of its proposals for not adequately addressing student hardship; expresses serious concern at reports of childcare and hardship funds being stretched to breaking point  across colleges and universities in Scotland; recognises the calls of the NUS and other student representatives for a £7,000 minimum income guarantee but believes that a £7,000 minimum income for all students in Scotland is unachievable with the funds allocated for student support by the Scottish Government in this spending review period, and calls on the Scottish Government to come forward with new proposals that focus the available resources at the poorest students to genuinely address student hardship in Scotland."

Does the cabinet secretary acknowledge that the consultation proposes a minimum income guarantee of only £5,500—an increase of a mere £500—and does nothing to address the serious issue of student hardship?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

The Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill is the first bill that I have worked on at stage 1 since I entered the Parliament. I found stage 1 to be constructive and focused, if quite technical for a first-time legislator such as me. Of course, I do not have the advantage of having been on the Education Committee when the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004 was passed, although sometimes the discussion between Ken Macintosh and the Minister for Children and Early Years became a prompting exercise on who voted for what the first time around. During the complex committee process, I welcomed the pleas from many witnesses for the process to be simpler, clearer and more parent friendly. Useful evidence and briefings were provided during the committee's consideration and ahead of today's debate by Govan Law Centre, the National Deaf Children's Society and a large  number of other children's and disability groups who contributed concise, well-thought-out arguments. It is clear that we need to return to the 2004 act and ensure that the system is working as well as it should. The 2004 act, aspects of which the bill seeks to clarify, is an ambitious piece of legislation that aims to deliver equal educational opportunities for children and young people with additional support needs. Its fundamental principle is that decisions must be made in the best interests of the child. There is no doubt that, in many cases, the 2004 act has delivered and is working well. However, in evidence, the committee heard concerns that the original intentions of the legislation are not always implemented. That was evidenced by a desire for a full review of the legislation, as other members have pointed out. At the informal round-table meeting of the committee and children's organisations, there was a sense of frustration that the bill's scope is fairly limited. We heard that other issues need to be addressed, in particular those that arise from the Court of Session's rulings and the recommendations for improvement in the HMIE review. The revised code of practice might address some of those issues, but there are still concerns about its ability to provide the absolute clarity that is required in many areas. The minister helpfully indicated to the committee areas in which the Government will lodge amendments at stage 2. The committee welcomed his commitments, but we are keen that he should reflect on the complexity of the process for parents and consider lodging amendments that would further simplify the circumstances in which a parent has recourse to an additional support needs tribunal. The increasingly adversarial nature of the tribunals was a consistent theme among witnesses. In evidence to the committee, Jessica Burns, the president of the Additional Support Needs Tribunals for Scotland, reported an increase in the number of cases in which local authorities brought in a legal team when the tribunal was dealing with a placing request, although she acknowledged that that happens in the minority of cases. She said: "Authorities ... have begun to feel that a large number of successful placing requests will take a lot of money out of their education budget, and one can understand their motivation in seeking to protect their budgets."—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 10 December 2008; c 1767.] Ms Burns reported that in such circumstances, representatives of organisations such as ISEA, which represents the majority of parents, often feel at a disadvantage, because although they have significant experience in additional support needs  they are not legally qualified. It is clear that there is an imbalance in such hearings. Although I am assured that Ms Burns and other tribunal members work to create a culture in which everyone is treated as a witness to the tribunal and one side is not pitted against another, it is difficult to achieve such a culture when there is a mismatch of resources. Ms Burns suggested that tribunals should have the power to appoint legal representation for parents, in limited circumstances. The committee appreciated the frustration of the ASNTS in such cases. The proposal should be given careful consideration. However, we are keen to minimise the adversarial nature of tribunals. Ms Burns mentioned costs and funding, as did Govan Law Centre and local authorities. Although Govan Law Centre thinks that there is sufficient clarity about who bears the cost, there are concerns that worries about the additional cost to a host authority can make the authority reluctant to accept placing requests or reticent about letting parents know that they can apply to a neighbouring authority. A witness from a local authority told the committee that the system for recovering moneys from authorities is confusing and is "neither clear enough nor robust enough to withstand what may well be increased pressures between authorities."—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 14 January 2009; c 1862.] The Government acknowledged that, but argued that the system should be clarified in the code of practice. The committee remains concerned about the matter, and we encourage the Government to consider lodging at stage 2 an amendment to confer on host authorities a statutory right to reclaim costs. An increasing number of local authorities are using independent mediation services. I welcome that approach, which is best practice, particularly when the needs of looked-after children are considered. The committee supports the proposal to make the host authority responsible for mediation and dispute resolution in relation to out-of-area placing requests, but we are concerned that parents do not always understand their rights in that regard. I welcome the minister's acknowledgment of that. Like the minister, I attended the Scottish additional support needs mediation event that was held in the Parliament during stage 1. It can be easy to get lost in the technicalities of section 70 of the Education (Scotland) Act 1980 or section 27 of the 2004 act, but the event served as an important reminder of what the bill is about: parents who are trying to do the best for their children. A panel member emphasised that it is all about people and relationships. They said that it is  about communication between parents, teachers, social workers and council officials, and if all partners could be supported in making those relationships work, more adversarial routes could be avoided. The discussion brought the legislation to life for me. I welcome the revisiting of the 2004 act and the Scottish Government's proposed stage 2 amendments. However, like other members of the committee, I think that more improvements to the 2004 act could be considered, to enable parents to get the best for their children and to ensure that all the agencies, officials and organisations that are involved are aligned in such a way as to make the process as easy, simple and constructive as possible.

The minister will be aware of the high expectations for the fund, with a number of towns in Fife, such as Glenrothes and Leven, already starting to make a case. I appreciate that he plans to make an announcement in March, but can he say when the fund will be available and when it will start to be spent on town centres?

Does the First Minister recognise that the four-year visa covers the vast majority of Scottish degrees, that renewing the visa should be straightforward for genuine students and that the visa charges are not significant compared with international students' fees? Scottish colleges strongly welcomed the visa moves, believing that they will weed out bogus institutions and students. As he recognises, the previous Scottish Government showed, through the fresh talent initiative, that negotiation can secure more suitable terms for Scotland in relation to immigration and border control. Will he work with the whole Parliament on a cross-party basis so that we can all focus on delivering the improvements that Scottish universities want to see?

Labour welcomes the opportunity for the Parliament to reflect on the work of the Council of Economic Advisers and the Government's response. When the council was established just over a year ago, we were in different economic circumstances. The challenges that Scotland faces now are different. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning rightly focused on tackling redundancy and unemployment. We need to make serious decisions about our economy and ensure that, once we begin to emerge from these challenging times, we have the building blocks on which to capitalise. We must ensure that we have a skilled, flexible population to meet the needs of new industries and that Scotland can compete internationally at the high-skills end of the employment market. In summing up on behalf of Labour, I will focus on the higher education aspects of the council's report before moving on to the more general debate. Labour's amendment calls for a formal link between the Council of Economic Advisers and the national economic forum. John Park raised concerns that, so far, the council's relationship with the forum has not been particularly close. Similarly, in its recommendations on universities,  the council seems to have been operating in a bit of a vacuum, too far removed from other initiatives such as the joint future thinking task force. However, those are points of detail. I appreciate that the Council of Economic Advisers is offering a strategic direction for the higher education sector to ensure that it plays a full role in contributing to our economy.

I appreciate that and I was aware of that from the minutes. My concern is that some of the council's recommendations are not clear in their understanding of how Government, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and the universities relate to each other. Of the three recommendations on higher education that made it into the council's annual report, the first relates to the future scale and balance of the Scottish university system. Scotland should act to expand university places and to increase the number of graduates. Such action is never more important than when going through an economic downturn on the scale of the one that we face. However, in dialogue with Government and business, universities are best placed to determine for themselves the balance that should be struck in those areas. As the Government acknowledges in its response to the report, the Government does not have the power to influence individual course decisions. That makes me ask whether the council was operating too far removed from other initiatives and from experts in the field. The council might have benefited from more engagement on the issue with the sector. However, its call for "clarity in the strategic direction of universities" is welcome. The council's second recommendation on HE relates to the degree structure that is offered in Scotland. We must be cautious about restructuring degrees in Scotland. The current four-year degree has served Scotland well and continues to do so. Again, I welcome the Government's response, which highlights the diversity that already exists within the sector. However, we cannot be complacent, so the council is correct to highlight the need for a flexible system that is responsive to a changing student population and that delivers access at all ages and points of life. The final recommendation on higher education relates to how significant additional resources might be invested in Scotland's universities. The  council's analysis of the challenges that the sector faces is entirely accurate. The report states: "squaring the budgetary circle of higher participation, higher levels and higher quality is very challenging." The council's view chimes with those in the sector who increasingly believe that it is essential that, in the next comprehensive spending review, universities receive funds that enable them to remain competitive internationally. We all know that universities face challenges and we need to appreciate that decisions taken elsewhere have an impact on Scotland's HE sector. In a global economic downturn, universities increasingly face the same difficulties as everyone, as well as challenges in recruiting international staff and students. The council does not mince its words on that issue. Its report states: "higher education is a high-cost area and requires a long-term perspective." The report also states: "Scotland will have to be proactive if it wishes to improve its relative position, and to have a strategy to fund the additional cost." I know that the cabinet secretary appreciates the scale of the challenge; the difficulty is that no one is reassured that we have a strategy to address the funding shortfall that universities will face in the near future. The council correctly identifies the pressures in the system and its solution, which recognises the responsibility of all stakeholders, is a helpful contribution to the funding debate. However, the principle on which the council bases its proposal needs questioned. The minutes of the meeting that was attended by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning state: "There was general agreement between Council members that there is a sharp contrast in the attitude and level of commitment between those students who are paying for their education and those that are not". The council provides no evidence to support that conclusion. As the Government states in its response, students already contribute a great deal to their degree, whether in time or money. However, the council raises pertinent issues on how significant additional funding needs to be raised. If the Government wishes to engage on the issue seriously and have a public debate on the issue, consideration should be given to an independent review. The council makes some helpful suggestions on business involvement. Much more work needs to be done on that, so I will be interested to hear the Government's response to the Scottish funding council's work with Scottish Enterprise to consider proposals for an engagement voucher scheme. I  look forward to seeing greater detail on how those proposals are worked up. Moving away from the HE-specific proposals and on to the wider debate, this morning SNP members seem to have pursued those recommendations in the report that suggest solutions that would require more powers for the Parliament. Perhaps that is not surprising, given that council members are selected by the Government. However, SNP members' contributions have been constructive and have added to the general wider debate. The Conservative amendment and speeches from Conservative members have focused on the energy debate. I would welcome clarification from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth as to how the Government intends to respond to the independent assessment. Labour has sympathy with the Liberals' amendment, although the fact that it strays from the central thrust of this morning's debate is unfortunate. However, some speeches from Liberal members were more wide-ranging and raised important concerns about infrastructure investment in Scotland. Hugh Henry made a constructive speech on the local income tax, which I hope the Government will listen to. Labour has been consistent in raising concerns about the Scottish Government's response to the economic downturn, so we hope to see further action in the immediate future. However, the 34 recommendations that have been accepted by the Scottish Government—and the five others that have been partially accepted—represent a large amount of work, if they are fulfilled. Given the Government's record to date, with strategy after strategy delayed—I refer to the skills strategy, the strategic transport projects review, the national planning framework and the Scottish Futures Trust—I hope that the council's recommendations do not suffer the same fate. I call on members to support the Labour amendment.

It has long been recognised that Scotland's curriculum for three to 18-year-olds is due for review. That process was started in the first session of the Parliament with the national debate on the curriculum, the conclusions of which were developed into the curriculum for excellence proposals. I welcomed the Government's decision to consult on the curriculum for excellence. However, given that we still await the final conclusions from the consultation responses, today seems a strange time for a debate.

I thank the cabinet secretary for that intervention. I am sorry if my comments were not clear. I understand that the Ipsos MORI report is due out at the end of February. If the debate had taken place following its publication, we might have had more substantial material to discuss. I understand why the cabinet secretary may not wish to debate other pressing education issues—particularly on the first day back after the recess—such as university funding, student hardship, the situation with probationary teachers or the failure to deliver promises on class sizes. However, a debate on proposals that have yet to complete the consultation process seems a bit mistimed. Nonetheless, I welcome any chance to debate how we can ensure that everyone in Scotland learns to their full potential. Scotland's curriculum has many obvious strengths and is renowned internationally, but there is no doubt that its various segmented parts have developed separately. A more integrated and fluid approach across the whole age spectrum could ensure that we get the best out of everyone in Scotland's schools, colleges and other learning environments and could mean that schoolchildren—and adults in non-school  provision—can rise to their full potential without the curriculum or qualification structures blocking their development. Therefore, I welcome a number of the proposals in the Government's consultation. The increased flexibility that was offered in last year's proposals is a welcome step, as it will encourage pupils to work at their own pace. However, Rhona Brankin has rightly expressed reservations about how schools will manage the change in practice. Equally, retaining higher and advanced higher provides welcome stability for pupils, teachers and schools alike. However, in terms of content, I believe that a greater focus on functional literacy and numeracy is required. I welcome the cabinet secretary's opening comments on that area. It is crucial that children leave primary school with a foundation in the skills that they need to reach their full potential as adults. We recognise that the transition from primary to secondary can be a challenge for all children and it is unacceptable to expect them to undertake that without the necessary skills. We need more consistent and regular testing of primary schoolchildren's literacy and numeracy levels, and much more rigorous collection of statistics by the Scottish Government, which could go a long way towards identifying those pupils who are being left behind and ensuring that they catch up by the time that they go on to secondary school. A number of the cabinet secretary's proposals are sound. I believe that the ambition is there to improve Scotland's curriculum, but there are concerns over the reality of implementation. I have genuine fears that the cabinet secretary could fumble this once-in-a-generation opportunity and the years of hard work by not ensuring that sufficient resources are in place. While many councils across Scotland are struggling just to tread water, it is simply unrealistic to believe that councils and their school staff will be able to implement the significant changes that we need without sufficient resources. We have heard many education groups highlight their concerns over funding for the curriculum, including the EIS, the Scottish Parent Teacher Council and School Leaders Scotland, through its general secretary. Moreover, we have heard concerns regarding funding for teachers' continuing professional development. Due to the tight funding settlement provided to local authorities, training for teachers has been squeezed, although funding in that area will be a crucial element in delivering the curriculum for excellence.

I will just finish my point.  I welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement of an extra in-service day, but there needs to be more secure funding for continuing professional development.

I will challenge what the cabinet secretary has just said. Councils are struggling to afford new teachers, keep class sizes down, deliver free school meals and build the new schools that pupils need, and it is hard to see where they will find money to implement those changes. For example, recent statistics reveal that spending per pupil in Fife Council, in my region, was among the lowest in the country. It spent under £4,000 per primary pupil and had the lowest spend per secondary pupil in Scotland. That situation has developed over the past two budgets from a situation in which Fife's spend per pupil was similar to the average Scottish spend to one in which its spend is now the worst in Scotland. Primary schools in Fife have seen a 4.1 per cent real-terms cut and secondary schools have seen a 6.9 per cent real-terms cut because of two years of Scottish National Party council leadership. In Fife, as in other councils across the country, there is no extra room in the budget to deliver the Government's proposals. Let us not forget that it is not just schools that will deliver the new curriculum. We must also look at the experience of colleges and voluntary sector providers and ensure that the curriculum suits children, young people and adults. Equally, universities must be included to ensure that their own curriculum dovetails with the curriculum up to SCQF level 7. However, we see again a severe shortage of funding to deliver the changes that we need. Wishful thinking will not deliver the curriculum for excellence. To deliver the ambitious overhaul of Scotland's curriculum that we want, the Scottish Government must come forward with the resources to back up the good work that has been carried out on the curriculum for excellence. Again, I welcome the words in the cabinet secretary's proposals, which build on a number of years of work by the previous Administration and stakeholders throughout the sector. However, without sufficient money, the SNP is risking the legacy that was left to it. I hope that the cabinet secretary can show the leadership that is required  on this issue and deliver the resources for the curriculum that Scotland requires in the 21 st century.

Will the minister confirm whether the Leven to Thornton rail link was considered for inclusion in the strategic transport projects review? If it was, why was the link not included in the Government's final proposals? Will the minister pledge to find central funding for the link, regardless of its omission from the STPR?

To ask the Scottish Executive when funding for drugs courts is due to end and when a decision will be made on whether it will be extended. (S3O-5166)

Does the minister share my concern that that short timescale leaves a damaging question mark over the drugs courts in Glasgow and Fife, which means that many of those who are employed by the courts will start actively to seek work elsewhere? Crucially, there is time for only a cursory review of the drugs courts, which will risk not giving them the chance to show their true worth. Will the minister actively look for continuation funding that gives a decent amount of time for those issues to be addressed? Will he, as a matter of urgency, bring an end to uncertainty, so that a review to decide the future of the drugs courts can be held under fair conditions?

It is only a few weeks since I took part in the debate on looked-after children. That morning, we were all in agreement on the pressing need to do more to support this group of children and young people to ensure that they have better life chances and opportunities. Often, the best chance for such children or young people is to stay with a member of their extended family—a kinship carer. Such carers are often grandparents, who take on the responsibility of looking after their grandchildren in difficult circumstances because the safety and care of their grandchildren is their prime concern. It is regrettable that we return to the issue of looked-after children today in much more adversarial circumstances, but I am afraid that that is unavoidable, given the treatment of kinship carers by the Scottish Government. In the debate almost a year ago, we welcomed the Government's promise to deliver on a kinship carers allowance. We have initiated today's debate because, regrettably, the Government has failed to deliver on that promise. Some complex issues need to be resolved, as Liz Smith explored. The measures that the Government has suggested are limited. Children 1 st has identified 7,000 kinship carers who do not receive additional financial help because of the status of the child. Although today's debate is focused on the 2,000 kinship carers who should qualify for the suggested additional support, more must be done—including having discussions with  the UK Government—to deliver better levels of support. Last year, the Scottish Government gave false hope to carers. That was unfair. The First Minister, the Minister for Children and Early Years and the concordat all gave a commitment that is not being delivered. Once again, the ability of the concordat to deliver Government priorities has been called into question. Within Fife, 80 carers of looked-after children, and 148 carers of non-looked-after children, currently receive a kinship carers allowance that is paid at the same rate as the foster care allowance, which ranges from £80 to more than £140 a week, depending on the child's age. Fife Council's arrangements have been in place for a number of years so they pre-date the Scottish Government, the concordat and Fife Council's current SNP-Lib Dem administration. In response to Bob Doris and Christina McKelvie, I point out that the policy was originally delivered by a Labour administration in Fife. It is nonsense to suggest that Labour took no action on the issue. On 1 April 2008, Fife Council had no delays in payments, no broken promises and no carers waiting for funding that they had been promised. However, I have spoken to officials at Fife Council, and I am very concerned to learn that the allowance is under review. Fife Council is considering whether it can afford the current rates, whether it needs to extend means testing and whether it can continue to provide an allowance to kinship carers of non-looked-after children. The historic concordat is forcing Fife Council to look again at its kinship care arrangements. We are told that the historic concordat provides money to pay for the kinship carers allowance, but the review in Fife could lead to a cut in provision in the region. In many ways, families in Fife are fortunate, given the continuing postcode lottery in kinship care support. The Government's commitment to "the provision of equitable and appropriate support for all carers of looked-after children"— [ Official Report , 5 December 2007; c 4089.]  is not being realised. Worryingly, kinship care is referred to in the single outcome agreements of only 11 local authorities. That is a serious omission, given that kinship care is a concordat commitment. Kinship care is another example of the concordat not working because it is unable to deliver national priorities that were promised by a Government that is not providing enough money to enable delivery. There is a yawning gap between the promises that were made by the Government in the Parliament and local government's ability to deliver them. In its defence, COSLA has produced  a briefing that sets out the reality of the implementation of the policy. The fact that it needs to deal with the "myths that have built up around the policy on kinship care" payments is a direct result of misrepresentation by the Government. Today's debate will, I hope, push the Government towards making good on the promises that it made a year ago.

Does the minister agree that the Leven to Thornton link clearly meets the aim of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth to maximise jobs, business, the economy and sustainability with accelerated capital spend? Will he therefore consider every possible option for bringing forward the rail link as part of the Scottish Government's plans to accelerate capital spending, so that Levenmouth and wider Fife can benefit during these difficult economic conditions?

The cabinet secretary mentioned the joint future thinking task force. The other week, it faced concerns that there is no new money and that the horizon fund is being created merely by top slicing other budgets. She stated her intention to provide a higher proportion of funding for knowledge exchange. Will that increased proportion be additional money or further top slicing from universities' already tight budgets? What will the timescale be for the increase? The funds that are proposed for the horizon fund are, in many cases, already committed, and I am concerned that, without more money, there is a danger that other important projects may lose out.

I remember as a young—or perhaps younger—researcher in the early months of the Parliament preparing a paper on looked-after children for Labour MSPs. The inequalities that face that group of young people have never left me. I prepared the paper at the time of the first big debate on the issue, which took place when Sam Galbraith was the responsible minister. The genuine importance that has been placed on the issue is clear from previous Executive ministers' speeches and their actions in government. However, reform and the increased resources that have accompanied reform have not led to the progress that we all wanted and still want to see. The statistics make for depressing reading. The numbers of children in care have steadily  increased over the past few years. Some 26 per cent more children are now looked after than were looked after in 1999. Many life chances are taken away from children in care. We know that such children are more vulnerable to teenage pregnancy, drug and alcohol abuse, unemployment and severe health inequalities, which Richard Simpson discussed. Change has not happened anywhere near as fast, and has not gone as far, as we wanted it to. That has not been because of lack of effort, lack of support in Parliament or even lack of consultation outside it. Many of the indicators on which the wellbeing of looked-after children is based will take a while to improve, but children and young people are being let down daily. Looked-after children do not need to see such reductions in their life chances. Other countries do much better in this area. We must improve parenting and corporate parenting in this country so that we do not continue to waste the talents of Scotland's looked-after children. Education has been focused on and has received resources—Rhona Brankin highlighted that. Last year, 48 per cent of looked-after children over school age left care without any qualifications. That figure is an improvement on the near 60 per cent who left care without any qualifications in 2002-03, but it is still unacceptably high. It is depressing that the figures for my region—Fife—do not compare well with the poor national figures. The educational attainment of looked-after children in Fife is lower than that of looked-after children in other parts of the country. They have lower attainment in many qualifications, and lower attainment in English and maths. Furthermore, there has been a large drop in attainment from last year to this year. Fife Council was one of 18 authorities that took part in pilots that were aimed at increasing educational attainment among looked-after children, but the process revealed as much about what needs to be improved as it did about the ability to deliver results. However, it is important that there is a legacy from the pilot so that the necessary change that was identified can be achieved. In recent discussions that I have had with teachers and other professionals who work with looked-after children in Fife and throughout Scotland, concerns have been expressed about the serious lack of foster care places and the lack of training for foster carers so that they can cope with challenging behaviour. Despite fostering being most beneficial to the most disruptive children, many are placed in bought placements in which they find themselves in mixed age groups. That leads to frequent disruption, which can obviously impact on children's attendance and  attainment at school. Only 27 per cent of care leavers who are entitled to after care are still in touch with Fife social work services, and only a third of care leavers in Fife had pathway plans. Those figures are well below the national averages. There are also concerns about weaknesses in some local authorities' single outcome agreements on looked-after children, and about stretched social work budgets, which must ensure that children on the margins of needing care will always have that option open to them. However, some positive actions have been taken in Fife. There are people in Fife who are very committed to looking after looked-after children. I am pleased to be an ambassador for Barnardo's Fife children's rights service, which provides independent advocacy for children throughout Fife. Many of the service users are children who have been, or will be, taken into care. The service is entirely independent of other interests within child care services. Children feel that they can trust it, and it can speak freely and fully in support of the child's rights. I would like to see such a service available to looked-after children throughout Scotland. If we are to improve corporate parenting for looked-after children in Scotland, and improve parenting in Scotland so that we will rely less on corporate parenting services, we need properly protected investment by the Scottish Government and local authorities throughout Scotland. I know that we are working in a changed financial relationship with local authorities, but it is clear that progress is slow on local delivery and translating words into actions, and that the Parliament's intentions often struggle to be realised.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it expects levels of student hardship to increase in this academic year. (S3O-4771)

Can the cabinet secretary confirm that a student in England with a parental income of £50,000 receives more Government support than does the very poorest Scottish student? Does she agree that stripping over £12 million from funding for grants, bursaries and loans over the next three years, which is a result of the Scottish Government's decision to reduce the number of students who are eligible for Government support, risks increasing student hardship and drop-out rates, and threatens the widening of participation at Scottish universities?

I congratulate Christopher Harvie on securing this evening's members' business debate and giving us all the opportunity to talk about the virtues and merits of Fife. Professor Harvie's motives in pushing for Fife to have a prominent role in the forthcoming year of homecoming are to be commended, and I am sure that Fife is well placed to be at the centre of events. Like many Scots, Fifers have made their mark around the world, and the homecoming will give us all an opportunity to reflect on those achievements.  I look forward to the minister's reply to Professor Harvie on the proposal that Fife should be a trial project for worldwide internet links. I would be supportive of any project that raised Fife's international profile, but would want to be reassured that any such project that was pursued could deliver high returns, culturally and socially. Even before the internet, Fife had a long tradition of twinning and cultural partnerships, one of the longest standing of which is Dunfermline's relationship with Trondheim in Norway. That is an interesting example, as it reflects the progress that has been made in the relationships that are established. From being a fairly municipal partnership that existed mainly between councils, Dunfermline's relationship with Trondheim has recently been recommitted to and has grown into a much more community-focused and inclusive partnership. Since 1996, Fife has taken a much more community-driven approach to twinning and has placed a focus on developing relationships—it is almost a process of dating for a few years before rings are exchanged. Fife has active associations that manage such relationships. As well as economic strengths between towns and villages, the prevalence of beer festivals in Fife seems to owe something to our European twins. Kirkcaldy has a long-standing relationship with Ingolstadt, which recently led to brass and oompah bands celebrating Ingolstadt's 1,200 th birthday at Beveridge park. Glenrothes is twinned with Böblingen—I am sure that Christopher Harvie will correct my pronunciation. It is a vibrant partnership that involves cultural, social, economic, educational, sporting and tourist engagement, although I imagine that Böblingen has a quieter month ahead of it than Glenrothes does. Compatibility is a key factor in many relationships, and it is increasingly recognised as the bedrock of a successful twinning. In that context, I would have reservations about the internet—that often impersonal tool. I am not sure whether the internet is the best place to foster twins that have long-term prospects. Also, it takes time to develop a twinning between towns and villages, and the timescales to meet the year of homecoming are too sharp to allow any meaningful bonds to develop. The idea of twinning towns that share a name may be limited. Although Dunfermline may be overwhelmed by suitors, I cannot find an equivalent for Kelty, my home town; Burntisland, my adopted town; or Methil, where my office is—though if they exist, I am sure I will be corrected. For a successful link to be established, there has to be interest and commitment from both partners, and we cannot be sure that Dunfermline, Illinois  would embrace the project in the way that we would like. The point is that there needs to be interest on both sides. The outside world needs to want this level of engagement with Fife. Although I hope that the year of homecoming will successfully focus the world's eye on Scotland, interest needs to come originally from communities. The key for me is the level of engagement and inclusiveness of the project. Unfortunately, there appear to be new barriers to this, particularly for children and young people. The lack of a foreign language, and the barriers that are presented by the necessary but often onerous child protection tests and disclosures, make successful school exchanges difficult and present new challenges in ensuring that twinning is carried on to the next generation. The motion mentions the Rosyth ferry. We all know how important the ferry is, and I am concerned that the gap in the service is threatening not only the economic links but the cultural links that have developed over the years. I, along with others, am disappointed that there had to be a gap and I am perhaps less concerned about the virtual bond that can be created than I am about trying to hasten the return of the ferry, to recreate the bond that was there. I urge the Government to do all that it can to return the service as soon as possible.

Like many other members and the crowd who were outside Parliament this morning, I believe that increasing the age limit for alcohol to 21 is misguided. There will be future opportunities to debate whether the other measures in the Government's alcohol proposals will bring about the cultural change that we all know is needed, but there can be little debate left about a simple increase in the age limit to 21. It is an inconsistent policy that will not bring about the significant changes in Scotland's relationship with alcohol that we need. If the reason for raising the age limit to 21 is to tackle underage drinking, the SNP's policy looks even weaker, because the main reason for increasing to 21 seems to be to enforce the age limit of 18. If we want to enforce that age limit, we must invest the resources to do so. We should not  unfairly target 18 to 21-year-olds in order to tackle a problem with 15 to 16-year-olds. Instead, the Government must do more to enforce the current age restriction and prevent children from getting a supply of alcohol from adult friends or relatives. We must do more to prevent retailers from selling to our children. That involves tougher enforcement of current laws, enhancing the test purchasing scheme and enforcing a change in the culture of retailers and pubs so that proof of age is always asked for. It is about coming down hard on retailers and pubs that break the law; it is not about increasing the age limit to 21.

I appreciate the intervention, but the evidence that I have suggests not that it is solely 18 to 21-year-olds who supply alcohol, but that it tends to be older relatives who do it—the conviction in Fife was of a 26-year-old. It is not only people in the 18-to-21 age category who are involved in proxy purchasing. We must crack down on adults who buy alcohol for children. It is often far too easy to overlook the fact that proxy purchase—not direct purchase—is the greatest source of alcohol for children. As we crack down harder to enforce the age limit of 18, there is the potential that we will see an increase in the problem of proxy purchasing. Statistics show that 22 per cent of 13-year-olds and 29 per cent of 15-year-olds get alcohol from friends or relatives. Even more concerning is the fact that those figures rise to 26 per cent and 35 per cent when we consider girls alone. However, on the most recent figures, we have had only one conviction for proxy purchasing in Fife—as I said earlier, that person was over 21—and we have had only 83 across the country. Something is clearly wrong, and increasing the age limit to 21 will do little to tackle that aspect of underage drinking. Rather than increase the age limit, the Government should consider radical ways to encourage retailers to demand proof of age before selling alcohol. Challenge 21 is a useful scheme for retailers across Scotland, and radical solutions to encourage uptake and use of proof-of-age cards, such as the Young Scot card, could be far better routes to tackling underage drinking. Scotland faces a real challenge in its relationship with alcohol, and I agree with the Scottish Government that we must be prepared to consider radical solutions to the serious problems  that we face. However, the emphasis should be on the word "solution" and not the word "radical". There is no point in doing something for the sake of being seen to do it. Raising the age limit to 21 is not a solution to the problems that we face in Scotland. The SNP should drop the plans and instead focus on more effective measures to tackle proxy purchasing, underage drinking and our cultural attitude to alcohol in Scotland.

To ask the First Minister, in light of concerns regarding universities' budgets from October, what the Scottish Government will do to avoid a funding crisis in the higher education sector. (S3F-1035)

The First Minister paints a positive picture of funding in the university sector, but the principal of the University of Edinburgh, the convener of Universities Scotland, all five rectors and even the First Minister's Council of Economic Advisers have recently expressed concern about the funding of universities in Scotland. Indeed, only this week, we heard news of up to 35 redundancies at Queen Margaret University. The truth is that the First Minister must accept some responsibility for the funding problems that universities in Scotland are facing. Does he accept Universities Scotland's statement that universities are facing a real-terms cut of 0.2 per cent next year? Will he admit that the Scottish Government's poor universities settlement left no room for manoeuvre to absorb the unplanned costs that are now being faced?

The Scottish National Party is contributing to the difficulties that are facing many pensioners in the coming winter. The SNP decision to means test the central heating programme means that pensioners in my region are being denied the support that was available to them under the Labour Government, and they are facing a very cold winter. Will the Government look again at that decision, particularly in the context of rising energy costs, and ensure that Fife pensioners have a heating system that they can turn on this winter?

Although located in some of the most outstanding  areas of Scotland, rural communities, especially the hill and island communities, are disadvantaged in their daily lives in many ways compared with the rest of the country. Living in a more remote part of the world is more expensive than living in an urban area; fuel and food prices and the general cost of living is higher in Scotland's Highlands and Islands than in our cities. At the same time, our rural communities benefit the rest of the country. Tourism, as one of our largest industries, relies on rural communities and often on farmers to keep and manage the land that provides the scenery and views that attract so many visitors to Scotland from the rest of the UK and the world. Equally, some of our most dynamic voluntary organisations in more remote communities often have to live a more collaborative existence than those in urban or city areas. It is not just in the Highlands and Islands, however, where there are rural communities and economies and the increased cost of living and the marginalisation that go with that. In my region of Mid Scotland and Fife, many rural communities require help and investment in order to sustain jobs and their way of life. We must ensure that in changing the LFASS we do not take funding away from areas that need it. The LFASS has been a useful support to our rural communities in that it has provided funding to keep agriculture going and has thus kept whole communities going. Recently, however, as others have said, we have seen a decline in the number of livestock on our hills and there has been concern about how we can keep whole areas sustainable for the long term. Furthermore, with the current global economic conditions affecting countries throughout the world, the cost of farming in our most rural areas has increased significantly, as Aileen Campbell has just outlined. It is therefore fortunate timing that we now have the opportunity to look ahead to 2010-2013 and shape a second interim LFASS. The EU has intimated that it plans to bring forward new regulations in this area in 2014 and it remains to be seen whether those will refocus the LFA funding. The EU could go a number of ways on that and until we have a definite plan and timetable, we should focus on what Scotland needs and how that can be delivered through the current criteria. Over the years, the LFASS has moved from focusing on rural depopulation to looking at how farming can be continued in marginal areas. Now land management is a key aim, which contributes to maintaining the countryside and promoting sustainable farming systems and sustainable rural economies.  I read with great interest the useful submissions from the NFUS, the RSPB and the SCVO. All are pushing for change, although not necessarily in the same direction. The NFUS outlines the steep decrease in livestock numbers in Scotland, pointing out that the fastest decrease has been in the most remote areas. It wishes to see funding focused on active farming in the most remote and physically disadvantaged areas, with additional payments to encourage environmental benefits from farming activity. The SCVO also argues for better targeting of the LFASS at genuinely disadvantaged areas, but it argues that farming cannot be seen in isolation from rural communities. It argues that LFA funding should be given to achieve tangible and agreed public good for rural communities, whether economic, social or environmental—and not necessarily delivered through traditional agricultural activities. It is clear that the stakeholders of rural communities are keen to contribute to a debate on their future. The challenges that we face in helping rural communities in Scotland, which are struggling at this time, merit a wider debate. The RSE report, which was published earlier this month, suggests that there needs to be a new debate on what is the right level of support for subsidies for farming and rural activities. That is important for gaining public confidence. I hope that the Scottish National Party will take this opportunity to conduct such a review. As has already been said, the SNP's SRDP is open to the criticism of being overly bureaucratic and lacking in transparency. I hope that the Government will bring forward changes to improve that. I also caution that SRDP funding for village halls and other community facilities should not be threatened by calls to switch funding solely to faming support. The SNP needs to invest more wisely in improving the long-term sustainability of rural agriculture and economies. More support for local abattoirs, which has already been suggested, could reduce costs for farmers, decrease environmental impacts and boost local economies. We know that support for farming has a beneficial effect on tourism and local food provision. However, the Government is in danger of going in the wrong direction and increasing the centralisation of decision making on environmental, economic and tourism matters. Looking at the LFASS gives us an opportunity to consider how we can get the greatest impact from LFA funds until 2013. Money cannot be spent on propping up unsustainable production. Instead, investment must be made where it will leave a legacy of sustainable rural economies that benefit not only livestock production but rural communities  and economies, the environment, the voluntary sector and tourism industries in Scotland. I hope that the minister will consider those points in looking ahead to a further interim scheme.

I share the sadness expressed by Ted Brocklebank regarding the untimely loss of John MacDougall. Speaking personally, I can say that he and his office were a great help to me in my first year in Parliament. His contribution to Fife will be missed and not forgotten. I am not as long in the tooth as other parliamentarians who take an interest in the A92 and, accordingly, cannot reflect on decades of activism on this issue. However, I have been a frequent traveller on the road over the years and know well the frustration that arises from getting stuck behind a tractor and the anxiety that can be caused by some other drivers' foolish overtaking. However, it has been the efforts of the Glenrothes area futures group that has focused the attention of all of us on the case for further improvements to the road. I have been happy to work with the group to support its efforts to raise the profile of the road, the state of which the group's members believe is affecting the quality of life of their communities. Increasingly, the A92 is a road that needs attention. The circumstances around the road are  different from what they were 10 or even five years ago. For a start, 25 per cent more traffic uses the road than was the case 10 years ago. Increasingly, it is recognised that connectivity between Fife and Dundee, in terms of road and rail networks, is in need of improvement. Dundee is a growing city, with key industries that Fife should be further engaged with. Fife's focus is frequently on Edinburgh, but we have another major economic centre on our doorstep, and it is important that we are able to take full advantage of it. More immediately, Tullis Russell is proposing a new biomass energy system, which will bring around 200 lorries a day to this section of the A92. Two new retail developments are also being brought forward in Glenrothes, and Amazon has recently located to Glenrothes on the A92. All those developments will cause increased traffic on the road. The safety record of the road has been referred to already and, as Ted Brocklebank said, accidents and injuries are increasing. There is also anecdotal evidence that drivers are choosing to avoid the road, especially in rush hour, due to safety concerns, even though it is often the most direct option. People deciding to take longer, less direct routes is not good for the Fife economy. Ted Brocklebank is right to appeal for improvements to be made outside the Glenrothes boundary. If the issue is about improving the economic growth of Fife, particularly central and east Fife, and making it a more attractive place for businesses to locate themselves, improving the A92—along with securing a new Forth crossing—is vital to ensuring that Fife remains open for business. The forthcoming by-election has already been referred to. By-elections often generate more heat than light, but the Glenrothes area futures group has been working hard to create a cross-party consensus on the matter. I hope that that is reflected in the support that the group receives when it comes before the Public Petitions Committee shortly. The campaign was going on for some time before the election and will continue after the election. I will be happy to work with the group on this issue for some time to come. It is a bit disingenuous for Ted Brocklebank to suggest that the Conservative Government had any intention of delivering the dualling of the A92. it is well known that the Conservatives' package of transport projects was an election sweetener that was undeliverable, so it is a bit rich for Ted Brocklebank to accuse other parties of electioneering on the issue. Of course, with regard to past decisions, the Scottish National Party is blameless on this issue,  as it has only recently been in a position in which it is able to make decisions. However, it is worth noting that, so far, those decisions have not included a commitment to upgrading the A92. Although Tricia Marwick expresses her support for the campaign, that support is not shared by the SNP-led Fife Council, and we wait to see whether it is shared by the SNP Government. I appreciate that the minister will announce his strategic transport projects review soon, which will make the Government's priorities much clearer. When he does so, I hope that he has something positive to say to the A92 campaigners.

I would like to put on record the fact that there was a misunderstanding between our offices. We did not receive e-mail confirmation from the minister's office, and I had child care commitments last night. The meeting has now been rearranged, and I am grateful to the minister for that.

The reality is that the legal status of students taking out loans was not an issue for these postgraduate students until the Scottish Government decided that they could no longer defer paying the endowment. Responsibility for the situation lies squarely with the minister and no one else. When she reversed the decision on deferment, she stated that she was exploring options to ensure that postgraduate students did not lose out. Can she confirm whether she will reimburse the postgraduate students who have already paid in full? Will she pay the interest on the student loans that postgraduate students were forced to take out after receiving their final demand letter?

To ask the Scottish Executive what meetings it has had since May 2007 with the south east of Scotland transport partnership and Fife Council to discuss the possibility of upgrading the Redhouse roundabout and what meetings it has planned with them on this issue in the future. (S3O-3837)

The minister will be aware that congestion around the Redhouse roundabout in the morning and afternoon rush hours can make travelling a misery for people throughout the south-east Fife area. Does he agree that, along with the Leven to Thornton rail link, upgrading the Redhouse roundabout is a top priority for people in Fife? Will he outline potential funding sources for making the upgrade of the Redhouse roundabout a reality?

Will the member take an intervention?

I believe that enough research—by the NUS, Shelter and other organisations—has been carried out to allow the Government to make progress. A circular was issued when we were in Government, suggesting that a scheme would be in place by mid-2008. I believe that the intention was to carry out the research and have something in place by now. My concern is that the Government could be moving a bit quicker.

I am delighted to speak on tenancy deposit schemes in my maiden members' business debate. It is always a pleasure to be involved in a debate about a matter on which a solution can be found. I am sure that members will join me in welcoming to the gallery representatives from the National Union of Students and students from the University of Edinburgh, the University of St Andrews, the University of Stirling, and Heriot-Watt University—I am sure that they have already had an entertaining time. I became aware of the inadequacy of the current arrangements when students from the University of St Andrews contacted me after losing their deposits because their letting agency had gone bust. I wrote to the Minister for Communities and Sport, who gave the only possible reply, which was that students could pursue the problem through the registration scheme or the small claims court. Neither option was suitable and it was clear that the tenants would never get their deposits back. If a custodial tenancy deposit scheme had been in place, their money would have been safe. The need for such a scheme is growing. The private rented sector has grown to more than 10  per cent of housing and accounts for more than 230,000 households in Scotland. The sector offers flexibility that meets the needs of students, young professionals, migrant workers and many families. However, it is unfortunate that there is almost acceptance of a poor system in relation to deposits, in which vulnerable tenants, in particular tenants who rent from unaccredited landlords, suffer. As tenants commonly have to pay deposits up front, unfair deductions or delays in returning deposits can cause debt, threaten tenancies and even lead to homelessness in the worst-case scenario. A tenancy deposit scheme would protect tenants from unfair deductions to deposits and from delays in repayment and could offer dispute resolution services. In England and Wales, three mandatory tenancy deposit schemes have been in place for more than a year and have been acknowledged to be a success. More than a million tenancies are covered and disputes between tenants and landlords have been reduced to a minimum. In addition, the schemes are entirely self-financing. In a custodial scheme, in which deposits are held by a third party rather than by the landlord, a proportion of the interest from deposits is used to cover the scheme's running costs. There are no fees for landlords and tenants receive a proportion of the interest on their deposit. That is an improvement on the current arrangements for many tenants. As we know, Parliament is keen on international comparisons. I am pleased to report that similar schemes exist in Ireland, Belgium, France, New Zealand, Australia and Canada. Having met the National Landlords Association and the Scottish Association of Landlords, I appreciate their reservations about the introduction of such a scheme in Scotland. However, I firmly believe that a custodial scheme that would pay for itself would have many benefits for landlords as well as for tenants. In Ireland, landlords protested that the sector would collapse if such a scheme were to be introduced, but in fact the sector has flourished since its introduction. In England and Wales, the National Landlords Association runs one of the schemes. In Scotland, with registration and accreditation, the sector is showing itself to be forward looking and keen to meet high standards. I believe that a tenancy deposit scheme could only help to enhance that reputation. It is clear that there are inconsistencies at present in the handling of deposits, and that there is a lack of clarity and understanding of the issue among landlords and tenants. The Scottish Government should act now to use the powers that were left for it on statute.  Although the minister has pushed forward with landlord registration and accreditation, there has been less drive on a deposit protection scheme, albeit that it is also a measure in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006. Looking back to the passage of the act, it is clear that concerns were expressed that registration and accreditation would not, of themselves, tackle the problems of tenancy deposit dispute. At the time of the passage of the act, there was strong cross-party support. My fellow Fife MSP, Tricia Marwick—with whom, I admit, I do not agree on many occasions—lodged an amendment on the issue. At committee stage, she said "Good landlords will be perfectly happy with a scheme that will separate them from rip-off merchants."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 5 October 2005; c 2504.] Strong stuff indeed. It is therefore a pity that SNP back benchers have not been as vocal on the issue when their party is in government as when it was in opposition, albeit that some SNP back benchers continue to support the proposal. The political argument has been won. The measure was included in the 2006 act because Parliament recognised the need for such a scheme. We should now be pushing ahead and introducing a scheme. A circular that the former Scottish Executive released in August 2006 said that "the provisional estimate is that arrangements" for a deposit protection scheme "could be operational by mid-2008." Even allowing for civil service caveats, the intention was clearly that a scheme would be in place by this summer. A tenancy deposit scheme should have been in the ministerial in-tray, but we have instead seen delay in the progression of such a scheme in Scotland. Only now—a whole year since the election—is the private rented sector tenant survey finally under way. While the Government has lingered, events have overtaken it. The total deposits that are held by private sector landlords have reached unprecedented levels. Shelter Scotland estimates that the amount is about £50 million. However, using the latest Scottish household survey research, the figure could be closer to £80 million. Schemes in England and Wales have been up and running for a year. The Scottish Government can now draw upon that experience, as it can on the research and evaluation that took place before those schemes were introduced. Recently, the National Union of Students conducted research that found that 33 per cent of students reported unfair delays or deductions from deposits at the end of their tenancies. At the moment many tenants, including students who are  going to university in the autumn, are looking for accommodation. It is only fair that those tenants, including students and their parents, have similar protection to that which is offered to tenants, including students, in the rest of the United Kingdom. A tenancy deposit scheme that is combined with an arbitration service has something to offer to both tenants and landlords. The powers are in place—they are ready and waiting to be used. In the meantime, up to £80 million is being held in the private rented sector without regulation on how it is handled, when it is returned, or who receives the interest from the sums involved, the total of which is vast. As a first step, a voluntary scheme would at least provide some protection. I welcome a commitment from the minister that he will explore the possibility of providing voluntary access to the existing schemes in England and Wales, before he puts in place a mandatory scheme. That said, the evidence on voluntary schemes is not particularly positive. Although good landlords would join, the vulnerable tenant would still be left exposed. I hope that the minister will take the opportunity of the debate to put on record his agreement in principle to the tenancy deposit scheme and to commit to consulting over the summer to shape what a future scheme or schemes would look like. A tenancy deposit scheme would be an improvement to the private sector in Scotland. It would not need legislation. It would make a positive impact quickly and deliver a huge benefit for tenants and landlords without disproportionate cost to the Government, tenants or landlords. There is no reason to hold off any longer from providing this valuable security to tenants.

The previous Labour-led Executive made clear its intention to introduce a deposit scheme that would be up and running by the middle of 2008, but we are in the middle of 2008 and so far we have heard little from the Government on it. The minister mentioned costs. Does he agree that the issue is not simply about comparing the total amount of deposits that are withheld unfairly against the costs of the deposit protection scheme, because a scheme could reduce the fear and threat of unfair withholding of deposits, which would reduce tension between tenants and landlords?

That reduction may be unquantifiable in simple cash terms, but does the minister agree that it would be a crucial benefit of a scheme?

I congratulate my colleague John Park on lodging the motion for the debate. The crossings across the Forth are crucial to the economy of my region of Mid Scotland and Fife. It is therefore pleasing for me to see that the upper Forth crossing at Kincardine is coming close to completion and I look forward to its planned opening later this year. The new crossing will improve the road infrastructure in the area and cut journey times from both sides of the Forth.  However, I am concerned that the recent closures of the Forth road bridge, which were due mainly to poor weather, might mean that we would be taking a risk in having only one upper Forth bridge operational when the old Kincardine bridge is closed for refurbishment. I back John Park's calls for the minister to look long and hard at whether the old bridge needs to close entirely, and to consider whether other options can be explored and whether contingencies can be put in place to mitigate the effects on residents in the surrounding area. Also, with a question still hanging over whether HGVs will be able to cross the easterly bridge from 2013, planning for contingencies around the upper crossings now could help in coping with increased HGV traffic in the future. It is crucial that we do what we can to prevent a gap in HGVs being allowed to cross the easterly bridge, or at least minimise the gap, not just for the sake of hauliers and the economy but because Kincardine residents will feel the brunt of increased freight coming through their villages. However, a more long-term approach is required to get freight off our roads and out of our villages. I support the reopening of the Leven to Thornton rail link, which could go some way to reducing the demand on the two current and two new Forth bridges. As well as reducing traffic flow on the bridges, getting more freight on to rail could help to reduce emissions and tackle climate change. The south-east Scotland transport partnership is considering the feasibility of reopening the rail link, and I hope for positive news on that in the near future. As well as dealing with freight, I believe that we can make improvements to the transport infrastructure in the east that would ease the pressure on the two upper forth bridges. A great priority in Fife is to make improvements to the Redhouse roundabout outside Thornton, which serves traffic from the Levenmouth area and beyond. Also, just this week a petition was lodged with the Scottish Parliament to improve the A92 around the Glenrothes area.

Of course, Presiding Officer. I will try to draw what I say into an overall Fife strategy. I have, along with my Fife MSP colleagues, spoken to Fife Chamber of Commerce, which believes that transport improvements such as I have described could play a crucial role in growing the economy not just of Fife, but of the east of Scotland in general.  If we can improve traffic flow for the easterly bridge and cut journey times for the buses, freight and cars that use the bridge, we can also reduce demand on the bridges on the upper Forth, which will reduce congestion in the villages around Kincardine. I hope that the minister will look seriously at the proposed transport improvements when they come before him. It is crucial that we have contingencies in place around Kincardine to cope with increased traffic flow in the short term, when the old bridge is closed for refurbishment; in the medium term, in the event that the easterly bridge is closed due to weather restrictions; and, in the longer term, looking ahead to any gaps in the ability of HGVs to use the easterly Forth bridge. I hope that the minister can assure us that contingencies will be in place to deal with those consequences and to ensure that the villages around the upper Forth bridges do not suffer the severe traffic congestion that they fear.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its transport priorities are for the Fife area. (S3O-3322)

The minister will be aware that a Leven to Thornton rail link and improvements to the Redhouse interchange are high transport priorities for Fife Council. I hope that he will do all that he can to support the realisation of those projects. He may also be aware that a petition was submitted to the Parliament this week calling for improvements to the A92, particularly around Glenrothes. I am aware that there are competing priorities within Fife and a finite pot of money, but is he willing to consider the proposal for the A92 seriously and to meet me to discuss constituents' concerns about the road?

I thank Christopher Harvie for lodging the motion for this evening's debate. Supermarkets have grown in importance in our daily lives, from being virtually non-existent 40 or 50 years ago to being omnipresent and at the centre of much household shopping in Scotland. The convenience of the supermarket and getting there, the parking and the shopping hours that extend well into the evening, or even for 24 hours, together with the range and certainty of supply of stock all under one roof have all been key to the success of the 21 st century supermarket. It is very difficult for the high street to compete on that basis. When supermarket convenience is combined with relatively low prices and strong branding and advertising, it is clear why the supermarket has become such a powerful part of our lives. A supermarket can contribute to regeneration by bringing jobs, shops and a new lease of life to an area. In my region, Glenrothes is set to benefit from two new supermarkets, both of which appear to be adopting a modern and responsible approach to large-scale retailing: one will be an eco-store that will employ renewable technologies, and the other will contribute to the regeneration of  the town's main shopping area. Increasingly, some retailers are becoming responsible and responsive to their local community—although we must recognise that that happens only when they see it as being good for their business. However, supermarket development is not always necessarily a good thing in itself. Many have suggested that out-of-town shopping developments, which are often centred on large supermarkets, are a significant contributory factor in the degeneration of many town centres. Equally, more recently, environmental concerns about supermarkets have come to the fore. As a society, we are beginning to question whether it continues to make sense to have large-scale out-of-town—and, therefore, car-reliant—shopping centres, which sell out-of-season goods sourced from around the world and all needlessly packaged in plastic and cardboard. The consequences and contradictions of the carbon emissions of such shopping behaviour are coming into sharp focus. It remains to be seen whether supermarkets and customers are able to adapt to reduce the carbon emissions of shopping on such a scale. I want to raise briefly the pricing policies of some supermarket chains. Many of our most deprived communities, including those in my region, have only one small store from which to get food and other daily essentials. Many people within those communities do not have cars to take them to the larger and cheaper out-of-town stores. That means that they are very much at the mercy of the prices and offers that are available at the local store. However, as a number of supermarket chains have put in place differential pricing policies that depend on store size, the smaller stores often have higher prices and have fewer offers available. I fear that the double whammy of such pricing policies and lack of transport means that some of our poorest communities pay the most for their daily essentials. In the energy sector, gas and electricity suppliers provide social tariffs that guarantee cheap rates for their poorest customers, and I believe that it is worth considering a similar voluntary scheme for the retail sector to provide social tariffs for daily essentials. In that way, supermarket chains could ensure that their stores in Scotland's most deprived communities sold goods at the low prices that are available in the larger out-of-town stores. Today, I have written to the minister and several supermarket chains to seek their views on my proposal. I look forward to exploring the idea in a constructive and consensual manner with all interested parties. I thank Chris Harvie again for giving us the opportunity to raise these issues.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its targets are for absence rates within the NHS and what efforts it is making to meet them. (S3O-3116)

The cabinet secretary might be aware that, as of November 2007, NHS Fife had a rolling average absence rate of 5.8 per cent. That rate is above the national average, and above that of comparable NHS boards. Can she confirm whether NHS Fife is on track to meet the target of 4 per cent? If she cannot, can she outline the efforts that the Scottish Government will make to ensure that absence rates in NHS Fife at least meet the national average? Will she examine the reasons behind the absence rates of NHS staff in the region and those of the rest of Scotland's hard-working NHS staff?

I thank Tricia Marwick for securing this evening's debate. I am happy to add my support to the call to reopen the Leven to Thornton rail link. Local community groups and representatives—some of whom I, too, welcome to the chamber this evening—have long recognised the need for better  links to the Levenmouth area. I hope that the time has come for those links to be realised. There are challenges in introducing a Leven to Thornton rail link into the Fife rail network, but I hope that SEStran's feasibility study will examine those challenges and explore ways to overcome them. The Government needs to strike the right balance between the two priorities for Fife—the need for quick, major connections between towns and cities on the east coast line and the need to extend the local rail network that operates close to where people live. Work and leisure possibilities have changed dramatically in recent years, and our transport systems often struggle to adapt to our changing needs. Unless people have a car, Fife can be a difficult place to get around quickly. Recently, I opened an office in Methil. For my staff, travelling to Methil from Kelty, Glenrothes or Edinburgh by public transport is not really an option if they need to get to work on time. A Leven to Thornton rail link, along with investment in other public transport infrastructure, would make commuting to and from Levenmouth much more possible and could open up much-needed employment opportunities. If jobs are to be created, the conditions must be right. Those are the key arguments in favour of reopening the line. Many of them are made by the Levenmouth communities regeneration group in its well-named five miles and five arguments statement, which I fully support. Previous Administrations and councils have long recognised the benefits of reopening the rail link, but recently the need for it has become all the more pressing. We all recognise that the predicted expansion in housing in the area will place greater demand on public transport. Reopening the line would give us the opportunity to move not just passengers but freight, as Tricia Marwick said. The likely closure of the Forth road bridge to heavy goods vehicles, the increased cost of moving freight by road, and our increased awareness of the environmental impact of our transport decisions all add further weight to the argument. The importance to national and international companies such as Diageo of having rail links close by should not be underestimated. Equally, improved links could encourage other businesses to relocate to the Levenmouth area and provide a key link for the energy park and, potentially, the Westfield site. The local transport strategy for Fife identifies a new Leven to Thornton rail link as a priority, but it should not be provided in isolation. It is clear to me that, as Marilyn Livingstone highlighted, Levenmouth and central Fife more generally need  improvements to the key linkages to town centres and to the public transport network as a whole. The minister has a strategic role and is rightly interested in the national picture, but I hope that, as was the case under the previous Administration, there will be opportunities for a number of more local improvements to take place, such as the reopening of the Leven to Thorton rail link. Such improvements would considerably enhance social mobility and access to employment, reduce traffic congestion and promote sustainable travel as a positive alternative. Levenmouth needs everyone to work together to continue to promote its regeneration and development. I would greatly welcome the reopening of the Leven to Thornton rail link as part of a package of investment in public and private transport for Levenmouth, and I am more than happy to have been able to help to promote that aim in this evening's debate.

To ask the First Minister what measures the Scottish Executive is taking to tackle student hardship. (S3F-710)

In reality, the First Minister's Government has done little to boost levels of support for today's students while they are studying. Bursaries have stalled under this Government, and now we see that its flagship policy of a local income tax would make working students worse off. That policy would hit the least well-off the hardest.  Last week, the First Minister did not seem clear on the point that students are exempt from council tax. While that does not inspire confidence in his preparation for a local income tax, can the First Minster explain why he feels students should pay his local income tax when they are exempt from council tax?

To ask the Scottish Executive what efforts it is making to increase the number of places at specialist schools for children with autistic spectrum disorder. (S3O-2703)

As the minister will be aware, the number of children with autistic spectrum disorder is rising so it is important that we ensure that such children can access appropriate education. Will he respond to concerns that the promised £10 million additional support fund has not been delivered? How can the Government guarantee that money that was intended for additional support needs will be spent on improving such provision?

I am pleased to speak in this afternoon's debate. When the National Parks (Scotland) Bill was passed in 2000, I was working in the Parliament as a researcher. I am pleased to take part in a debate that reflects on the first five years of the parks. One of the two national parks, Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park, is situated partly in the region that I represent. I welcome the minister's announcement today that the boundary of the park will be extended. The national parks have at their core four statutory aims, with which we are familiar: conservation, sustainability, understanding and the promotion of social and economic development. It is crucial that the existing national parks and any future parks that we establish stay true to those four aims and remain linked and accountable to the local communities in which they are placed. An important part of the role that the national parks play is that they build community engagement and involvement, so that the unique and special environment in Scotland is conserved, sustained and, moreover, enjoyed and understood. Scotland's landscape and wildlife are among our biggest assets. The beauty of our country brings millions of visitors from around the globe to our shores every year. The economic benefits of the £4 billion-plus tourism industry, which sustains more than 200,000 jobs in Scotland, make it  integral to Scotland's prosperity, especially in many rural areas. National parks that are linked and accountable to their local areas, that conserve and sustain our environment and that promote and develop the use of it should be a key element of further building our tourism industry. I recently attended a tourism conference in Fife at which the challenges of climate change for the tourism industry were highlighted as well as an increasing move towards sustainable tourism both in terms of how tourists travel and how the tourism industry delivers. The quality of our national parks puts us in a good position to meet those challenges. I acknowledge the minister's assurances that he will not be bound by Professor Kay's report. I do not believe that Neil Kay's recommendation to merge the national parks into SNH is the proper way forward, as that could risk losing the local connection that national parks should have. I was happy to receive useful briefings from RSPB Scotland and Ramblers Scotland in advance of the debate. Although they point out the room for improvement, they support the national park model. A key issue for Ramblers Scotland and others is that of access rights to Scotland's environment. In my region, there have been recent problems with access to land on the Sauchieburn estate, on which Ramblers Scotland has been lobbying hard, with a protest organised for this coming weekend. The National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000 was introduced as part of the measures on land rights in the early years of the Scottish Parliament, and the national parks have acquitted themselves well as access authorities. The Ramblers Scotland briefing states that our two national parks have "demonstrated how public support for the protection of landscape, wildlife and the cultural heritage can go hand in hand with economic improvement and the wider aspects of sustainable development." It seems clear that the national park structure is appreciated by those who enjoy Scotland's natural environment and that it is a valued model for securing the full potential of Scotland's environment. National parks can ensure that the public have access to Scotland's countryside and can effectively manage that countryside in a sustainable way, both economically and environmentally. As part of the forthcoming review, I believe that consideration should now be given to extending the model of national parks to marine and coastal areas. I may be biased, but I believe that Fife contains some of the most beautiful beaches in the whole of Scotland. It is also home to diverse and fragile coastal wildlife. Extending the model of national parks to those areas and to other coastal areas in Scotland could help us to  maximise the benefits of Scotland's coastline for tourism and quality of life and could help us to sustain them into the future. However, the minister has confirmed this afternoon that although the new Administration is not against a coastal marine national park in principle, "simplification of the complex regulatory system for the marine environment" is one of its "more pressing priorities". I quote from the Scottish Government's website. A marine bill should be a high priority—it was in our manifesto and in the SNP's. However, it will take time to produce a marine bill, and it will take longer still to pass and implement such legislation. All the while, we are delaying the prospect of extending the benefits of the national park model to elsewhere in Scotland, including the marine and coastline environment. The truth is that it is not an either/or situation. A new national park can be created by ministerial order under the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000 and need not wait for new legislation to come into force. I believe that, following the review of the national parks, the Scottish Government should seriously consider creating new national parks, including national parks in marine and coastal areas such as those in my region. There is no reason to wait for the proposed marine bill to which we are all looking forward.

I fully accept that. Members have explored and recognised the importance of locating national parks where local people are keen to have them. My point is that I would like the Government to consider establishing a coastal and marine national park sooner than would be the case if we waited for the proposed marine bill to be passed. We are lucky to have such a beautiful country. For a small country, Scotland has some of the most diverse landscapes and wildlife in the world. Our national parks should continue to form an element of how we secure the benefits of our natural resources for generations to come.

The minister will be aware that Fife Constabulary is cracking down on adults who supply alcohol to young people and that, only this week, a second adult has been charged with supplying alcohol to two 12-year-old girls. However, tracing such adults is difficult and the police must rely on reports from the public. Does the minister agree that the Government should introduce a mandatory national ultraviolet marking scheme that would link alcohol products to the people who bought them? That would go a long way towards helping the police to do their job of identifying adults who break the law in that way.

I am happy to speak in this afternoon's debate. I acknowledge Dave Thompson's efforts in securing  the debate and the concerns that he has highlighted about the above-average number of accidents caused by drunk drivers in the Highlands and Islands. Drink-driving is completely unacceptable, and we must do all that we can to make Scotland's roads safer. Our current drink-driving limit has been in force since 1966, and a number of bodies have recently suggested that it is time to review the limit, with persuasive arguments having been presented by the BMA. Many European countries have lower limits—we should consider following their example. I welcome the debate on the issue and the on-going debate across the United Kingdom, but the matter is reserved and—to reflect Des Browne's comments—I feel that if it is right to lower the limit here, it is right to do so throughout the UK. There are real concerns that a difference in the limit in Scotland from the rest of the UK may cause confusion among drivers and not lead to the necessary clarity around the law. I regret to say that, like the Highlands, Fife has a worrying record of serious road accidents, although the issue is wider than drink-driving. Road safety more generally is a serious issue across the country. Only today, we have heard of an accident in Fife that claimed the lives of two men. My deep condolences go out to their friends and families. When I was elected last May, I was shocked by the number of deaths of young drivers and passengers in Fife, where nine people died in road accidents last year, many of whom were young people. I must say that alcohol was not involved in the majority of the accidents: irresponsible driving, combined with rural roads and bends on high-speed roads were the main factors. Much work is being done in Fife by the police to try to educate young drivers and make them aware of the risks and reality of their actions. Fife Constabulary reports that in Fife someone is seriously injured or killed in a road accident every second day. One quarter of convictions for causing death by dangerous driving are for drivers under 20, even though the age group represents just 3 per cent of all drivers. Safe drive stay alive is a successful project in Fife, sponsored by Diageo, which works with senior pupils and college students to consider a range of issues that face new drivers and emphasises the dangers of drink-driving. Around 1,500 young people take part every year. The project's content reflects the findings of statistical evidence, feedback from emergency service personnel and consultation of education officers and road users. It has adopted an innovative and hard-hitting approach. Contributions from the parents of road-accident victims and victims  themselves ensure that it is an experience that the young people who attend do not forget. The House of Commons Transport Select Committee report on novice drivers published last summer stated that there is a case for reducing the limit to zero for novice drivers. The Department for Transport has given a commitment to consider the option as part of a wider consultation on the alcohol limit. I welcome that response. I want to touch briefly on the issue of people driving when under the influence of drugs. The problem affects young people as passengers and drivers, when other transport options may not be available, when they feel that the roads are quiet and when there is a feeling that not much risk is being taken. We need to ensure that a strategy that addresses drink-driving also recognises the reality that there are some people who would not dream of drinking and driving but who take a different approach to drug taking. We need to ensure that we address that. There is an additional challenge in raising awareness of the unacceptable nature of drink-driving. A recent report on Polish migrants in Fife highlighted the clear benefits that they bring to the economy as well as the challenges that they face in accessing services. However, Tayside Police has recently expressed concerns that migrant workers in particular do not stick to the alcohol limit. That may seem contradictory as many of the countries that the workers come from have lower limits than the UK. It appears to be difficult to identify the reasons, but it is possible that the limits are not so well enforced in some European countries. There is an additional challenge in ensuring that we reach everyone through appropriate and relevant campaigns. Drink-driving and drug-driving are very important. Thousands of accidents each year could be prevented if we work to reduce the number of people who drive when under the influence of alcohol or drugs. The Scottish Government must focus its efforts to tackle drink-driving through on-going publicity and enforcement campaigns that are targeted at all drivers. I hope that the consultation throughout the UK looks at all appropriate ways to tackle drink-driving.

I am pleased to take part in the debate and to add to the support that has been expressed for the organ donation task force's recommendations, which could revolutionise the way in which we approach organ donation. The Parliament has taken action to improve organ donation. The Human Tissue (Scotland) Act 2006—which introduced a new concept of authorisation and made provision for children aged 12 to 15 and adults over 16—combined with promotion of the organ donor register, has led to an increase in donation among all age groups. The previous Executive significantly increased the budget for promotion and, although I acknowledge Roseanna Cunningham's concerns about the size of the budget that is available for such work, I welcome the current Government's continuing commitment to promotion. A lot of work is also undertaken locally to raise the issue. The Fife Free Press is running a campaign to increase the number on the register in Fife and I am happy to recognise its commitment and enthusiasm. However, although the public focus is on the organ donor register and there is a welcome debate about the merits of an opt-out system, the recommendations in the report are vital for improving organ donation. As the report makes clear, much can be done to improve the system of identification and referral, co-ordination and retrieval. The establishment of a national, co-ordinated, clearly defined organisation is key to success in that, and I welcome the commitment that the Government has made today to delivering that recommendation. The Spanish example is often quoted as an illustration of the merits of an opt-out system, but the opt-out is only part of the story. As members have acknowledged, Spain has an advanced system for dealing with organ identification and retrieval. The lessons learned from that model could result in more people being given the chance of a good quality of life and good health. I want to highlight a couple of areas of the task force's report. First, it recognises that many of the issues that we need to address "should not be particularly difficult, or even that costly to resolve. Overcoming them will require leadership, boldness and willingness to change established practice." That might be the most challenging aspect. The recommendations need implementation in all areas, and the task force has made bold recommendations about developing a model to ensure comprehensive potential donor identification. It is in that area where we face the greatest challenge, but I have confidence in the task force's recognition of the moral tensions that  can exist in very difficult circumstances, and in its acknowledgment that it is proposing a radical change of practice. The call for a pilot study on introducing clinical indicators is welcome, as support from medical teams is essential for the agenda to move forward. As much as any other recommendation in the report, improving the identification and referral system and removing the barriers that exist in that respect will make the real difference. The proposals on the co-ordination of donor transplant co-ordinators and organ retrieval teams are critical. Although the UK has highly committed staff, our system is recognised as being unsatisfactory. There must be an increase in the number of DTCs, with one attached to every intensive care unit in Scotland. That expertise in organ donation should be extended to all clinical staff who are likely to be involved in the treatment of potential donors. The report highlights the fact that many critical care staff could go through their training without being involved in the care of a single potential organ donor, and I support its recommendations for mandatory training in the principles of organ donation. I am interested in the report's recommendation on recognising and honouring individual organ donors, where that is desired and appropriate. When George Foulkes had a members' business debate on presumed consent a few weeks ago, many MSPs spoke of their deep personal gratitude to organ donors who had helped their families. Many donor families find comfort in hearing of the life that their loved one has been able to save. More could be done, if desired, to recognise that. Speaking in the recent members' business debate, I raised the issue of baby and child donation. I appreciate that it is a highly sensitive area, but it is crucial that it does not get overlooked in the wider debate. I recognise the hard work of my constituent, Anne Fotheringham, in raising the issue of organ donation in Fife and throughout Scotland, and I thank her for bringing the reality of baby and child donation to my attention. The number of children waiting for transplants is not large, but it is significant. Nine children are currently waiting for a transplant in Scotland. Last year, there were 12 recipients of transplants aged under 17. We must do all that we can to help children who need organs to get the chance of a transplant. The current debate on an opt-out scheme will not do much to improve the chance of a transplant for babies and young children, but an opt-out system, and the debate that accompanies its introduction, could make organ donation a more open subject, which parents will have discussed before being asked for consent. A public debate may provide the opportunity to reflect on the issue,  so that parents are more secure in any decision that they might be asked to make. The implementation of the task force's recommendations, the improved training and education of staff and the resolution of the moral tensions around introducing clinical indicators as a trigger for notification will go a long way towards improving the availability of organs for babies and children. The report recognises the existing barriers, particularly in identification, and I would argue that that issue is sharper when babies and children are involved. As I said in the members' business debate, I cannot imagine having to make a decision over organ donation for a child. Like other parents, it is not something that I want to think about. However, we cannot exclude consideration of baby and child donation from the discussion. While the debate around consent attracts leaders and champions, we must acknowledge that cultural change can be achieved only with clear political leadership and commitment. I hope that leadership will be shown by politicians, clinical staff and health boards throughout the UK to deliver the proposed measures to tackle the donor shortage.

The cabinet secretary spoke of the risk that is posed by new family members. Will he look at the earliest possibility at the England and Wales pilot, in which people can ask the question whether someone with whom they are involved is, or has been, on the sex offenders register?

Sex offences against children are among the worst crimes in our society. There is agreement in Parliament that we must do all that we can do to prevent such crimes in a reasonable and measured way. At the same time, we must avoid feeding the fears of parents. We must recognise that, thankfully, sex offences against children are rare, although the new technologies that Helen Eadie mentioned present us with new challenges. Equally, we must remember that 80 per cent of reported sex crimes against children are perpetrated by friends and family members. Stranger danger exists, but by no means is it the source of the majority of such crimes against children. We need to keep in perspective where the risk to children lies and do what we can to reduce that risk. In focusing on sex offenders in the community, we must not forget the violence and abuse that are experienced by some children in the home. The previous Scottish Executive took many steps forward in protection of children. The Justice 2 Sub-Committee report came at an opportune time for reviewing progress and looking to the future. Of the report's 33 recommendations, we know that 16 have been implemented and that the Scottish Government is working to implement the remainder. I share the concerns that Paul Martin mentioned in his opening speech, but I welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement—which I  believe is prompted by today's debate—that the Government will report to the Justice Committee. I am confident that the cabinet secretary will not only provide information on what recommendations have been implemented, but will detail what plans exist for taking forward the remaining recommendations. Over the past 10 years or so, we have had a series of changes to the legislative framework to protect children from sex offenders. We all recognise that it is impossible to reduce the risk of such offending to zero but, while acknowledging the significant progress that has been made on issues such as information sharing, the sub-committee's report also identified weaknesses in the system. I seek an assurance that we will continue to address those issues, particularly those on which we could provide greater reassurance to parents. It is crucial that the approaches that are taken to management of sex offenders, including notification arrangements, are co-ordinated across United Kingdom jurisdictions. The ability to move around the UK is exploited by sex offenders, in particular by those who have not been identified and are not on the register but are committing offences. There can be no weak links in the protection systems that we have in the UK. It would be helpful to consider whether we can learn from the decisions that have been taken in England and Wales to improve management of sex offenders. The media's focus in the debate has been on DNA retention. DNA can help to identify offenders quickly and, crucially, it can help to identify those who are guilty of offences before they go on to reoffend in what might be a more serious manner. We know that many of the sex offenders who have perpetrated some of the most serious crimes in the UK exhibited earlier behaviour that could have been used as a pointer to their future crimes. DNA retention is a huge breakthrough that we must utilise as far as possible. Clearly, we must do that without violating rights to privacy and without discriminating against particular sections of society. On collection of DNA, I know that there are arguments in both directions, but I believe that it is our duty to reflect on whether, in the light of the DNA collection regime in England and Wales, we have the best system in Scotland for meeting the challenges that we face.

I am aware of those figures. As I said, we need to be careful. We need to analyse the figures. If particular sections of society are being targeted, we must take that into  consideration. However, my argument is that Scotland should also reflect on the positive aspects of the system that is currently in operation in England and Wales. We need to consider whether we are on the right place in the spectrum in comparing where we are with the position in England and Wales. A key issue for the public and parents—

I will need to skip that bit, so I will move on. Management of sex offenders in the community presents the issue of disclosure. The cabinet secretary has stated that he is willing to learn from the pilots in England and Wales which, in very limited cases, extend third-party disclosure to parents who request information about a partner's or carer's status on the sex offenders register. That may be a way of further managing the risks that some children face in their own homes when new members join the family unit—an issue that I mentioned at the start of my speech. The cabinet secretary seems to be keen to wait until the pilots finish—which I understand may not be for two or three years—before judging whether such a move would be appropriate for Scotland. There is an argument that we should try to learn from the pilots before then. The recommendation on resources must be addressed. Monitoring of offenders should be intensive and sustained. There are strong arguments for the extension of agency involvement in terms of timescales. Parents and communities must be assured that the system is robust and rigorous and that Parliament will work with and support others to do everything possible to protect children.

I am pleased to speak in the debate. I will talk a bit about Raith Rovers Football Club, whose home is in Kirkcaldy, and the model that that club represents to others for genuine fan involvement and engagement. Marilyn Livingstone will, as a committed Raith Rovers fan, be disappointed at not being able to take part in the debate, although she has at times, I think, been a Raith Rovers widow. We seem to see her husband Pete rather than her at many games.  A few years ago, Raith Rovers faced an uncertain future, but the club was saved by a £1.3 million community takeover, which was the first of its kind in Scottish football. When the owner of the club decided to sell, a community consortium worked hard to raise funds. It recognised the value of the team to the community and demonstrated the sheer passion that people can have for their team. That passion was mobilised through the fans group, Reclaim the Rovers. Supporters Direct played an important role. For the first time, a supporters trust member is on the club's board, which is hugely significant, and Raith Rovers are committed to a range of community outreach work to schools and local clubs. Like all clubs, it faces challenges, but people have made enormous efforts in the past, and I am sure that the commitment that has been shown will continue. In addition to being involved in the trust, fans are involved through an active supporters club, which is run by a committee of lifelong Raith Rovers fans. The committee is elected by supporters and there are two honorary positions, one of which is held by the Prime Minister, who is a lifelong Raith Rovers fan. We can start to see a pattern in fan involvement with the team. There is a huge commitment by members, who are responsible for a number of tasks that are carried out at Stark's Park on match days, including running the official club shop, distributing and selling match programmes and organising the ball-boys and mascots. I do not know whether the Prime Minister helps out with those tasks.

That is true. At the weekend, I attended a celebration of Jobcentre Plus in Kirkcaldy. The contribution that Raith Rovers and other teams are making to support unemployed people with long-term or complex needs into employment is to be acknowledged and commended. That further demonstrates the contribution that teams can make to their wider communities, and that they deserve support. I hope that the Government will begin to give support to Supporters Direct, because it can make a difference to local football clubs. Raith Rovers are a good example of a club that positively captures its fans' enthusiasm and energy. I hope that the support that Supporters Direct offers will continue.

The minister has given the impression that snaring is essential for effective predator control and he has implied that land managers fully support this approach. As he might be aware, that is not the case. Indeed, some land managers maintain effective predator control without the need for snaring. Will the minister provide more detail on how much consideration has been given to alternative methods, including research on non-lethal methods? What steps will he take to ensure that land managers share and promote to others best practice on such methods?

Does the minister share my concern that there has been no progress since May on three high schools in Fife that have been identified as needing replaced? Nine new schools have been officially opened since May—one by the minister—but they were all built under the previous Labour Administration.

Organ donation is a hugely sensitive subject, as the two speeches that we have heard so far have clearly illustrated. I am therefore grateful to George Foulkes for all the work that he has done on the matter since he came to Parliament. I also acknowledge the work of other members in previous sessions. A public debate on an opt-out register and organ donation more generally is overdue, so I am delighted that George Foulkes has secured this members' business debate. I am confident that other members will cover the general issues of organ donation, so I will focus on a particular aspect—baby and child organ donation. I appreciate that the issue is highly sensitive, but it is crucial that it is not overlooked in the wider debate. Early in my time as an MSP, I was approached by Anne Fotheringham, who is a constituent of mine from Methil. Anne's daughter, Angel, was born in 2006 with multiple difficulties. Within months, she required a new liver and bowel, for which she was placed on the transplant list. At that time, she was so small that she needed the organs of a newborn baby. Anne set up a campaign for a double transplant. Through sheer perseverance and determination, her campaign for Angel received support from a number of well-known celebrities and widespread coverage in the written and broadcast media. However, after 16 months on the transplant list, Angel died in June last year at the Royal hospital for sick children in Edinburgh. I am concerned that the system is not working for children as effectively as it could if parents have to resort to media campaigning at what is clearly a stressful time.  Thankfully, the number of children who are waiting for transplants is not large, but it is significant. At present, nine children are waiting for a transplant in Scotland. Last year, 12 recipients of transplants in Scotland were aged under 17. We must do all that we can to help children in Scotland who need organs to get the chance of a transplant. To be clear, I am not suggesting that we extend an opt-out system to include young children. The BMA, which has long advocated an opt-out system in general, would not apply it to under 16s. The Human Tissue (Scotland) Act 2006 makes a distinction at 12 rather than 16. If we are to have an opt-out donation system, careful consideration should be given to the age at which we deem people competent to make the decision for themselves. However, the adoption of a soft system of presumed consent for adults could improve the system for children in a number of ways. I cannot imagine having to make a decision about organ donation for a child and—like other parents, I imagine—it is not something that I even want to think about. However, an opt-out system and the debate that would accompany its introduction could make organ donation a subject that parents had discussed before they were approached about consent. A public debate might give parents an opportunity to reflect on the issue so that they are more secure in any decision that they are asked to make. It is not just legislation that will increase organ donation. An education and awareness campaign, a public debate on organ donation, and the implementation of the recommendations of the organ donation task force could also boost awareness of child organ donation. What matters most is that we minimise the tragic waste of young lives waiting in vain on the transplant list and that we do so while fully adhering to the needs and wishes of parents. I am happy to speak in this evening's debate and, at least in a small way, to pay respect to all the hard work that Anne Fotheringham has done to raise awareness of organ donation in Fife and throughout Scotland. I want to ensure that the issue of child organ donation does not get lost in the parliamentary debate today or in the public debate that is set to follow.

During the national health service waiting times debate on 27 September, the minister stated that she had sent in a team to examine the situation in Fife. Can she inform the chamber of the findings and recommendations of that team and repeat her commitment that Fife will meet the six-week delayed discharge target later this year?

As someone who grew up in a mining community, I am pleased to contribute to the debate. In thinking about the debate, I was reminded that, in addition to coming from a family that has strong ties to the coal industry, I went to a high school in Cowdenbeath that named its houses after collieries. My house was Aitken—it was named after the Aitken pit. From that, members will see that my life and community are rooted in the history of the industry. The number of members who represent Fife who want to speak in the debate is a reflection of that, too. The Coalfields Regeneration Trust was established in 1999 by a Labour Government that recognised the need to target investment at former mining communities. It recognised that those communities had not only had their heart torn out of them, but were at risk of losing their identity. It could see that unemployment and poverty threatened community ties and relationships. Given that 28 Fife wards are eligible for trust support, we can see that the area is particularly affected in that way. The trust supports valuable work in raising the aspirations of those communities. The demise of the coal industry led to a depression not only in economic activity, but of spirit. The trust has been helpful in restoring the confidence of those communities. I do not view the mining industry or the past with rose-tinted glasses. For miners and their families, life was often hard. Even when there was an improvement in conditions—which was hard fought for—the industry still left behind a legacy of poor health, particularly of chronic respiratory problems. The poor health of those communities was exacerbated by the dramatic decline of the industry. High levels of depression were often the experience of coalfield communities, partly as a result of mass unemployment.  However, underpinned by the work of the NUM and miners welfare organisations, a support system was created around the coal industry. Miners galas may happen only once a year, but the impact of those community gatherings and events lasts throughout the year. Members will know the proverb, "It takes a village to raise a child": coalfield communities often take that saying quite literally. By supporting projects that are responsive and relevant, the Coalfields Regeneration Trust gives valuable support to communities to maintain ties, support local groups, and generate activities that will renew communities in a way that will make them sustainable once more. Projects in Fife such as Trans-Fife Community Transport have benefited, but the trust's work with business and enterprise groups is also very important in securing the future of and returning optimism to these areas. I echo Cathy Jamieson's point about securing the trust's funding. Although it has been a while since there were operational pits in Fife, the effects of the closure on communities that were built around the industry are still felt and investment in the area is still needed. Fife is changing. New industries are moving in and new opportunities are being created; new families are moving into the area; and new houses are being built in communities. However, we must ensure that the traditional communities are not left behind. Their community spirit was built over generations around a dominating economic centre, and as the very nature of work becomes more fragmented, more short term and more fluid, we are unlikely to see such communities again. However, we should look to them as examples of how people can work together and can take pride in their work, in their communities and in themselves.

I have listened to the debate over the principle of equity for Fife with interest. Does the member agree that it would be helpful if the minister confirmed today whether he is considering tolling as part of the funding package for a future, replacement Forth crossing?

I welcome alcohol awareness week and its efforts to encourage sensible drinking. However, as other members highlighted, an unhealthy attitude towards alcohol remains across all sectors in Scotland. The abuse of alcohol not only damages the individual concerned but has a major impact on friends, families and communities—Mr Gibson spoke powerfully about that. It is undeniable that alcohol costs our society dear in many ways. We are witnessing an explosion in alcohol-related health problems, while alcohol-related violence and other antisocial behaviour remain unacceptably high. Underage drinking rates are also worrying. The latest SALSUS national report shows that 36 per cent of 15-year-olds and 14 per cent of 13-year-olds reported drinking alcohol in the last week. However, it would be wrong to think that unhealthy drinking is confined to young people, men, deprived areas or city centres at the weekend. Unhealthy relationships with alcohol exist in families of all backgrounds, in all areas of Scotland and across all age groups. Those are the problems, but what can we do about them? I will focus on two alcohol-related issues in particular: underage drinking and drinking in pregnancy. I will try not to repeat points that Mr Gibson made, many of which I agree with. For young people, alcohol can be a gateway to risky behaviour—unprotected sex, violence and, more generally, an air of invincibility. Early alcohol misuse can be an introduction to illegal drugs or to smoking under age. Also, drinking under age can lead to a legacy of misusing alcohol later in life. Many members represent communities where the extreme antisocial behaviour that is driven by underage drinking is threatening and highly disruptive. In the environment of the inevitably macho group mentality of teenagers—boys and  girls—binge drinking can and has become the norm. If binge drinking is acceptable at 12 or 13, by the time a young person reaches 18, unhealthy drinking habits will already be entrenched and ingrained. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary accepts Labour's amendment on that issue. The proper enforcement of the age limit for buying alcohol is crucial. The rise in the age for purchasing tobacco to 18 gives the Parliament an opportunity to introduce new measures to enforce rigorously the age limits that we have in place. I hope that, along with any new initiatives on underage drinking, resources will be provided for proper enforcement of the age restrictions for smoking and alcohol consumption. Too many retailers regularly sell alcohol to people who are under age. I also urge an extension of the test-purchasing scheme. The results of the pilot that was conducted in Fife were worrying: 26 per cent of retailers in west Fife and 16 per cent of those in east Fife failed the test purchase. Retailers should be supported in enforcing age restrictions, but there should also be heavy punishments for those who are caught selling to underage children. As well as working to reduce the supply of alcohol for underage drinking, we need to reduce the demand. In my region, the Drug and Alcohol Project (Levenmouth) started an initiative in partnership with Fife Constabulary that targets underage drinking and deals with it holistically. The initiative is one of the first of its kind. When an underage drinker is picked up by the police, they are referred as a case to project workers at DAPL, who visit the family and work through any related issues with them. Working in that way, we can try to tackle the root causes of underage drinking. It is essential that projects such as DAPL have secure funding to provide a much-needed community service. The second issue that I highlight is alcohol and pregnancy. From the moment a woman becomes pregnant, she begins to influence the future child's life chances. Her decisions on smoking, alcohol, diet and her own well-being all have implications for the future child. The lack of clarity in the recommended drinking levels and information on the potential health impacts of alcohol has made it difficult to deliver a coherent message to pregnant women. At the extreme, alcohol can cause permanent damage to embryos while they develop in the womb and can cause foetal alcohol syndrome, which permanently impairs brain and nervous system functions. However, there are increasing concerns that drinking alcohol during pregnancy can lead to a wide range of disorders and there has been a clear move towards supporting a precautionary principle. Although it is socially acceptable for women to  avoid soft cheese and peanuts during pregnancy, avoiding alcohol seems to be a different matter. The unhealthy relationship with alcohol that we have in this country seems to make abstinence from certain risky foods far easier than abstinence from alcohol during pregnancy. However, the evidence is inconclusive and the matter must be approached in a sensitive and reasonable manner. Women must be able to make informed decisions. To enable that, the Government must work closely with the medical profession; guidance on alcohol consumption should contain specific advice on drinking and pregnancy; and any voluntary labelling initiative with alcohol producers should include information on the risks and potential consequences of drinking while pregnant. Alcohol awareness week is about changing our drinking culture. The Scottish Parliament has done much to recognise Scotland's problems with alcohol. Although problem drinking is an issue throughout the UK, Scotland has particular health, crime and social consequences that arise from our relationship with alcohol, and we all have a responsibility to recognise and address that.

I am pleased to speak on this issue, as I have first-hand experience of it and know it well. Although much of today's debate and the media coverage have focused on red tape and public services, I want to highlight the effect of red tape on third sector organisations, from social enterprises to community groups and everything in between. For a number of years before entering Parliament, I worked in the voluntary sector and was in constant contact with the full range of voluntary organisations, from large national social care providers right down to community groups staffed by volunteers, from long-standing organisations with decades of experience to brand new start-up organisations. Despite the fact that they were vastly different in many respects, all the organisations agreed that, next to funding, red tape was their biggest issue. As a result, I was pleased when Tom McCabe announced the Crerar review, and I know that many in the sector have been eagerly awaiting its conclusions. Red tape is not just about pounds and pence or the X amount of money that is lost to overcomplicated bureaucracy. Reducing red tape will allow organisations to make a difference and improve the quality of life for everyone in Scotland. For voluntary organisations, unnecessary red tape does not just cost money; it constrains front-line activities and reduces the sector's positive impact. The tight resources situation within which voluntary organisations have to work makes it more difficult for them to manage red tape and almost impossible for them to absorb its impact. The more time that a voluntary organisation has to  spend on administration, the less time it has to focus on its service users, who, after all, are what really matters. Moreover, we should not forget that voluntary organisations often work with the most vulnerable in society. Indeed, in providing child care services, social care services, victim support services, housing services or services for older people, they now work at the forefront of our communities, tackling in some way almost all of Scotland's major challenges. As a result, unnecessary red tape is impacting heavily on the most vulnerable in our society. Voluntary organisations have welcomed the report. For example, SCVO has said: "There is obviously a place for sensible regulation and checks but what we constantly see are groups being crippled by a merry-go-round of form filling. Scotland needs a system of light-touch regulation where appropriate and the bureaucratic burden should be lifted from the" voluntary sector. Indeed, I know of one organisation that at one stage last year had been inspected or audited on 11 separate occasions by 11 different regulators, each of whom demanded the same or very similar information. Each time a regulator came calling, the organisation's staff were diverted from the activities that the body was set up to carry out. Obviously a certain amount of red tape and regulations are required. Much of the administration that public services and voluntary organisations face is necessary and, indeed, many regulations seek to ensure that organisations are run well and efficiently. In that regard, we need think only of the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005, for which the sector actively campaigned. That said, it was as clear to the previous Executive as it is clear to this Scottish Government that there is a better way of organising regulation to ensure that the proper and correct elements of administration are kept and the needless and unnecessary elements are rationalised—in other words, so that the bathwater is thrown out, but the baby is kept. In that respect, I warmly welcome many of the report's recommendations. However, the report's publication gives the Parliament an opportunity to do even more. For the voluntary sector, red tape extends beyond those parts that deliver services and beyond the 43 regulators identified in the report. Community Care Providers Scotland has welcomed the report, recognising that many of Crerar's proposals will make a significant difference to voluntary organisations that provide public services. In looking to the future, CCPS identified a missing link in the form of the large amount of quasi- regulation that funding authorities conduct. The organisation highlighted the fact that "Councils in particular duplicate a lot of the processes that scrutiny bodies already undertake and they too should be included in any new system for reducing red tape." Voluntary organisations face an additional layer of bureaucracy stemming from the monitoring and evaluation burden that comes with receiving grant funding, whether it comes from public or independent sources. The Crerar report gives the Scottish Government a chance to consider reducing the amount of red tape, not just for public service organisations but for organisations that deliver public benefit elsewhere, including sports clubs and village halls. Such organisations might not necessarily deliver public services, but they do deliver public benefit. Unnecessary red tape must be reduced for those organisations. We should allow funders and regulators to share necessary information on organisations to further streamline monitoring and evaluation structures. We could also operate a lead regulator model, whereby certain regulators and funders would be trusted to carry out monitoring and evaluation that would be of advantage to others. The Crerar report was instigated by a Labour minister and has been welcomed by an SNP one, so it gives me great hope for cross-party working. I call on the Scottish Government to seize this opportunity to empower social enterprises, voluntary organisations and community groups to do what they were created to do and make a positive difference to people throughout Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps the Cabinet Secretary for Justice is taking to tackle underage smoking and drinking. (S3O-760)

I acknowledge the cabinet secretary's commitment to addressing the issue. I will ask a bit more about enforcement. Like many areas, Fife has its fair share of antisocial behaviour linked to underage drinking. The cabinet secretary will be aware of the success of the 12-month alcohol test purchasing pilot that was run in Fife. Following the publication of the interim report, what progress is being made on developing common procedures that all Scottish forces can use by 2009? As the cabinet secretary said, the minimum age for making cigarette purchases will rise from 16 to 18 from Monday. What plans does he have to enforce that age restriction? Will he consider positive and negative licensing? What resources will be committed to that? Finally—

Sorry. Now that 18 will be the age restriction for purchasing alcohol and cigarettes, what plans does the cabinet secretary have for joint enforcement initiatives, such as encouraging better use of proof-of-age cards?

I am pleased to speak to the Labour Party amendment and to take this opportunity to talk about housing issues that affect communities throughout Scotland, including Glasgow. The Government has brought a narrow focus to the debate. In my speech, I will broaden out the discussion in line with Labour's amendment. There is no doubt that the increased supply of social housing is of crucial concern in Glasgow and throughout Scotland. The issue is not a recent one, although it has become particularly acute as a result of the current high demand for affordable housing solutions in a buoyant housing market. The problems that stock transfer in Glasgow sought to address were long-standing ones. Whatever the criticisms of GHA, there is no doubt that the situation in Glasgow required radical solutions to improve standards of housing for tenants and to address the problem of the huge debt that had accumulated. Of course, there has been a great deal of debate about how the process has unfolded, but it is unworthy of the priorities of addressing the needs of tenants in Glasgow to focus only on a critique of the current situation and opposition to the policy, without providing specific measures for the long term. As Tom McCabe and other members outlined, the future of Glasgow housing is of crucial importance to the people of Glasgow and their representatives. In the Labour Party amendment, we have set out clear proposals to progress the situation. In the spirit of consensus, I hope that the cabinet secretary will give due consideration to the content of the amendment. As I am a Mid-Scotland and Fife MSP, GHA does not directly impact on my constituents, but its reputation is important to the future of the housing association movement and to community ownership. I appreciate that the cabinet secretary recognises the scale of the housing issues that face Glasgow and Scotland. This week, the Prime Minister announced an investment of £8 billion for  affordable and social housing, which is a 50 per cent increase in funds for social housing. In its programme for Scotland, the Government stated that it would set out proposals for the provision of affordable housing. Although I appreciate the importance of today's discussion on GHA, and the support that all members have expressed for second-stage transfer, it is regrettable that the cabinet secretary did not take the opportunity that the debate gave to set out proposals for the whole of Scotland.

I am sorry, but I had to revise my speech twice to reduce it in time.

I will give way.

There are different solutions to tackling debt. It is up to the Government to take forward proposals in that area. I take the opportunity of speaking on a housing platform today to raise a few issues that are relevant to Fife. In Fife, we face two major challenges in housing: first, more people are expected to locate to Fife and, secondly, we have a need for good-quality affordable housing, both for sale and for rent, to ensure that people who choose to live in Fife are able to stay in the communities where they have strong links. The issue is one that other members raised in relation to Glasgow. The average house price in Fife is just over £130,000, while the average salary is just under £20,000. Around 12,000 people are on the housing list, a figure that includes nearly 4,000 people who have applied for a transfer. As in Glasgow and throughout Scotland, there are issues to address in Fife in the rented sector in terms of the availability of affordable and mixed-tenure housing.

I am sorry, but I am short of time. I took an intervention from Kenneth Gibson.  The cabinet secretary will be aware that a reappraisal of the housing land requirement in Fife is out for consultation. If it is approved, 4,270 fewer homes will be built in Fife over the next two decades than were originally planned as part of the structure plan. I remain to be convinced by the arguments supporting that reduction. Restricting house building in Fife will increase house prices further, run the risk of pricing many people out of the market, and stall town centre regeneration and leisure developments. Another crucial element will be the type of housing to be built. I would have welcomed details from the Government on its manifesto commitment to reserve a minimum of 25 per cent of all new housing developments for affordable housing; and I would have welcomed details on how it plans to ensure that the element of affordable housing includes a mix of properties, so that new developments are inclusive of communities and are not simply commuter villages that sit on the edge of more established towns and villages. I hope that the minister will take those points into consideration when considering the plan's approval. I look forward to the Government providing firm solutions to meet housing needs in Scotland and to address the situation in Glasgow. At a time when it is clear that we need a great deal of investment in affordable housing and such investment is being committed in England and Wales, it is crucial that the Government come forward urgently with proposals for affordable homes in Scotland. I urge the SNP to match, if not exceed, plans for affordable homes in the rest of the United Kingdom. I am disappointed that it has not taken the opportunity to do so today, but I hope that the SNP will return to Parliament in the near future on this crucial issue. I hope that it will bring forward proposals for implementing its housing policy within this session of Parliament.

I want to press the cabinet secretary on audiology waiting times. Waiting times for audiology services in central and west Fife are reasonable, but the figures show that, as recently as last month, people in north-east Fife are waiting as long as 52 weeks after first visiting their GP before they get a hearing aid fitted. That wait far exceeds the previous Executive's 26-week target; it also far exceeds the target that was pledged in the SNP manifesto of an 18-week waiting time. The north-east Fife figures were brought down only this week by a short-term waiting times initiative—the second this year—but we do not know what will happen when the short-term funding runs out. We do not know whether there will be a return to long waiting times in six months. Equally, there is lack of clarity on audiology waiting times between an answer that I received from the Minister for Public Health, which confirmed that audiology is not part of the 18-week guarantee, and the First Minister's interpretation of the situation. Will the cabinet secretary clarify whether, in line with the SNP manifesto pledge, audiology comes under the 18-week waiting time pledge? If it does not, does that represent another broken SNP promise?

Does the minister agree that, with Aberdeen recognised as Scotland's oil capital and Dundee recognised as our capital of life sciences, it is time that Fife—and, in particular, the Levenmouth area through its regeneration project—was recognised as being at the forefront of renewable energy production and that it should be given the appropriate support to achieve that?

I welcome this opportunity to speak on an issue that concerns many people in my region, particularly the people of Methil and Buckhaven. The first time I spoke in the chamber was on the issue and I am pleased to return to it today. The proposal for ship-to-ship oil transfers off the coast of Methil in the Firth of Forth has been of interest to the Parliament for some time. The work of previous ministers—particularly Sarah Boyack, who initiated a review of the legislation on ship-to-ship oil transfers—has been acknowledged by members today. I also acknowledge Catherine Stihler MEP's efforts to raise the issue at European level and her continuing commitment to finding a long-term solution. It is clear that Labour members, along with other members, particularly from Fife, have been concerned about Forth Ports' conflict of interest and the potential environmental impact on a sensitive area. As a new member, I have been reading the Official Report of the Environment and Rural Development Committee meetings in the previous session. It is clear that ship-to-ship transfer is a complex issue because it involves devolved, reserved and European matters including maritime legislation, regulations on legitimate commercial activity, and considerable environmental concerns. I welcome the measures that have been announced today. Better transposition of the habitats directive will strengthen its intention. I acknowledge the RSPB's support for the move and thank it for producing a useful briefing. Scottish ministers will have the power to influence decisions by competent authorities and to ensure compliance with the directive. That will remove the concern about Forth Ports' conflict of interest. As other members have pointed out, it is not appropriate for Forth Ports to make the decision because it also stands to benefit financially from it. However, it is fair to say that ministers have not found the dilemma easy to solve. As the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment rightly acknowledged, there are limitations to what  the measures can achieve. Although the solution moves the decision-making power to ministers, they will still have to take decisions in line with the habitats directive. The new provisions will not raise the hurdle that proposals for ship-to-ship oil transfers must overcome.

I do not disagree with the minister that Westminster has a role to play in resolving the situation, which I hope will be based on constructive dialogue with Westminster ministers. If the appropriate assessment meets the directive's requirements, in the present situation, ministers appear to have no power to say no. They can enter into a process of suspending the decision and endlessly delaying, but today's decisions will not allow them to veto the activity. However, that is not the impression that the people of Fife and Methil have been given. Two weeks after the recent election, the Executive-in-waiting briefed that it would be able to veto the proposals. I assume that that was said because the SNP did not fully appreciate the issue's complexity or just because it was trying to reel in the Greens. That situation gave the people of Fife hope that ship-to-ship oil transfer could be laid to rest quickly. As welcome as today's changes are, they are—arguably—a stopgap measure. For the future protection of Fife and Scotland's coastline, the Executive must introduce a marine bill at the earliest opportunity. Apart from occupying this legislation-lite Executive, that would provide lasting protection for the fragile marine-based wildlife of Fife and Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is  being made in planning for a replacement road crossing for the Forth. (S3O-305)

I am pleased that the minister recognises that it is vital for the economic and social future of Fife and the east of Scotland that planning for a replacement road crossing begins now, and that a situation in which travel to and from Fife is unreasonably restricted is not allowed to develop. I would like to impress on the minister the importance of consultation with the current bridge workforce on changes and new proposals. Can the minister give me a guarantee that there will be full consultation with the people of Fife on the options for a replacement road crossing?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it intends to implement the national waste strategy. (S3O-213)

I am sure that the minister appreciates the scale of the problem, with a typical household in Fife alone producing more than 1 tonne of waste every year. I am sure that he appreciates the need for clarity for local authorities on how they progress with their waste plans. Does the position set out to local authorities in March 2007 on the funding of waste treatment infrastructure still prevail or is it under review? If it is under review, what is the timescale for completion?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made on the development of new renewable energy schemes. (S3O-115)

How will the minister encourage the use of renewable power sources—including on-site generation—in new public buildings, such as schools? How will he ensure that local Scottish renewables companies—such as Burntisland Fabrications Ltd in Fife, whose Methil facility produces wind turbines—will benefit?

It is an honour and a privilege to have been elected to this Parliament to represent the people of Mid Scotland and Fife. I have chosen to take part in today's debate on a safer and stronger Scotland because it is at the heart of achieving safe and strong communities. The debate highlights the need to achieve the right balance between dealing firmly with unacceptable and disruptive behaviour and dealing with its root causes—poverty and disengagement from society.  I welcome Kenny MacAskill to his role as Cabinet Secretary for Justice. I hope that he will continue to put, as Labour did, the needs of communities at the heart of his agenda. This policy area is of great concern to the people of Scotland, and I hope that all parties will work constructively to address the issues. Still too many people are plagued by noise night after night, still too many people feel intimidated by others in their communities and still too many people feel that their quality of life is blighted by vandalism and selfish behaviour. In the previous session of Parliament, Labour ensured that they had somewhere to turn, and in Fife we have been among the first to benefit. While some local authorities have been slow—even reluctant—to use antisocial behaviour powers, Labour, along with Fife Constabulary, have taken action. Although intervention and mediation is always the first route, measures such as closure orders, which can give local residents respite from extreme antisocial behaviour, are last-resort measures that must be available to police and communities. The detrimental effect that just a few people can have on a community cannot be overestimated. Fife also has an excellent record on participating in preventive measures, and it piloted the successful alcohol test-purchase scheme. I pay tribute to Christine May, the former member for Central Fife, who was a supporter and proponent of that approach. She recognised the importance of the scheme, which is being rolled out throughout Scotland. Community wardens have been a huge success in Fife. I spoke to a community activist at an event on Friday and was impressed by her enthusiasm for community wardens when she described the role that they play in her community. I hope that the new Executive will continue to strengthen services that previously have benefited from antisocial behaviour funding. While tough action needs to be taken to protect, other measures are needed to prevent. As representatives, we have a responsibility to consider how we create and support a stronger and safer society. At the heart of that is how we support and foster communities, and how we protect and encourage a way of life that has been at the centre of Scottish society for generations. We must recognise the value to wider society of inclusive communities that foster a sense of belonging. I grew up in the close-knit community of Kelty, which is an ex-mining village in Fife. It is the kind of place where, no matter what someone achieves in life, they are always known as their father's daughter or son. It has had its fair share of difficult times—the miners strike in the 1980s, and periods  of high unemployment and the hardship that that brought to many families—but as a community it has always held together and its members have always looked out for one another. Such values have made its annual gala day—which takes place at the end of the month—one of the longest running in Scotland. Officially, we may refer to a network of community organisations, but it is the coming together of groups of people to achieve things for their village—whether it is the old men's club, the community council or youth street projects—that makes communities safer and stronger. There are towns and villages like Kelty throughout Fife—resourceful communities that invest in their own wellbeing. Our role must be to support their work and to help them to tackle the problems that they face. I welcome the cabinet secretary's recognition that deprivation is an underlying cause of crime. I hope to see a strong anti-poverty agenda from the Government. Labour is happy to work with the Government on such an agenda—Labour put that agenda at the centre of politics in this country. Improving housing, investing in early years education and giving young people goals to aim for are all part of building a safer and stronger society. I pay tribute to another former member of the Parliament, Scott Barrie, who championed children's and young people's issues. His voice on those issues will be missed. Scott previously highlighted the work of Abbeyview junior wardens in Dunfermline. By supporting the work of community wardens, those young people, who are aged between 10 and 14, take pride in and take part in their community. If we involve such young people in their communities and anchor them into those communities, we invest in their future. The scheme is a tremendous success, and I commend it to the cabinet secretary as a good approach to tackling antisocial behaviour. We can help our communities to be safer and stronger, but that is not about excluding people—it is about doing more to ensure that they are included. Labour set that direction in this Parliament, and I urge the Executive to continue to pursue it.

Will the cabinet secretary give assurances that in investigating solutions that are actually deliverable he will work constructively with authorities in England, Wales and Northern Ireland to amend the habitats regulations, including extending part IV of the regulations to cover maritime activities?