Although, in many ways, Parliament’s consideration of the local government finance order is something of a formality, it is important to mark the extent of the funding problems that Scotland’s local authorities face. I do not pretend for a moment that Mr Swinney has not had to deal with cuts in his budget, but time and again ministers have passed on the pain to local government—a move that has been exacerbated by a council tax freeze that is now completely underfunded by the Scottish Government. That has, inevitably, resulted in reduced local services and the loss of more than 30,000 jobs in our councils. In written evidence to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, Unison told us: “No one disputes that the Scottish Government has to manage a difficult budget imposed by Westminster. But within that budget there are choices to be made and councils are clearly the losers.” That is borne out by the figures, with £637 million having been cut from the local government budget since 2008-09. In my region—North East Scotland—the impact of the settlement is acute. Willie Rennie was right to point out the particular difficulties that Aberdeen City Council faces, given its underfunding situation.

If I have time later, I will give way to Mr McDonald, although I might not have time. From a dwindling pot, Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council receive shares of funding that are among the lowest in Scotland. That greatly restricts what our councils can do to provide services and invest in the local economy.

I will give way if I have time later. That second point—on investing in the local economy—is pertinent to the debate because the cabinet secretary promised in 2011 to introduce a business rates incentivisation scheme, under which councils would retain a proportion of the business rates that they collected above the target that was set by ministers. Mr Buchanan rightly referred to that in his speech. That announcement was welcomed in North East Scotland—a region whose economy is, of course, crucial to the whole country. However, ministers have, in effect, reneged on the promise. They have moved the goalposts by revising the targets so that councils will receive a fraction of what they would have received under the original scheme.

I will take a brief intervention from Mr Stewart.

Mr Stewart tries to blame the councils, as Mr Swinney did yesterday. I will come on to exactly why that is wrong. The fact is that ministers have moved the target. In Aberdeen, that means that, rather than receiving £5.8 million, the city is now scheduled to receive only £300,000 from the scheme under the revised targets. That is a massive difference. It is ridiculous for Mr Stewart to try to blame COSLA for lack of progress, as John Swinney did yesterday, because if councils had agreed to proceed with the current proposition, it would mean that they would forsake millions of pounds that should be going to local authorities. Ministers have said that it would mean an unjustified windfall for councils, but they are quite happy to secure that windfall for their own budget. It is particularly important for North East Scotland that ministers finally make good their pledge on this scheme. I hope that they will, because the current arrangements mean that the region is losing out, despite its importance to the Scottish economy. On council funding, funding for health services, public sector jobs and, most recently, plans to close Aberdeen’s fire and police control rooms, North East Scotland is getting a raw deal. Yet, even as ministers asset-strip the region of its key services, their proposition is that North East Scotland will, through its oil and gas industry, foot the bill for separation. No wonder that argument is not winning favour in North East Scotland. I ask ministers to think again on all those issues. In particular, I ask Mr Swinney to assure us today that he will work collaboratively and constructively with COSLA to make progress and at least alleviate the impact of a settlement that is bad for North East Scotland, as I have said, and for councils across the country.

The economic case for Scotland staying in the UK is best made by SNP members themselves, because although they say that they want independence, in fact they want to keep the pound, keep the Bank of England, keep UK financial regulation and keep single markets in energy and financial services. Even those who oppose Scotland’s membership of the UK have, ultimately, had to concede how important it is for the future of our economy. The flaw in their approach, which recognises the importance of those shared institutions, is that in each case we know that we will retain them if we stay within the UK whereas there is, at the very least, uncertainty over our future membership of them if we decide to break away. It is a flawed approach from a party whose economic prospectus under independence is predicated on tax receipts from a commodity whose levels of profitability are volatile. As a member for North East Scotland, I am the first to champion the importance and success of our oil and gas industry. However, although times are undoubtedly good in the industry now, that has not always been the case and there is considerable doubt over what the price of a barrel of oil will be next year let alone in 10 years’ time. I hope that we can look to another 30 or even 40 years of production, but it is a finite resource—a fact that is reflected in the increased production costs that the industry faces in the mature fields of the North Sea.

I will come to the oil fund in a moment. We must remember that Norway has significantly greater resources of oil and gas than we have, but I will return to the issue in a moment. Before Christmas, I was surprised to hear the cabinet secretary remark that he could not understand how tax receipts from North Sea oil were predicted to decrease at a time of increasing investment in production. He must be aware that the oil that is being recovered from the North Sea now is often from fields that have already been significantly depleted and that it therefore requires far more investment to produce, meaning that the tax take will be less. In that context, tax stability is vital for the industry. Although I am the first to acknowledge that the UK Government has not always got that right, the white paper has precious little detail on what the tax structure for the industry will be. It cannot provide any details of how the billions of pounds required for decommissioning will be found, although it does say there will be an oil fund even before there is a balanced budget, which makes no sense whatever to me. Although the Scottish ministers might try to spin to the industry that there will be no change in terms of tax, the evidence for that claim is simply not in the white paper. Although the SNP wants the north-east to foot the bill for separation through our oil and gas industry, ministers are failing to provide the investment in infrastructure that our area needs and are actively withdrawing services from Aberdeen—from shutting our prison to reducing local police and fire services. I agree with much of the cabinet secretary’s analysis of the economic policies of the UK Government, but the referendum is not about one Government, it is about the future of Scotland for generations to come. It was wrong of the UK ministers to cut too deep and too fast, as that approach stalled growth and led to a long period of stagnation in the economy. However, while we have made common cause with the Scottish ministers on the idea of building our way to recovery and investing in recovery, their position on the issue is just not credible given their disproportionate cuts to the housing budget and their singular lack of success in driving forward projects through their NPD programme. There is a fundamental incoherence about the SNP’s economic plans for a separate Scotland, which promise higher public spending in a range of areas and a corporation tax cut that would cost hundreds of millions of pounds. It is entirely wrong of the UK Government to pretend that we can cut our way back to prosperity but, equally, it is entirely wrong for the Scottish Government to pretend that we can invest more in public services while cutting taxes for business. That does not add up. The fact of the matter is that, whatever the colour of the Government at Westminster is, the Scottish Government wants to retain all the key structures of the UK-wide economy— the Bank of England, the pound and financial regulation—even if it means that we have less influence on those key institutions than we had before. That would be the case whatever the political complexion of the Government that was in office in Westminster. We need those institutions because, even in these tough times, the advantages of being part of the bigger, more diverse economy of the UK are clear, and if those advantages are clear to the SNP’s own ministers, I am sure that they will be clear to the people of Scotland as well.

I congratulate Alex Johnstone on securing the debate, which gives us a chance to reflect on what is a successful and important project not just for the Arbroath area but for Scotland, given its influence and the innovative work that it has done. It provides support to some of those in the local community in Arbroath who most need it, it helps young people from challenging backgrounds and, as has been said, it provides the only large-scale activity-based drop-in centre for young people and those with disabilities in Angus. I recall visiting the CAFE project in 2007 during that year’s election campaign with Jack McConnell, who was then the First Minister, and Cathy Jamieson, who was then Minister for Justice. We heard all about the good work that the CAFE project does and we saw the facilities that are provided at the centre. We met the young people who were using the facilities and who clearly found them invaluable in making a big difference to their lives. Those young people would otherwise not have had a huge amount to do in many instances. It was clear that the Arbroath CAFE played an extremely important role in the local community. Members might also recall that, during that election campaign, the issue of antisocial behaviour was particularly to the fore. One of the benefits of the work of the CAFE project has been that it has offered some of those young people who might be at most risk of being involved in antisocial behaviour alternative activities. It has therefore benefited the wider community and not just the young people. The project has not just offered those young people the social and leisure activities to which Alex Johnstone referred; it has provided them with skills through work placements, volunteering, and work with the jobcentre. It has also offered health advice. The CAFE is therefore providing a whole range of essential services to young people and other individuals and families in the area. That project and the visit remains so clearly in my memory not just because I met young people who clearly valued the work of the project but because I met Sheriff Norrie Stein, whose enthusiasm for the work and the mission to provide much-needed support to young people in the area is infectious. It is clear today that he galvanises the whole community around the work. I know that the determination was born from Sheriff Stein’s experience of meeting young people through his work as a sheriff. Those young people had not had the opportunities that are provided by a project such as Arbroath CAFE. As Alex Johnstone said, the project is providing young people in the Arbroath area with opportunities to lead far more productive lives as young people and in the future as well. The benefits of the project also lie many years into the future. The project does not just have local effects. Through its innovative and successful street football project, it has supported young people in Arbroath, in the north-east and throughout Scotland. Hundreds of communities have benefited from the pioneering approach of the Arbroath CAFE project. As has been said, at this time, the project needs our support more than ever. I hope that the minister will reflect on what she has heard tonight and on the huge amount of support that the project has in the community and in the chamber, and that ministers will do all they can to support the Arbroath CAFE project so that it can continue to play its vital role in the community for many years to come.

I am pleased to have the chance to speak in this debate. I have corresponded with the minister a number of times on housing issues in the north-east. Although I appreciate the replies that I have received, the policies that she has outlined again today fall very far short of what needs to be done to address the chronic shortage of social housing in this country, and certainly the specific challenges that we have in the north-east. Members on the SNP benches may not want to hear this, but, as people on the ground in our communities know, the reality is that there is a crisis in social housing. No number of excuses and no amount of passing the buck will get us away from the fact that this Government has singularly failed to deliver on its key pledge to the people of Scotland. Why we should have any confidence at all that it will be delivered in an independent Scotland when the Government cannot deliver it with the powers that it has now is beyond me, and certainly is not illustrated by anything in its white paper. As Mary Fee said, the fact is that fewer social housing homes were built last year than at any time since 1947. That is the wage of this Government’s decision to cut the housing budget by one third and that is the issue at hand. It dismissed the figures that were published yesterday, which showed the extent of the problem.

Not at the moment; I am just past my first minute. The Government’s amendment dodges the crucial issue by debating records on house building in a way that suggests that homes that are built by councils are good and homes that are built by housing associations are bad. What a ludicrous debate that is. The key issue is that homes are built and people are getting off the waiting lists and into those houses.

Mr Mason knows that this party brought forward a clear budget proposal last year for building more homes and increasing substantially the housing budget, and that was not predicated on anything that Mr Mason has suggested. He should have looked carefully at our budget proposal last year. The fact of the matter is that the previous Executive built 10,000 more homes in the last year of our Administration than this Government did last year. Whatever weasel tactics the Government is using with regard to the data it chooses to use, the fact is that we built more social housing and it has failed to deliver on the pledges that it has made in this area. We will debate a number of statistics this afternoon, but we should remember the human impact. I think of the young woman and her partner who, for three years, had to share their bedroom with their son, and the impact that that had on their lives. I think of the families in which brothers and sisters are sharing rooms way beyond the ages that the vast majority of us would find acceptable, because their parents cannot secure the housing that they need. That is what is happening on the ground in our communities. There are many stories like that. The Government’s figures show that 1,000 households in Aberdeen and 3,000 in Aberdeenshire are defined as overcrowded, with thousands of people on waiting lists. Aberdeen City Council proposes to build 2,000 new social homes through its infrastructure plan. It is acting on that. It is the Scottish Government that is entirely failing to step up to the plate on this important issue for the north-east. If there are more people on waiting lists, surely we must build more homes. Instead, the figures from the Government state that there were only 99 social sector new-build starts in Aberdeenshire in 2012-13 and a round figure in Aberdeen of zero. That figure sits against a figure of more than 1,300, which is the number of affordable homes that local housing associations estimate are required. It is not surprising that, in July, Audit Scotland found: “Aberdeen City is one of the few council areas in Scotland with a surplus of jobs, but the area received the lowest allocation per head of population for new homes in the 2012-15 plans.” That is a lower allocation of a diminishing budget.

The member makes a good point, which I am about to deal with. That is why the issue of homes for social rent is important. That is a pledge that this Government has failed to deliver on. The issue of rents is important. Aberdeen has had the highest increase in house prices outside London and now we have the highest rents in Scotland. That makes it all the more difficult for those who already live in the north-east but who are on low incomes and are not benefiting from the strong local economy to get the housing that they need. However, when this Government decided to cut the housing association grant to build new homes from £76,000—which it was when Labour left office—to just £44,000, it did not take a rocket scientist to work out that that would mean that fewer homes would be built, and that is what happened. Housing associations told the Government that it would happen and it happened. Now, finally, ministers have accepted that point and have changed the position so that the cut in the grant has been reduced, and the new level is £58,000. However, I say to ministers that that figure will have to be revised again if it transpires that the 30,000 new homes target cannot be met. To return to Mr Harvie’s point, if that target is met by building homes for mid-market rent, that will not be addressing the need that exists. I hope that the Government will do more to support the housing associations of the north-east, which stand ready to move forward with the projects to deliver the social housing that our part of Scotland needs. I hope that ministers will rethink an approach to housing that has been marked by swingeing cuts and a lack of delivery. The people who are sitting on housing waiting lists today do not need a change in the constitution; they need a change in the policy of this Government to deliver the homes that they need.

Will Mike MacKenzie take an intervention?

Is it not the case that the need to upgrade maternity services at NHS Grampian has contributed to the problem? What action is the cabinet secretary taking to ensure that the health board has the resources and support that it needs to put in place the much-needed new maternity facilities at the hospital?

Every year of delay to this project costs local businesses in Aberdeen tens of millions of pounds. When will the minister submit a planning application for this route? How long will it all take? In fact, what is the problem with the Scottish Government giving a legally binding commitment to meet the costs? Why can the minister not do that?

This is a welcome debate on an important report. In its focus on dealing with the long-term challenges of youth employment, the report highlights the fact that there are no quick fixes to achieve the skilled economy that we aspire to create or to achieve the growth levels that we want in our economy, which will offer our young people more employment opportunities. Throughout the debate, members have, rightly, highlighted commission recommendations that will, if implemented, deliver an education system with better outcomes for many of our young people. It is also interesting and healthy that a number of members have identified areas in which the commission might do more work to develop its thinking and that they have challenged the commission. It is good that the Parliament has had the opportunity to provide food for thought for the commission in the debate and to say why it is good that the commission published an interim report. I am particularly interested in what the commission says about the relationship between the business community and our education system. It says that businesses are no longer simply consumers of education—a number of members have talked about that. Businesses often complain that the current system does not deliver people with the skills that businesses say that they need. Instead of complaining, it is much better for businesses to engage more meaningfully with our schools, colleges and universities. On that, I am sure that the commission will have benefited considerably from the chairmanship of Sir Ian Wood and his knowledge of such matters, which he developed during his phenomenal career in the energy industry. As a member for the north-east, I am very much aware of the employment opportunities for young people in the energy industry and particularly in the oil and gas sector. A recent PricewaterhouseCoopers report said that the industry needs to recruit and train more than 120,000 people in the next 10 to 15 years to capitalise fully on existing and future opportunities in the industry. What is for sure is that local businesses tell us that they are crying out for more skilled workers now. In the past few years, there have been positive developments in the relationships between businesses and the academic institutions of the north-east. The commission recommends that businesses should engage with education institutions in a way that they have not done before. In the energy industry, the commission has a receptive audience for that point. Dennis Robertson pointed to examples in his constituency of such work, which is going on in a number of areas throughout the north-east. There can be no better time for the Scottish Government to help to foster such links through its work. The success of Aberdeen College’s oil and gas training arm—Aberdeen Skills and Enterprise Training, or ASET—shows the potential that exists. It is clear that there is no shortage of demand within industry for the young people who attain skills through that training, nor a shortage of demand among young people to take up those places. Not to offer more opportunities such as those at ASET means young people missing out on opportunities for work and continuing acute challenges for our businesses in recruiting the skilled workers that they need. We must all hope that that situation does not pertain in the future. When I refer to opportunities in this context, I am talking about opportunities for young people in not just my region, but other parts of Scotland where youth unemployment problems are even greater. We must think laterally about how we can get more young people in other parts of the country to benefit from those opportunities as well. That is why it is essential that ministers back the ambitions of the report by investing in further education, as our amendment highlights—I am pleased that it has been accepted. It is welcome that the Scottish Government is investing in the energy activities of the north-east institutions through its energy academy. That is very welcome investment. However, the problem, as other members have said, is that ministers are giving with one hand but taking away with the other as they cut millions of pounds from the budgets of our local colleges in the north-east. That approach will have to change if the ambitions that have been correctly laid out in the report are to be achieved. I hope that the ministers’ welcome intention to support the proposals that have been put forward by the commission will be backed by action to ensure that, in the future, our colleges have the support that they need to give our young people the life chances that they deserve. A number of members have talked about the need to share best practice, mentioning the report’s references to support for our young people who are at risk of disengaging from education. I hope that the commission will look to the north-east, where there are examples of best practice. I urge it to consider the success of some of the most innovative schemes in the area such as the work of the Station House Media Unit in Aberdeen, which has achieved great success in bringing young people out from areas where they would not consider having the opportunity to go into employment, or be willing to do so, and transforming their opportunities and their whole approach. I look forward to debating the commission’s final report, which I am sure will make more positive recommendations to promote employment opportunities for our young people. There is no doubt that those opportunities exist in the north-east. With the right support from Government, many more of our young people will be able to take up those chances, which will benefit them as individuals and will also hugely benefit the wider Scottish economy.

The tragic helicopter crash on 23 August, 2 miles west of Sumburgh, in which four people lost their lives, has brought the issue of offshore safety to the fore once more. On 4 September, Parliament heard a statement from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth in which he spoke for all of us when he expressed our deepest sympathy and condolences for the families, friends and colleagues who had lost loved ones that day. Following the statement, members across the chamber focused on the need to ensure that all necessary action is taken so that the safety of the helicopter fleet can meet the highest standards for the future and to instil confidence among the workforce in the helicopter fleet, which had been shattered in the aftermath of the tragedy. I thank those members who signed my motion to allow this debate to take place today. The motion follows that most recent tragedy, but it also reflects on the sad and deeply concerning fact that this incident was the fifth in four years in which a Super Puma helicopter had ditched. That raises many questions about how we improve helicopter safety in the future. Members will, I am sure, reflect on a number of important and different aspects of how we should achieve that, but at the heart of the motion is an issue that is highlighted by events since the tragedy that took place in 2009—which we all remember all too well—when 16 people lost their lives. Today, four years after that crash, a fatal accident inquiry has still not taken place. I lodged the motion as a result of the campaign that my trade union, Unite, has taken forward on behalf of its members, and offshore representatives of Unite join us from Aberdeen today. They are calling for the Scottish Government to support the proposals that my colleague Patricia Ferguson has made in her proposed inquiries into deaths (Scotland) bill. A key aspect of that bill is to make the process of fatal accident inquiries quicker and more transparent. Speaking in the days after the fatal crash this August, Unite’s Scottish secretary, Pat Rafferty, said: “Friday’s horrific events should now compel the Scottish Government to ensure the safe passage through Parliament of Patricia Ferguson’s FAI reforms. On Thursday we vented our anger over the current FAI process and the ridiculous delays in starting the FAI into the 2009 Super Puma crash, the agony this is causing victims’ families, and the fact that we do not have legally enforceable outcomes from the process.” That last comment from Pat Rafferty gets to the nub of the issue. Ensuring that the FAI process is not so protracted in the future is vital for those who have lost loved ones. It is also vital for offshore workers today, who need to have confidence that any lessons that need to be learned from previous accidents have been learned and that action has been taken as a result so that they can be as safe as possible when travelling to their work offshore. All of us in the chamber want to have a helicopter fleet in the North Sea that has the best possible safety standards and in which offshore workers have confidence. However, the fact that in addition to having had this number of incidents in the past few years we have had such an on-going delay in the FAI into the 2009 crash has only undermined that confidence further. It is not only Unite that has these concerns, as is evidenced by the briefing that members had from the National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers ahead of the debate. Last week in The Press and Journal, the Lord Advocate stated that he did not wish to see a delay to an FAI into the fatal crash in August. That is a welcome statement. However, the question must be, without legislation, how will that ambition be achieved? When I questioned the cabinet secretary on that issue after his statement, he pointed to the fact that the inquiries by the Air Accidents Investigation Branch have taken two and a half years. Of course that is an important aspect and investigations can be complex, but that does not in itself account for a delay of four years or indeed for a year’s delay from the decision last January by Crown counsel that there would be no criminal charges into the 2009 crash to the point where we expect the inquiry to be held next January. A number of steps require to be taken in light of these accidents. Of course, action within the industry is vital and I know that the helicopter safety steering group is working assiduously to address those issues. The recent announcement of a review of seating arrangements in the aircraft is welcome—although some people would say that it is not before time—as is the Civil Aviation Authority review, in collaboration with its Norwegian counterpart. That is welcome because, as Nanette Milne pointed out after the ministerial statement on the tragedy, the record of safety in Norway is good and perhaps we can learn lessons from Norway. However, it remains important, given the number of incidents, that there is now a full, independent inquiry—in the same way that the Cullen inquiry took place after the Piper Alpha tragedy. Therefore I hope that ministers will support the call from my colleague Frank Doran MP for the United Kingdom Government to instigate such a review. The key thing for us in this Parliament is to take what action we can to promote safety and this Parliament can act to ensure that there are no longer any unnecessarily protracted waits for FAIs—waits that prolong the suffering for families seeking answers and potentially delay action that requires to be taken to improve safety for the future. I hope that ministers and other members will give serious consideration to the campaign that is being taken forward by Unite and the bill that is being brought forward by Patricia Ferguson, because we believe that this is a crucial issue if we are to put first the goal that Unite and its members and workers have identified: to protect and serve the interests of the industry’s most important resource—its people.

I agree with what the minister has said, but would he be willing to engage with my colleague Patricia Ferguson on the issue of fatal accident inquiries, which is central to the motion?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what recent progress it has made in taking forward the business rates incentivisation scheme. (S4O-02408)

The minister has confirmed that there is no agreement between councils and the Scottish Government that ministers were justified in the dramatic movement of the goalposts for the business rates scheme target that has meant that, for example, Aberdeen City Council will receive only £300,000 rather than £5.8 million to invest locally. When the review is concluded, will it mean that councils will be able to invest in one of the funds locally, and will the commitment that was given to councils by ministers be honoured?

As the Government’s motion and our amendment suggest, our economy will be the central issue in the independence referendum, as has been reflected in the debate thus far. What has been striking in the Scottish Government’s position is that, despite its virulent opposition to the continuation of the United Kingdom, it has been so anxious to communicate to the electorate that when it comes to the key levers of the economy, nothing will change. It argues that we will keep the pound, that we will keep UK-wide financial regulation and that we will keep the Bank of England—although, of course, the Scottish Government cannot offer certainty on any of those points. In offering that argument, those who advocate separation are highlighting the strengths of the case for remaining in the United Kingdom, where we know for sure that we will retain those benefits for our economy. If those things were not so beneficial, those who argue for what they call independence would not be so much in favour of retaining them. Our remaining within those shared institutions of the UK is crucial to key sectors in our economy, such as financial services—especially here in Edinburgh—and it is also important that we remain in a single energy market.

As it happens, I think that Margo MacDonald has a far more consistent argument on independence. I do not agree with it, but it is a consistent argument, which one has to respect. On the issues that she raises in respect of skills and empowering women, I think that education plays a key role. I will return to that subject later in my speech and will address some more of her points. I was coming on to the energy market, because it is crucial to the north-east’s economy. We had the results of the schools referendum in Aberdeenshire yesterday; it was interesting that 75 per cent of pupils made a positive choice for Scotland to remain in the UK. That highlights anxiety about the proposition that is being put forward, by those who advocate separation, with regard to the energy industry. They want to use oil and gas to balance the books, but as Malcolm Chisholm pointed out in yesterday’s debate, that would have applied only in six of the past 22 years. We have to question how confident the Government itself is about the north-east economy. I asked Derek Mackay today about the business rates incentivisation scheme in Aberdeen. In response to my question he argued that, far from being the success story that we thought it was, the rateable value of properties in the city of Aberdeen has fallen. That is an extraordinary claim. I doubt whether it is accurate, but if it is the case, it means that the sums for separation do not add up—to an even greater degree than we thought previously. What we do know is that with the powers that they already have, ministers are not taking the action that they should take to ensure that we realise the full potential of our oil and gas industry.

It is extraordinary to hear the minister supporting stability, given his proposition to move to an entirely different system of taxation. Of course, the minister cannot even say how he would pay for decommissioning. No wonder so many people in the industry are deeply concerned about what the Scottish Government is putting forward. It is not just about future taxation, important though that is; it is about supporting local infrastructure. It was wrong for ministers to scrap the Aberdeen crossrail project and to delay until 2020 improvements at the Haudagain roundabout, which cost local businesses in Aberdeen tens of millions of pounds every year. This brings me to the point about skills gaps. We know about the skills gaps facing the oil and gas industry in the north-east and yet—despite what Mr Crawford said when he was here—this Government has slashed funding for colleges.

I need to make progress. I apologise—I have only a minute and a half left. There were more than 100 fewer staff members at Aberdeen College in 2011 than there were in 2006. That inhibits the potential of our colleges to train local people in the skills that they need for the oil and gas industry. It is an opportunity cost for those individuals and for our local businesses, which need skilled workers. What is clear is that with the powers that they have at their disposal now, ministers are not doing enough to support the very industry that they would rely on in a separate Scotland. So many plans are still to be paid for by oil and gas revenues. Only today we hear that they are to be used to pay to renationalise the Royal Mail in Scotland. We in the Labour Party oppose the privatisation of the Royal Mail, but the issue is far too important for a policy to be developed over the course of a minute in response to a question. I look forward to hearing from Mr Ewing in his closing speech the detailed figures on the proposal. That is what postal workers and people who rely on these services deserve—a serious debate on a serious issue. The very UK institutions that the separatists hope to retain in a separate Scotland make the case for those of us who believe that we are better together and that the economic future of Scotland—particularly the north-east—is best served by a strong Scottish Parliament that is properly focused on the needs of our economy, within a United Kingdom, thereby ensuring that Scottish businesses have the opportunities that they need and deserve.

It is clear that we are agreed on one thing and that is the importance of the bill. The arrangements for the oversight of the referendum are significant politically, so it is important that we get the legislation right. Given the process issues that have been raised by members from across the chamber, it will be crucial that the committee and ministers work through the bill diligently to ensure that all those issues are correctly addressed. A legitimate concern is that more can be done to ensure that there is a reasonable equality of arms in terms of spend during the short campaign, particularly in relation to permitted participants and how those are defined. It is also right to ask questions about the operational purdah, particularly with reference to the parliamentary days that will occur during the campaign. We also need to ensure that the Electoral Commission has the powers to address any breach of the campaign rules prior to the referendum. I am hopeful that the committee will look carefully at those issues. On the two occasions that I attended committee meetings, the committee certainly considered the business in hand—in that instance, the issue of the registration of 16 and 17-year-olds under what is now the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Act 2013—in a thoughtful and efficient manner. Those issues are important because it is vital that both sides of the debate and, indeed, all those taking part in the referendum can be confident that the process will be efficient and fair and that all will know, whatever the result, that it was reached in the right way. I welcome the bill’s objective to provide for a “fair, open and truly democratic process, conducted and regulated to the highest international standards.” A key part of fulfilling that principle must be the proper parliamentary scrutiny of the Scottish Government’s proposition. We need to hear more about that from ministers as well. The remit of the committee, as it examined the legislation before us, has thus far focused on those important process issues, but I am concerned that the Parliament also has a proper opportunity to debate the substantial issues that will arise from the publication of the Scottish Government’s white paper, whenever that finally happens. If the publication date is to be delayed, as we hear it may be, it becomes all the more important to have a clear process in place so that whatever propositions are put forward for Scotland post-separation or post-vote can be properly scrutinised. We are told that the white paper will have all the answers, so Parliament must engage in work that will shine a light on whether questions have been answered or whether further questions need to be asked. Although consideration of the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill is the first job of the committee, it is vital that it, alongside that work, considers what further role it may have in scrutinising the proposals that the Scottish Government will put before the people as a result of the passage of the bill, which we on this side of the chamber will support. I am aware that, under its current work programme, the committee may well have ceased its work before the publication of the white paper. It is possible that the Government’s intention is to publish the document after stage 3 consideration of the bill. Therefore, if the committee cannot lead in that scrutiny, we must consider what role Parliament will have. That cannot just be a few plenary debates. It is clear that civil servants have devoted significant time to the white paper. For example, four civil servants are working on the infrastructure programme and seven are working on the proposed defence policy. The white paper is a major piece of Government work and members must have the opportunity to consider it carefully. This cannot be an issue in which the governing party restricts parliamentary scrutiny in any way—I certainly hope that it will not do that. In my North East Scotland region, there is a great desire that, alongside the fair referendum process that we hope the legislation will achieve, the questions on major issues such as currency, personal and business taxation, monetary policy and a range of other policy areas that many believe they have not received answers to from those proposing the break-up of the United Kingdom are answered. The Law Society of Scotland has also highlighted key principles that must inform the debate, including legal certainty and administrative continuity. In order to achieve that, the Parliament must not only legislate properly on the referendum process but look carefully into the substantial matters of debate that will take place in the process set out in the bill and then hold the Executive to account on the arguments that it makes on those matters. We all have our views about how that debate will be resolved. I am confident that the people of Scotland will reach the conclusion that, in constitutional terms, we have the best of both worlds, with this Parliament here to ensure that we have a strong Scotland in a strong UK. I believe that the people in my region will reach that conclusion for our part of Scotland and our local economy. Whatever our divergent views on the important question that we have to answer, we should all welcome full scrutiny of the proposals that we have waited years for the Government to provide. In endorsing the general principles of the bill, I hope that ministers will tell us how they will enable Parliament to carry out that important scrutiny work.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to promote food recycling. (S4O-02357)

As the cabinet secretary said, the zero waste action plan identifies the contribution that food recycling can make to reducing landfill usage and greenhouse gas emissions. Will he tell me what national targets have been set to increase food recycling, what monitoring of progress towards any goals that have been set is being made and what action ministers are taking to increase food recycling not only in individual households but throughout the public sector? There is huge capacity for increased food recycling in those areas.

I, too, thank the cabinet secretary for his statement. Is the cabinet secretary aware of the concerns that the trade union Unite has raised that, four years after the 2009 Super Puma crash, a fatal accident inquiry into that incident has still not taken place and that has not helped to allay the anxieties of workers about helicopter safety after the most recent tragedy? Will ministers therefore support the work of my colleague Patricia Ferguson as she consults on legislative proposals to speed up the FAI process and do all that they can to ensure that an FAI into the most recent tragedy takes place as soon as it can?

Will that tax system include substantial cuts to corporation tax?

Will the Scottish Government complete a new project execution plan for the Aberdeen western peripheral route by September, as Audit Scotland recommends? Will it provide reassurance that the project will proceed on time, even though Audit Scotland described the NPD funding programme intended for the route as “risky”?

We have welcomed the chance to debate the future of Scotland’s railways. Many of us have found the Government’s motion to be cloyingly self-congratulatory, but it has been good to debate a substantive issue in Scottish Government time, and none of us has said that there has been no progress on our railways. Under devolution, we have had the opportunity to bring a new focus to our rail services. Tavish Scott was quite right to say that that started with the first Scottish Executive under the coalition, when we looked at the transport policy that we inherited. There was a greater focus on rail than there previously was; there was not a myopic focus on new road provision. Devolution has a great deal of credit on its side in developing rail policy and some of the benefits that we now see. Nevertheless, we have voiced concerns about a number of areas of rail policy. We have, for example, voiced concerns about the limitations of the current franchise arrangements—I will return to that issue—but we have welcomed aspects such as the new wi-fi services that First ScotRail provides. A number of members, such as Margaret McCulloch, have referred to the investment in station facilities, and I am sure that we all appreciate the readiness of ScotRail staff to engage with us in the Parliament on issues that we take to them on behalf of our constituents. It is right to recognise progress where it has been made, but it is also right to acknowledge where concerns exist. We still do not know what the provisions of the next franchise will be. We should be relieved that so much of the “Rail 2014” consultation document was dumped, as it included proposals for closing stations, ending cross-border rail services and introducing longer journey times. It is good that, after the campaigns by trade unions and the concerns that were raised in the chamber, many of those proposals have gone, but the fact that they were even under consideration shows that the Parliament must scrutinise the Government’s plans for the franchise carefully to ensure that we achieve improvements and not a diminution of services. When we consider the rail infrastructure in Scotland, we see that the Scottish Government’s record is distinctly underwhelming. The Liberal amendment refers to the fact that was reported yesterday by the Aberdeen Evening Express that, over the past six years, journey times between Aberdeen and the central belt have increased. Members have mentioned the commitments on journeys from Inverness to the central belt that have not been fulfilled either.

Perhaps Mr Stevenson will explain to us why the Government has not fulfilled those commitments.

Mr Stevenson loves his averages, medians and statistics, but he is being very selective with them. What was highly regrettable was the decision that was made when he was transport minister—he will correct me if I am wrong—to scrap the Aberdeen crossrail project. As Dennis Robertson quite rightly said, we should have an ambition for a much higher frequency of through services from Stonehaven to Inverurie. It was a disgrace that, having campaigned for Aberdeen crossrail for so long when in opposition, and when plans were far advanced, the SNP unceremoniously dumped the project. Given the importance of Aberdeen to our economy, as Mr Scott said, that was a hugely regressive decision. However, Aberdeen crossrail was not the only victim. There were the Edinburgh and Glasgow airport rail links and, of course, EGIP, which has been cut by a third, which means that gains from that proposal have been lost. We will not realise all the advantages that we could have had, and that, too, was an extremely regrettable decision. That was a shovel-ready project—we keep hearing about shovel-ready projects—that would have been funded through Network Rail borrowing capacity and was not therefore subject to the swingeing cuts in capital investment that we have heard about. That decision was bewildering and it serves Scotland and our economic progress poorly. The Scottish Government has been keen to blame others for delays. In last week’s debate on its failure to progress work at the Haudagain roundabout in Aberdeen, it had the temerity to blame Opposition parties for delays with the Borders railway when it is the minister’s own failed procurement process that has resulted in the huge delays to that project. That was quite breathtaking stuff, even from this Government. Everything in the garden is not rosy. All the opportunities for an improved rail service in Scotland have not been secured by ministers. Indeed, the cuts to EGIP will result in longer journey times in some cases. Given the tough targets that the Scottish Government has set itself on CO2 emissions, which it has failed to achieve so far, I am interested to know what assessment was made of the environmental impact of not implementing EGIP in full, because that would have done far more to attract more people on to our rail services. The award of the new franchise presents the Government with an opportunity to secure improved services. That is why we have said in our amendment that it is vital to look at all the options for how the new franchise will be operated, not least because of the huge sums of public money that the franchise receives—£511 million this year. As Elaine Murray and Ken Macintosh said, it is time for ministers to look seriously at the potential for a mutual option for the ScotRail franchise. We have had warm words from ministers on that but no practical action, and it will not happen on its own. If limitations are being placed on what the Scottish Government can do around a potential mutual bid for the franchise, I hope that ministers will join their counterparts in the Welsh Government, who have already raised with the Department for Transport the issue of a level playing field for all franchisees, whether they be not for dividend or profit seeking. As Ken Macintosh said, the legal advice on this is not as clear cut as the minister would have us believe. We do not believe that it has been tested in any way by ministers, although we know how reluctant they are to tell us about their legal advice. From the legal advice that we have certainly received, we believe that ministers have a greater capacity than they say they have to explore alternative options for the delivery of rail services in the future. It is our intention to work with our colleagues in the Co-operative Party and the trade union movement to promote such an option and greater accountability in the provision of our rail services in future. When it comes to the future, we remain in the dark about the Scottish Government’s proposals for our railways under its unpopular plans for separation. Perhaps the minister will enlighten us on those proposals during his closing speech. It is important, because our rail services are crucial to our country and economy, and we believe that there is no cause for ministers to rest on any laurels. They need to get on with the work of delivering the better rail network to which we should all aspire in Scotland.

I am pleased that we have been able to bring forward in Labour business the issue of tackling congestion at the Haudagain roundabout, because it is a vital transport priority for Aberdeen. We should all agree that, because Aberdeen is of critical importance to the wider Scottish economy, we must have a transport network that is fit for purpose for a city that is the energy capital of the United Kingdom and a global energy hub. The Scottish Government should certainly agree that that is the case, because its plans for separation—faltering and unpopular as they may be—are predicated on having a thriving oil and gas industry based in Aberdeen. Therefore, it is as surprising as it is frustrating that successive Scottish National Party ministers have failed to make the issue the priority that it needs to be. The Haudagain roundabout rarely features in newspaper headlines without words such as “bottleneck”, “notorious” or “nightmare” attached to it, and with good reason. Day after day, rush hour after rush hour, motorists in Aberdeen have had to endure long delays at the Haudagain, which have sometimes doubled their journey times. The problem is manifested not just in frustration for motorists—it comes at a cost to the north-east economy. In 2006, the Institute of Directors estimated that congestion at the Haudagain cost the Aberdeen economy between £15 million and £30 million each year. We can expect that estimate to be significantly higher today. That is why the issue was identified by Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce as a key priority for the organisation in its recent campaign on transport policy. Our airport is particularly affected by congestion at the Haudagain and unacceptably long journey times into the city centre. We have seen significant growth in passenger numbers and flights, and significant investment by the airport’s operators in its infrastructure, but the continuing congestion at the Haudagain is clearly a threat to the airport’s laudable ambitions for growth.

Of course; I am happy to accept that point. We all agree on the importance of the AWPR but, through today’s debate, we want to move the Haudagain roundabout up the agenda, because it, too, is crucial to improving access to the airport.

That is both a poor excuse and a gross misrepresentation of the issue. I will specifically address the ludicrous press release that Mr Stewart issued yesterday later in my speech. That will give him time to reflect on just how idiotic that contribution was. It is vital to our business reputation that visitors can have ease of access to the city centre for the meetings that they are in Aberdeen to attend, but all too often they encounter long traffic jams at the Haudagain, with the result that their journey from the airport into town takes almost as long as their flight. Because of Aberdeen’s importance to oil and gas and the wider energy industry, it receives thousands of business visitors each year. If Aberdeen is to secure its future as an energy hub and to have businesses that want to base their operations in the city, there has to be better access from the airport. In 2005, the feasibility study into proposals for improvements at the Haudagain that was commissioned by the then Labour-led Scottish Executive was published, but when the SNP came to power the Haudagain was notable by its absence from the party’s first infrastructure investment plan. That was despite the fact that in previous parliamentary sessions SNP members had lodged a number of motions calling for immediate action at the Haudagain, some of which were lodged as long as ago as 2005 and 2006 and included notable signatories such as Mr Swinney and Mr Neil, who, during his tenure as Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, failed to lift a finger to get on with work at the Haudagain. Despite the SNP’s calling for immediate action nearly 10 years ago, I note that when I lodged a question to ask Mr Brown for the latest timescale I was informed that work at the Haudagain would not begin until after the completion of the AWPR and would take nine months to complete. At the most ambitious end of the Scottish Government’s timetable, it will be 2019 before work at the Haudagain is completed. We know now that when SNP members call for immediate action, they mean action some time within the next 20 years. At the heart of SNP ministers’ appallingly sluggish approach to this transport policy has been their refusal to begin work at the roundabout before the AWPR’s completion. Refusing to start work on the Haudagain before the bypass has been completed has allowed the protracted court process over the AWPR to lead to more years of delay on the Haudagain. That situation was entirely avoidable; indeed, before they were in government, SNP members specifically called for work on the Haudagain to take place before the AWPR’s completion, not least because when the project is completed the Haudagain will be entirely on detrunked roads that are the responsibility not of Scottish ministers but of the local council and local council tax payers.

I am sure that Mr Stewart will want to speak later, so he will have his chance then. Despite the Scottish Government’s verbal assurances that it will pay for the Haudagain after the new trunk road is completed, my understanding is that it has not entered into a legally binding obligation to do so. Although ministers should enter into such an obligation if they are to stick to their current plans, it would be far better for them to take the action that is called for in the motion and move forward immediately with the planned improvements. Substantive work towards that goal can be achieved now. Kevin Stewart’s comments in this morning’s press display what I believe to be a wilful misrepresentation of the plan for improvements that has been put forward and, indeed, the plan that he voted for when he was on the council. Of course, we cannot rule out the possibility that he did not understand what he was voting for. The plan falls some way short of the flyovers that the SNP proposed when in opposition, but because we believe that time is of the essence we accept that this is the plan that must proceed. However, Kevin Stewart must be aware that no one is suggesting that the roundabout needs to be closed for the duration of this work, because the solution that he endorsed means that the work will not take place at the roundabout itself. As the appraisal under the Scottish transport appraisal guidance indicates, the main features of option 5—the plan that has been agreed—are the retention of the existing roundabout at Haudagain and a new dual carriageway link road connecting North Anderson Drive with Auchmill Road. That work will take place away from the roundabout itself. Of course, the plan for improvements chosen by the SNP will involve rehousing some residents in Logie and other plans for regeneration in that area. The council stands ready to move forward with this work now and to enable work to commence on the improvements well in advance of the Scottish Government’s current plans.

The member is aware that Aberdeen City Council proposes a third Don crossing. As I have said, the council stands ready to move forward with this work now and to enable work to commence on the improvements at the Haudagain well in advance of the Scottish Government’s current plans. With the right co-operation from ministers on issues such as compensation orders and with key decisions taken now, the relocation of residents that is required by the plan can take place at an appropriate and sensitive pace. Even the previous SNP council said in 2008 that that work could be done within three years. For the SNP to suggest that we can be a separate nation years before we can resolve the rehousing of residents who will be affected by the Haudagain improvements is patent nonsense. Last week Barney Crockett, Labour’s leader of the administration in Aberdeen City Council, announced that the city council was moving forward now with plans to link Dyce Drive to the A96 trunk road, with the improvements to be completed in 2015. That project will significantly improve surface access to the airport and to areas in the north of the city, where significant new office developments for businesses in Aberdeen are being developed. Today, we call on the Scottish Government to show the same kind of initiative with the Haudagain roundabout and not to subject motorists and businesses in Aberdeen to more years of traffic congestion misery. We ask ministers to think again and work with the council to give the green light to this project and to take the actions required to get it under way. If ministers fail to do that, that will mean not only years more of traffic jams, but years more of tens of millions of pounds of costs to our local economy and local businesses. That is entirely avoidable. Not acting now would mean that ministers would have failed to listen not only to the local councils, but to local businesses and local people. It is time for ministers and the SNP to listen and think again about their refusal to give the work at the Haudagain roundabout the priority that it needs, otherwise the charge will justly be levelled at the SNP that Aberdeen is its forgotten city. Aberdeen deserves better than that. We all agree that the city is vital to the whole of the Scottish economy. That is why I ask members to support our call for immediate action at Haudagain. I move, That the Parliament notes the ongoing concerns expressed in the north east over the continuing chronic congestion at the junction of the A90 and A96 trunk roads at the Haudagain roundabout; believes that, as it is the energy capital of Europe, Aberdeen requires a more efficient and effective transport network; recognises the views expressed by local business organisations, Aberdeen airport and local authorities that the traffic problems at the roundabout are detrimental to the local economy and cost it in the region of £15 to £30 million a year; notes that, although a feasibility study on improvements at the roundabout was commissioned by the former Scottish Executive and that Scottish Transport appraisal guidance was published in 2008, under current Scottish Government plans, work on the improvements will not begin until 2018 at the earliest and the Scottish Government has given no formal assurance that it will carry out this work after the completion of the Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route, when the Haudagain junction is no longer a Scottish Government responsibility; congratulates Aberdeen City Council on its announcement that it is investing in a £5 million project to link Dyce Drive to the A96 trunk road, which will be completed in 2015 and significantly improve surface access to the airport; believes that the Scottish Government should show the same urgency with work at the Haudagain roundabout, and calls on ministers to commence significant work on the project immediately so that road users in the city do not have to wait until the end of the decade for these much-needed improvements at the roundabout to be completed.

So when Alex Neil and John Swinney specifically called for immediate action more than five years ago, they were wrong.

In the previous session of Parliament, I raised the issue as a debating subject, and I have lodged a host of parliamentary questions on it. When will the minister bring forward the planning application for the route?

When?

I hope that the debate will give Keith Brown a chance to do rather better on this occasion—we all live in hope. This is the third time in the current parliamentary session that Scottish Labour has initiated a debate on ferry services, and that is for two reasons: first, ferries provide a lifeline service for our island communities; and, secondly, the Scottish Government has been responsible for a series of serious mistakes in its approach to ferry services. With the publication of the long-awaited ferries review last December, a raft of fare increases was announced that will result in fares to the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree increasing by an average rate of 8.2 per cent and, with the removal of road equivalent tariff funding for commercial vehicles, increases of up to 10 per cent in fares for such journeys. The recently published analysis that was commissioned by the Scottish Government shows that the removal of RET is having exactly the impact that members across the chamber warned ministers about. The increased costs to hauliers and island households amount to a tax on island communities. Given those findings, and given the debacle of the withdrawal of the NorthLink service from Scrabster to Stromness due to the breakdown of the Hamnavoe, it is no wonder that the minister declined our request two weeks ago that he come to the chamber to make a parliamentary statement on ferries. Today, we bring the issue to him, and we will look for answers on both those issues. We also wish to highlight our concern over the proposal from CalMac Ferries for significant pay cuts for its port staff, although I am more hopeful that we will find a consensus across the parties on that issue. Let me begin with the removal of RET from commercial vehicles. The consultants’ report that was published in April showed that the decision had resulted in a “significant negative impact” on hauliers. The report’s importance was neatly summed up by Gail Robertson of the Outer Hebrides Transport Group, who said: “It is an instructive document that clearly shows the devastating, negative impact the removal of cheaper fares are having on island families and businesses. We can appreciate why Keith Brown was reluctant to publish this document - it nails and dispels many assertions that were untrue.” The consultants’ report highlights that the removal of RET for commercial vehicles has had a negative effect on the margins of small hauliers in particular and has necessitated an increase in prices for network hauliers. The report also raised the concern that, as many parts of the Western Isles are characterised by relatively high levels of deprivation, if higher fares and transport charges lead to a reduction in income and employment, the outcome could be a worsening of the position.

Our commitment to RET was clear in our most recent manifesto. It is regrettable that the SNP has failed to stick to its commitments on this important issue. The report found—as we and many others said it would—that the removal of RET for commercial vehicles would lead to higher prices for islanders, with 88 per cent of businesses who participated in the survey noting that the increase in commercial vehicle fares had been passed on to their businesses. The other key aspect of the findings is that, despite what Alex Neil said in the previous debate on the issue, the report concluded that hauliers had passed on the savings from RET to their customers. That is why Chris MacRae of the Freight Transport Association said that the report showed that the removal of RET from commercial vehicles was a grave mistake that resulted directly in price rises on the islands and the weakening of fragile economies. He also said: “The logistics industry was incensed last year when the then Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment Alex Neil stated that hauliers were not passing on this benefit to islanders.” He went on to say: “The Report illustrates that the point made by Alex Neil and other MSPs to be without any foundation and we would ask the current Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment to issue an unreserved apology to the hard-working companies that do such work underpinning island economies.” I am interested to know whether that apology will be forthcoming today and what material action the Scottish Government will take to rectify the mistakes that it has clearly made in removing RET from those commercial vehicles.

The member should perhaps read the report that was commissioned by his own Government, which found that RET had been passed on by the hauliers. I can tell the member that many people on Lewis know very well that the savings from RET were passed on to local businesses. They are now feeling the pinch because of the increase in prices as a result of a decision that his Government made. That is the prevailing opinion of which I have been made well aware. I would be interested to know what the Scottish Government will do to rectify the mistake that it has made. We will support Mr McArthur’s amendment to our motion on RET, as we believe that he makes a reasonable point regarding the potential for piloting the application of RET in the northern isles, although we acknowledge that the costs would need to be scoped.

If I have time, I will take an intervention from the minister later. The second issue on ferries that we bring to the Parliament is one that Mr McArthur has raised on many occasions, which is the interruption to the crucial NorthLink service between Scrabster and Stromness, which has been of such concern to the community in Orkney, particularly as we approach the crucial tourism season. It is vital that we have certainty over the future of that vital service but, when the Hamnavoe broke down, Serco had no contingencies in place. The background to the situation is, of course, the shambles of the award of the NorthLink contract, which saw a legal challenge mounted in court and the minister instructing CalMac, which had previously run the service, not to appeal its exclusion from the bidding process on a technicality. We raised a number of concerns about the process, and today we ask whether the issue of contingencies for incidents such as the one that has occurred with the Hamnavoe was properly factored into the procurement process. I will take an intervention from the minister, if he still wants to intervene.

Mr McArthur’s amendment talks about a pilot. It seems to me that researching and studying the potential for the issues before we rule things out is not unreasonable. I understand that if the NorthLink service had remained with CalMac, capacity would have existed to have a replacement ferry in a couple of days. However, when the contract was removed from the publicly owned CalMac and awarded to Serco, the minister hailed the announcement, saying that it would “ensure that people travelling to and from Orkney and Shetland will continue to have access to safe, reliable and affordable ferry services in the future.” However, over the past few weeks the Scottish Government has been paying for a service that it is not receiving. That is why we ask the minister to inform us what financial penalties Serco will incur and what action will be taken so that people can have greater confidence in the reliability of that crucial service in the future. The experience of the award of the NorthLink contract shows the influence that ministers exercise over CalMac’s decisions, and the final ferry services issue that we bring to the chamber is one on which we ask ministers to exercise their influence in a positive way. Last week, members of the Transport Salaried Staffs Association organised a briefing with employees of CalMac who face a 25 per cent pay cut, at which MSPs heard from four employees who face the prospect of losing several thousand pounds of shift allowances annually if CalMac imposes the new contracts. That will affect around 70 mainly female clerical employees, many of whom work in rural parts of Scotland and many of whom are the main earner in their household. Even with their shift allowances, those workers do not earn a high wage. One employee said that her current salary was slightly over £22,000, more than £4,000 of which she stands to lose if the proposals are imposed. Those employees frequently go beyond their duties in order to serve the passengers and, indeed, the communities with whom they work. Given that the jobs in question are crucial jobs in often fragile economies, that development is a particularly concerning one. I have received a response from CalMac, with which I have raised those concerns directly, but they have not been allayed by that response. Although we have raised contentious issues in the debate, I am pleased that Labour members were able to support Kenny Gibson’s motion on the matter, and I know that the minister has also met members of the TSSA here in the Parliament. I hope that he can provide us with a positive response on that issue, at least. I look forward to hearing the minister’s response on the other substantive concerns that we have raised. It is because our ferry services are of such importance to our island communities that ministers must ensure that they are affordable and reliable for passengers, and that they are properly supported. We believe that, in key areas, ministers have failed in that duty. I move, That the Parliament believes that the Scottish Government needs to take action to address a number of failings in its policy on ferries; calls on it to provide a detailed response to the report that it commissioned on the effect of the removal of road equivalent tariff from commercial vehicles, which found that this has had a detrimental impact on hauliers and island communities; further calls on ministers to outline what financial penalties have been levied on Serco following its failure to run the Stromness to Scrabster service because of a mechanical failure to MV Hamnavoe and what action is being taken to ensure that this service is not disrupted in the future; expresses concern that Caledonian MacBrayne’s proposals could see many port staff receive pay cuts of up to 25%, and believes that the Scottish Government should make clear in a statement that it does not believe that this publicly owned company should proceed with these proposals.

Will the minister take an intervention?

When will there be further details of the individual local schemes across Scotland, including in the north-east, where schemes have been proposed by local councils? Is the Scottish Government on target with its aim to have above-average uptake of broadband in Scotland by this year?

12. To ask the Scottish Government what its plans are for the provision of dentistry in NHS Grampian. (S4O-02086)

I welcome the fact that increased numbers of patients in Grampian are registered with a dentist. What reassurance can the minister give me that there is proper monitoring of the practices that have received NHS grants to establish new surgeries to ensure that they fulfil the requirement that 80 per cent of their work is NHS treatment, and to ensure that patients who are registered with the practices are receiving check-ups and treatment at appropriate intervals? I know that those issues have already been raised with the Scottish Government.

I, too, congratulate Neil Findlay on securing the debate and for all the work that he is doing to ensure that this Parliament takes meaningful action so that there can be no opportunity for the operation of blacklisting in future and that there are penalties for those who have been engaged in the practice in the past. There is no doubt that blacklisting has ruined lives and careers and cost families throughout Scotland dear. We now know from the excellent work carried out by the Scottish Affairs Select Committee in Westminster that that pernicious and destructive practice was in operation for too long in our construction industry. Indeed, as we have heard, it may be in operation even today. I know of oil and gas workers in Aberdeen who were blacklisted in the 1980s, so the dreadful practice has unfortunately been widespread. Certainly, workers in my region—the north-east—were blacklisted. Indeed, we have been made aware of some 50 such cases. I am pleased that we are joined today by Tommy Campbell, the Unite regional organiser based in Aberdeen, and other Unite members who are campaigning on the issue. Tommy has played a leading role in the campaign in the north-east as someone who experienced the trauma of being blacklisted himself. It is right to congratulate my union Unite, the GMB and UCATT, which have been campaigning for action at a UK and Scottish Government level to tackle blacklisting effectively. I hope that the Parliament can move forward together to deal with the practice. We need an inquiry not only to understand the extent of the practice in the past but to be reassured that it is not widespread at the moment. Indeed, as we have heard in the debate, the unions fear that it is happening today. That needs to be investigated, which is why I wrote to the First Minister in December to request an inquiry. I hope that we get a more positive response to that suggestion today. In the debate, members from all sides have seen merit in an inquiry, so I hope that the minister will take the proposition seriously. I want to hear more from her about that in her closing speech. I also hope that the Scottish Government will take the action that it can take to prevent blacklisting in future by ensuring that the forthcoming procurement reform bill includes provisions to ensure that no company engaged in blacklisting can win public sector contracts. Unlike Christina McKelvie, I am not entirely supportive of everything that the Scottish Government has done on procurement, but I am very pleased indeed to hear from her that the SNP—and therefore, I hope, the Scottish Government—will commit to including such provisions in the forthcoming bill. Labour members will welcome that development, as we have been campaigning for it for some time. I am pleased that we seem to be making progress on the issue and look forward to seeing the provisions in black and white when the bill is published. We strongly believe that the Scottish Government should use all its spending power so that companies know that they simply cannot afford to be involved in practices such as blacklisting at any level and so that, therefore, those companies promote a culture of health and safety at work instead. Last weekend, many of us commemorated international workers memorial day. I joined the Aberdeen Trades Council at such an event where we remembered those who lost their lives at work because there was no culture of safety. That is why we must ensure that all workers can be confident that, when they raise concerns about health and safety or when they speak up for their union members, they will be listened to, their input will be valued and they will not have to live in fear of ending up on a blacklist and having their lives and careers ruined as a result. We are told that blacklisting is a thing of the past. Unfortunately, we suspect that it might not be. We are told that it does not happen any more. If that is the case, nobody should have anything to fear from an inquiry. Everyone should welcome the proposal and no one should have any problem with the measures for which the unions are campaigning and that Neil Findlay has proposed. I congratulate Neil Findlay again on giving us the opportunity to debate the action that we must take to ensure that blacklisting truly is a thing of the past.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what account it took of the local economy as well as access to justice in reaching the decision to close Stonehaven sheriff court. (S4O-02063)

In making the decision to close Stonehaven sheriff court, why did the cabinet secretary discount the view that was expressed by the Federation of Small Businesses? It said: “closing these ... courts will hit footfall and ... put ... pressure on existing businesses”. Is it not the case that closing the court in Stonehaven means even more business for the court in Aberdeen, from which business has previously been transferred because of pressures on capacity?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making in taking forward the business rates incentivisation scheme. (S4O-02021)

The scheme that was originally outlined by ministers would have enabled Aberdeen City Council to invest some £5.8 million in the local economy. The decision to revise the target in light of the appeals means that the council will receive only around £300,000 through the scheme. Is it not the case that Aberdeen is being penalised for delays in business rates collection elsewhere in Scotland? What will the minister do to rectify the situation so that the scheme achieves what it was meant to achieve, namely the ability to invest in economic growth in Aberdeen, which is important to our wider Scottish economy?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its response is to the Federation of Master Builders’ latest state of trade survey.(S4T-00319)

And we have agreed with the cabinet secretary on that policy. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary is taking the report seriously. Why is it the case that the federation finds the situation for small building firms significantly worse in Scotland than in the rest of the UK? What action will the Scottish Government take to address the issue?

We certainly support that argument. However, a number of areas are causing difficulty for the sector, such as the lack of delivery through the NPD programme, of which the cabinet secretary is well aware. The survey shows that the situation for firms is much better in Wales. Wales is taking a different approach to procurement, which includes far greater use of community benefit clauses. Will such clauses be used more widely in future, in projects such as the Aberdeen western peripheral route? Will there be a new emphasis on community benefit in the forthcoming procurement reform bill?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to support local authorities in the north-east to deal with the aftermath of recent flooding. (S4O-02007)

Aberdeenshire Council informed me that it has been in dialogue with the Scottish Government over a Bellwin scheme application for funding but, because of the claims threshold and the deadline for carrying out works, it is unlikely to receive any funds from the scheme. Does the minister agree that the terms of the scheme should be reviewed to ensure that, in more instances, local authorities benefit from funds from it rather than bear all the costs themselves?

The minister said previously that he would welcome a bid from a mutual or not-for-profit organisation in the franchise tendering process. Why then, in a written answer to me today, has he ruled out the possibility of civil servants being seconded to work on such a bid, although that would be the only way of creating a level playing field with the private companies, which will have scores of staff employed in their bid teams?

I think that Mr Johnstone spent some time winding up at the end of his speech. This has been a useful debate on a bill that is limited in scope but which concerns a very important issue, because it is about securing the best stewardship in the public interest of both the existing Forth road bridge and the new replacement crossing, which will also be a crucial part of Scotland’s transport infrastructure and vital to our economy in these challenging times, as many members have said. The management of the bridge has not been the issue of greatest controversy around the new crossing; the focus of that has clearly been the Scottish Government’s inability to secure the new bridge in a way that would have ensured maximum economic benefit for our economy and support for local firms. However, that issue will not be addressed by this bill. We look to the long-awaited procurement reform bill for reassurance that those lessons have been learned by ministers. I hope that Mr Brown will display just now that those lessons have been learned.

We would not simply have given the whole contract for the construction of the bridge to one firm and then taken a hands-off approach to any of the subcontracting work. Ministers had available to them several ways of pursuing better procurement of the building of the bridge and greater economic benefit for Scotland as a whole, but particularly for the area around the bridge. Clearly, though, ministers must take up that issue in the procurement reform bill. The Forth Road Bridge Bill is important in itself. The committee looked carefully at the key issues. I congratulate the convener and committee members on their scrutiny of the bill, which was diligent and effective. We have heard of a number of significant issues that are highlighted in the committee’s report. The committee is critical of the limited scope of the consultation on the bill, to which Roderick Campbell referred. That meant that, for example, the Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians was not able to take part in Transport Scotland’s engagement process. That is a crucial difficulty, because responsibilities that currently lie with FETA are to be transferred to a private operator. As UCATT has described, “FETA was a not for profit company and enshrined democratic accountability, by having a board with elected representatives making decisions. Clearly, the decision to privatise the operation of the bridge management and maintenance will end this culture and organisation.” The committee was also concerned about that issue and stated in its report that it was “unfortunate that there was no mechanism for an assessment to be made of how Option 3—” retaining FETA as the operator— “compared with the other options in terms of cost effectiveness.” A number of members have referred to that point, including my colleague David Stewart. However, I would go further than that, as members may imagine, in that I believe that it is another indication of a worrying default position of the Government to move service provision into the private sector when more effort could be made to retain services in public control.

I am afraid that I am struggling for time. We are where we are with this bill, so the crucial issue now is that the new operator works in the best interests of the public. How the FRB and FRC maintenance contract is procured is therefore very important. As I have said, it is important that lessons are learned from the mistakes that were made in awarding the contract for the construction of the Forth replacement crossing. I turn once more to one of the submissions to make key points for ministers to consider, this time from my own trade union, Unite, which is clear in its view that the overarching future procurement agenda in Scotland should “shift focus on moving away from lowest price tender to quality and sustainability which largely benefits people, not profit in public procurement.” Unite makes the important point that companies that are engaged in blacklisting should be barred from tendering for public contracts in Scotland. I hope that that position will find favour with ministers, and I note that Mr Brown highlighted to the committee the Scottish Government’s concerns over that pernicious practice. The final issue that I will touch on, which will also be a matter for procurement of the maintenance contract, is how transparency and accountability for this important management function are to be secured for the future. I understand that currently agendas and minutes of meetings are matters of public record. We must ask how that kind of transparency can be achieved in the future arrangements and, although ministers have ruled out councillors being members of the bridge users’ forum, nothing has yet been put in place to ensure the required level of dialogue between them, the contract holder and the relevant local authorities. As my colleague Elaine Murray indicated, we may well need to return to issues after further discussion with relevant local authorities. Helen Eadie also raised concerns. We have a number of anxieties about the bill that ministers will need to address at stage 2 and we will certainly test a number of those arguments further as the bill progresses. However, as Dr Murray made clear, those concerns are not sufficient for us not to agree with the committee’s conclusion that the bill should be allowed to progress to stage 2, to allow further debate on the measures and the legislation. That view informs how we will vote on the bill and we look forward to debating the important issues further in the weeks ahead.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Can the First Minister tell us how many civil servants will be working on the referendum bill and the constitutional reform workstreams in advance of the referendum?

8. To ask the Scottish Government when it will announce the location for the energy skills academy. (S4O-01922)

On 28 February, the first Minister said that detailed announcements on the energy skills academy that Labour members would welcome would be made in the near future. As the cabinet secretary knows, I am always keen to welcome good news from the Scottish Government when there is any, so can he tell me in more detail when an announcement will be made so that I can prepare to welcome the Scottish Government’s decision to base the academy in Aberdeen?

Does the cabinet secretary believe that it is reasonable for Scottish Water Horizons not to publish details of the review that it carried out of its waste business before reaching its very significant decision?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has had with the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities on the funding arrangements for the Aberdeen western peripheral route. (S4O-01863)

In those discussions with the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities, I am sure that the importance of speedy progress on this much delayed scheme was high on the agenda. To aid progress, local authorities have indicated that they are prepared to pay up front their share of the costs of the AWPR. Given that the Government’s funding is to be through non-profit distribution, will the cabinet secretary reassure us that the Scottish Government is on track to secure the private sector funding that it is to lever in? Can he confirm that the Haudagain roundabout is also still part of the procurement exercise?

As Elaine Murray said in her speech at the beginning of the debate, the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill does not rank among the most significant or contentious legislation that we have debated. Malcolm Chisholm was right to describe it as not having lived up to the hype that existed before it was introduced. However, the bill is important because, as almost everyone has said in the debate, Scotland’s extremely abundant water resources are an invaluable asset to our country. It is right that we use the great natural advantage that we have to the benefit of our people, and that we share with others around the world our expertise in making best use of what is a precious, and in some places scarce, resource. Neil Findlay’s point about the nature of that overseas intervention is important; the political context of some countries and ownership of their water resources will be important factors for Scottish Water to take into account. The ambition to have a successful and growing Scottish Water is the right one, which means that we must consider carefully any legislative changes to how we operate our water services. It is right that we are ambitious for the future of Scottish Water—with it remaining in the public sector—and for its roles as not only a service provider but a contributor to economic growth. The future of Scottish Water has been keenly debated again today between those of us who believe that it should remain in public ownership and those who believe that it should be taken out of the public sector, including Mr Johnstone. To be fair, I thought that Mr Findlay was a bit uncharitable in describing Mr Johnstone as a vampire, with his “fangs dripping with blood”. Even I thought that that was going a little too far, but it shows how intense the debate can become. It is far from clear whether some of the additional resources that the proponents of privatisation or mutualisation of Scottish Water say would be released would, in fact, arise. Some of the economic arguments that are made in that regard are faulty. However, it is without doubt important that we get the best possible performance from Scottish Water. That will certainly be expected by consumers in Scotland, who have just seen their water charges increase by 2.8 per cent. That increase is lower than increases in other parts of the UK, but it is an increase. Parliament has an important role to play in ensuring proper and effective stewardship of our water resources. The issues can be contentious, but it is clear from the debate today that, by and large, the bill is not contentious. Perhaps the biggest question has been around the focus of, and necessity for, some of its provisions. We agree that the hydro nation agenda should be promoted by ministers. Personally, I have been less persuaded of the need to place a legal duty on ministers to carry out the work—particularly as the legal duty has no effect. However, as Malcolm Chisholm said, it is vital work that needs to be happening on behalf of ministers anyway. There are a range of opportunities for Scottish Water to expand its business, boost our economy and improve its services to customers, and it must seek out those advantages. In recent years, Scottish Water has had considerable success in many areas. However, as regards its economic focus and contribution, in the stage 1 debate I highlighted the submission to the committee by Jim and Margaret Cuthbert on Scottish Water’s approach to outsourcing activities and procurement, which they say has resulted in a situation in which “management skills and” research and development “seem to be almost completely derived from outside Scotland.” Since then, members in the cabinet secretary’s party have also highlighted that point, but it has not resulted in changes to the bill, so I hope that ministers—indeed, the cabinet secretary—will reflect on the issue in advance of the proposed procurement bill. The measures in the bill that give definition to Scottish Water’s core and non-core services have received general support, including from us. We have also supported the proposal that the Scottish Government should be able to lend directly to Business Stream, and we have agreed that there is a clear logic behind new powers to enable licensed water and sewerage service providers to demand and recover charges from non-domestic customers in situations where payment is due, so there is a range of areas of agreement. The amendments that Elaine Murray lodged focused on aspects of the bill as they touch on environmental issues; that has been a running theme throughout consideration of the bill. In its stage 1 report, the committee made the case that the definition of the value of water in the bill should include environmental and social elements, so we welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary took that on board at stage 2. However, Malcolm Chisholm has today expressed concerns about consistency in relation to parts 1 and 3 of the bill, which the cabinet secretary should address. Abstraction is a major concern—as Mary Scanlon said—not least because it was not consulted on before the bill was introduced, which is a deficiency in the bill. There is also concern about duplication of regulation in that area, which is a problem for the businesses that are involved. That is deemed by the cabinet secretary not to be a problem in abstraction, but when it comes to peatlands it seems that it is. We are disappointed that the cabinet secretary has not included peatlands within the compass of the bill because peatlands are dealt with in other areas of legislation and the Scottish Government’s work. There has not been an impediment for the Government with regard to abstraction and a number of other areas. As Malcolm Chisholm said, peatlands are an important water-management resource, so that is an area of disappointment for us, but we are where we are. On the additional powers that ministers have given to Scottish Water, the key is that Scottish Water works sensibly and in close co-operation with others that operate regulatory regimes so that we do not—where it might be a difficulty—have wasteful duplication of effort. Our concerns about the bill are not so great as to prevent us from supporting it. The RACCE Committee has done a good job in debating and scrutinising the bill. Although we have reservations on some aspects of it, of course we agree that Scottish Water and our natural water resources represent an area of significant potential for Scotland. Ministers are right to focus on that. The bill, although it is limited in scope, is part of a much broader and important agenda, which is why we will support it.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to protect communities in the north-east from flooding. (S4O-01826)

Can the minister outline what support is being given to the community in Stonehaven in the aftermath of flooding that has resulted in the closure of the town’s Maritime Rescue Institute? On mitigation of the impact of flooding in the north-east, can he clarify why Grampian is not one of the areas in the Scottish Environment Protection Agency’s extended floodline warning service?

The minister is quite right to highlight the concerns over the impact of the bedroom tax, but would the situation not at least be alleviated if housing associations were able to build more one-bedroom properties, which many cannot do because of the Scottish Government’s decision to cut the housing association grant?

Mr Brown has brought a very important debate to the chamber, given ministers’ repeated comments of how crucial their NPD programme is to their economic strategy for creating jobs and stimulating growth. We have agreed with the Scottish Government that the cut to capital budgets has been too steep and fast and has threatened our economic prospects, but ministers have been quite wrong in their description of the previous UK Labour Government’s spending plans on infrastructure. We planned to spend more—

Mr Swinney is making a similar claim to that of George Osborne. According to Channel 4 FactCheck, latest Office of National Statistics figures show that Mr Osborne’s claim to have spent more on infrastructure than Labour planned to spend is wrong. In fact, the coalition has spent £4.7 billion less than Labour said it intended to spend. However, where we agree with the Conservatives is that Mr Swinney is completely wrong about not only the facts of this debate, but his ramshackle description of NPD and the failure to deliver on what has been called an important programme. If every £100 million of investment in this pipeline is worth 1,400 jobs, how many job opportunities have been lost in the past year because of the delays to these projects at the very time when those jobs are needed most? We have been told that the new NPD scheme would be transformational from the old PFI/PPP schemes. In some ways, it has been; at least under the old scheme, projects were delivered. There may have been a slip of the tongue by Murdo Fraser in the budget debate the other week, but he got it right when he referred to the “NDP”—the non-delivery profit—programme, because the reality is that, while the projects are delayed, investors are still making a profit. [Interruption.]

Indeed, the Scottish Futures Trust won an award in the 2012 public-private partnerships awards as the best PPP promoter. I have not seen the shortlist for this year’s awards, but on the evidence for this debate, I imagine that that achievement will not be repeated. Let us be clear. The culpability is with ministers, who have promised shovel-ready projects again and again, but have created the policy context that has ensured that there has been a lack of focus on their delivery. The key issue now is that ministers must act to ensure that there are no further delays to those crucial projects. I am sure that, throughout the debate, members across the chamber will talk about projects in their own areas. North East Scotland members have received an excellent briefing from Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce on the acute need for progress to be made on the AWPR now that the legal challenge is over, and on other projects, including the Haudagain roundabout, which ministers have dithered over for far too long. It is also vital that ministers can demonstrate that they can deliver through NPD the necessary funds for those projects, particularly in light of the experience of Borders rail. A funding partner could not be found for that NPD proposal. Our amendment also points to the specific issue of the lack of progress in the schools programme, in which, last year, £119 million was meant to be spent, but the final spending tally was zero. We want to know what dialogue there has been with local authorities on the impact that that has had on local educational goals.

Will the cabinet secretary therefore tell us the result of that dialogue and what the impact on local educational goals has been of the Scottish Government’s complete failure to deliver its programme of spending on schools through NPD? Earlier, the cabinet secretary talked about the transparency of the Scottish Government. We have lodged many questions on and asked for many details of the reasons for the delays in each project, and those requests have been blanked every single time. The idea that the Government has been transparent on the issue is simply laughable. We need to understand why there has been a systemic failure in the delivery of the projects and what specific issues there have been so that we can better understand how they will be resolved. It is because we agree that the programme is crucial and important to boosting our economy that we need ministers to ensure that the mistakes are not repeated. I hope that they can reassure us on those concerns, but at this point our concerns very much remain. We are not persuaded that ministers are taking the necessary action to ensure that the projects move forward as they should. We will not support the Scottish Government’s amendment, but we will support the motion. I move amendment S4M-05653.1, to insert at end: “, and calls on the Scottish Government to detail what discussions it has had with local authorities and communities about the impact of the delay of key capital projects, including schools, given that the projected £119 million investment for 2012-13 has been revised to zero.”

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

There seems to be little room in political discourse in Scotland for any issue other than the Scottish Government’s plans to break up the United Kingdom, but for people in Scotland—our families, our trade unions, our businesses and our civic groups—the issues that we are debating today are the most important ones. The Scottish Government’s greatest task and ambition should be to get our economy growing again, but in too many areas of the budget, the Scottish Government is either not doing enough or is making decisions that damage our chances of growth rather than improve them. We have focused on the three areas in which we think the Government is making the biggest mistakes. First, on college funding, from which tens of millions of pounds are still being cut, the Government’s actions are damaging chances for our young people. When we in Aberdeen hear that we will need 120,000 new employees for the oil and gas industry at a time when millions of pounds are being cut from our local colleges’ budgets, it becomes more clear that the Scottish Government’s approach does not make sense. Secondly, on housing, the cabinet secretary appears to think that more homes can be built even though he keeps cutting investment. Many of the new homes to which he has referred in the past were built under the previous housing association grant regime, not the current regime. Housing associations have had to dip into their reserves to enable them to build new homes and in many instances the reserves have been exhausted and associations do not have the funds to build the new homes that we need. Today’s announcement will not change that. If the Scottish Government will not take my word for that, it should look at the briefing from the SFHA, which says that the level of housing association grant must increase. That measure was absent from the cabinet secretary’s speech. The Government should also note that Shelter endorses our proposal for the allocation of all the consequentials to housing, not only to address housing need—which remains acute—but to deliver speedy investment in infrastructure and to support our struggling construction industry. If the Scottish Government fails to do that, we will face a housing crisis, as Elaine Murray said. Finally, on infrastructure, we have highlighted the cut of £350 million from the budget of the Edinburgh to Glasgow rail improvement programme. That decision was particularly poor because the project was going to take advantage of Network Rail borrowing, because the full benefits of the scheme will not now be realised and because EGIP was that cherished thing—a shovel-ready project. There is a clear gap between the rhetoric and the reality when it comes to ministers’ stated goal of investing in infrastructure to stimulate the economy.

I apologise to Mr Crawford; my time has been cut. We have reminded ministers that investing in infrastructure is the right approach, but they are not delivering. On Monday, the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities announced a refreshed infrastructure investment plan but neglected to mention that the Government’s flagship programme of projects that would be funded through the NPD funding mechanism has failed to deliver investment at the very time when it has been needed most. We know that, because although we were told that £353 million would be invested in 2012-13, only £20 million was spent. The figures that the Scottish Futures Trust released yesterday show that that is not the end of the problem. We were told that £686 million would be invested next year, but now we know that there will be only £338 million of investment. We have been given no clear explanation for the delay in all those projects. We have not been told why, of the £119 million that was meant to be invested in schools through NPD, nothing was spent in this financial year, or why next year, when £150 million was to be invested in schools, new plans allocate only £62 million. How many job opportunities were lost last year because of the delays to key projects? Even when its projects proceed, we believe that maximum economic benefit to our economy is still not being secured because of the Scottish Government’s failures in procurement. Too often, there is no level playing field that would allow Scotland-based firms that could employ people locally to compete with big multinational companies, because the Scottish Government has not done what other countries have done—within EU rules—to ensure that contracts include community benefit clauses and other provisions that would mean that local firms could compete. We have to look only at the debacle of the Forth replacement crossing contract to see how our economy has lost out. We hope that that will be changed through the forthcoming procurement reform bill, although we still await details of when it will be published. The cabinet secretary has said that the budget is firmly focused on growing the economy. However, in making the wrong decisions on colleges and housing and in failing to deliver on infrastructure plans, it does not live up to that billing. It is, rather, documentary evidence of a Government with its eye off the ball at the worst possible time for our economy. That is why the budget should not be supported by Parliament today.

1. Welcome back, Presiding Officer. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making in delivering infrastructure projects. (S4T-00236)

Yesterday, outside the chamber, the cabinet secretary spoke of ambitious plans to invest in infrastructure. Today, we have further information from the Scottish Futures Trust on the slippage of the non-profit-distributing programme, which was previously blamed on the Borders rail project and the Aberdeen western peripheral route. We now know that those projects account for only £39 million of a £333 million slippage. Can the Deputy First Minister tell us why, against the £190 million scheduled to be spent on school projects through NPD in 2012-13, the total spend will in fact be nothing?

That is wrong. Beyond that, what is important is that the investment is needed now. The Deputy First Minister referred to the AWPR, but that accounts for none of the slippage that I referred to in my question. Looking to the future—as the cabinet secretary clearly wants to, unsurprisingly—can the cabinet secretary say why the planned £150 million for schools investment through NPD next year has been scheduled so that only £62 million will be spent on schools? Which school projects are being delayed and why?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to tackle the issue of blacklisting. (S4O-01761)

I am sure that the minister shares my concern about recent reports of more than 50 construction workers in the north-east featuring on a blacklist—and many more across Scotland, as we know. Will he join me in congratulating Unite and all the other trade unions that are campaigning for an end to this pernicious practice? Does he agree that the forthcoming procurement bill presents an opportunity to consider measures to ensure that any firm that engages in blacklisting does not win public sector contracts?

Does the minister agree that the construction of the high-speed rail line should start in the south and the north of England at the same time to speed up the network coming to Scotland? Can he explain how on earth making that case would be assisted by breaking up the United Kingdom?

The recent severe weather conditions and freezing temperatures remind us of the acute need to tackle fuel poverty in Scotland. We live in a time of increasing fuel bills and fuel poverty, and still too many of our homes are poorly insulated. Nearly one in three households in Scotland lives in fuel poverty and behind that sad statistic are families, particularly those on the lowest incomes, who are simply unable to afford to heat their homes properly. Too many of our older people are left to choose between heating and eating. From my time working at Help the Aged, I am acutely aware of the impact of fuel poverty on our older people and the all-too-high levels of excess winter deaths in Scotland. The scale of the challenge is clear and it is right to ask if enough is being done to tackle it. Of course, the backdrop of UK Government policy is not helpful to the work that is done in Scotland to address fuel poverty. We readily acknowledge the impact that welfare reform proposals will have on the poorest households and the need for far more robust regulation of the energy industry to curb energy companies hiking prices for customers while increasing their profits. Energy companies have an important role to play—a point that I will return to—but, nevertheless, the Scottish Government also has substantial capacity to take action on fuel poverty. Therefore, it is right to focus on what can be done now through this Parliament. We have already heard today that it is a scandal that, in energy-rich Scotland, we have fuel poverty. That is, of course, true. However, we believe that it is a scandal that anyone in the UK—and, indeed, beyond—should live in fuel poverty. We want the UK Government to take a different course, but it is also incumbent on the Scottish Government, particularly given that it aspires to further powers, to use those powers that it already has to their full extent to tackle fuel poverty in Scotland. Although we undoubtedly support some actions that ministers have taken, including the principles of the national retrofit programme, we believe that further action is required, given the context of rising fuel poverty. We are not alone in believing that, as members will see from the excellent briefings that we received ahead of today’s debate. Some of the issues that I wish to speak about have also been highlighted by Energy Action Scotland, WWF Scotland, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and others. As I have stated, we support the proposal for a national retrofit programme for many of the reasons that Patrick Harvie highlighted in his intervention. We see many benefits to the scheme, not only because it will improve the energy efficiency of more of our housing stock but because it will support jobs in our construction sector in these tough times for our economy. Improving our poor housing stock has long been a priority for the Labour Party. We believe that more energy-efficient homes and reducing energy usage must be the key goals in tackling fuel poverty and, in doing so, contributing to the goal of reducing carbon emissions. That is why we have made housing the key priority in our budget proposal. We believe that our proposal will result in not only more affordable homes, but homes that are built to a higher standard of energy efficiency. Our proposal would also allow greater investment in retrofit schemes. Our priority for housing is why we supported a green new deal at the last election to insulate some 10,000 homes. Of course it is right that we welcome the retrofit programme that ministers have introduced, but more action is required. Only last September, the Scottish Government’s approach was described as “inadequate” by the expert on fuel poverty, Dr Brenda Boardman. Although the Scottish Government’s budget for fuel poverty is stable in the current spending review, three years ago the budget was subject to a two-thirds cut, which has been a costly mistake. Many members will be looking forward to the Energy Action Scotland Burns supper. I am told that Burns once wrote to his publisher that he had three guineas to carry out his work as an exciseman when it really required five. Ministers find themselves in a similar situation with their plans for addressing fuel poverty, given the funds available. We must have clarity about funding. We know that, of the Scottish Government’s £200 million budget for energy efficiency and tackling fuel poverty, almost two thirds will come from the energy companies—

That should indeed be a good thing, as the minister has chosen to say from a sedentary position, but that is why we call on ministers to provide an update to Parliament on the progress of negotiations with the industry to secure those funds. If the minister wishes to provide that update now, that would be very welcome. If those funds are not secured, clearly that will raise significant question marks over the delivery of the strategy. We must hope that energy companies will recognise their responsibilities to contribute to the work on fuel poverty when they are in dialogue with ministers on the issue. It is also welcome that Scottish Government funding has been provided for the go-early projects, which have had significant take-up among local authorities. However, I would like more information from ministers on what private investment has been secured for those schemes. I understand that the minister gave a figure in her speech, but it would be good to know whether that figure refers to what has actually been secured. That may well be an indicator of what funds can be levered into the national strategy. There are questions about when the rules on the operation of the green deal—for example, on the occupancy assessment that will be required—will be concluded in Scotland. It would be good to hear from the minister about what progress has been made on that. Although we welcome the national retrofit programme, I am conscious of the advice of Energy Action Scotland, which argues that, while the retrofit scheme will be important, there will remain a need for a programme similar to the energy assistance package to ensure that the most vulnerable households who live outside the retrofit programme zones will not need to wait years for help. I welcome the assurance that the minister gave to Dr Murray on the continuing eligibility for assistance of those who are currently eligible under that scheme. Those general points reinforce the importance of ministers producing further details on how the national retrofit programme will be rolled out. We want more avenues for tackling fuel poverty to be explored, including looking at initiatives such as the collective purchase of energy by communities to bring down costs and further pioneering schemes such as the provision of community heat networks in Aberdeen, to which the minister referred. In 2001, the Parliament made a commitment to abolish fuel poverty by 2016, and the Scottish Government has rightly and consistently said that it will abide by that commitment. Indeed, earlier this month in response to a question from me, the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities described that as not only as a statutory, but a moral, duty. Given that we have high levels of fuel poverty, which in the past year have unfortunately increased, it is right to ask what assessment ministers have made of their ability to reach the target that is now only three years away. Are ministers confident that their current plans are adequate to meet the target? Will they set milestones in a detailed published plan? Without that, the commitment will be no more than words. I am sure that no-one wants that; rather, they want a clear plan setting out what will be achieved and when. The scale of the challenge on fuel poverty is clear, but the costs of not meeting that challenge are heavy indeed and are paid by the most vulnerable in our society. However, we have not only the power to deal with the issue, but the wealth of expertise and commitment from many charities and individuals working in the field who are passionate about tackling fuel poverty. They often meet and work with us here and, for those of us that work with them, that passion is very clear. I hope that the Scottish Government will give them the support that they deserve in carrying out that vital work; indeed, the energy companies should support them, too. However, it is clear from those who work day in, day out to tackle fuel poverty that a clearer lead is required from ministers: that is what our amendment calls for. I move amendment S4M-05424.2, to leave out from first “the Scottish Government’s” to end and insert: “that the most recent figures available show that 1 in 3 households in Scotland are living in fuel poverty and that fuel poverty in Scotland has increased; notes that, of the £200 million budget that the Scottish Government states that it has set for energy efficiency and tackling fuel poverty, almost two thirds is to come from energy companies and, therefore, calls on the Scottish Ministers to provide an update on the progress of negotiations with the industry to secure these funds; recognises the role that the energy industry has in addressing fuel poverty and notes that Scottish Labour has called for comprehensive reform of the regulation of the UK energy market; recognises that the impact of the UK Government’s proposals on welfare reform will increase the importance of Scottish Government action on fuel poverty; notes the recent comments of the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities at a meeting of the Parliament on 9 January 2013 that the Scottish Government remains committed to its statutory obligations to eradicate fuel poverty as far as reasonably practicable by 2016, and considers that the Scottish Government should bring forward an assessment of how it will fulfil this obligation, including milestones in a detailed published plan.”

Will the member take an intervention?

I am not sure why SNP members are misinterpreting our position. We have said that the energy companies’ commitment should be welcomed and that it is important that the money should be secured. However, we want to know how far the Scottish Government has gone in the dialogue with the energy companies to ensure that the two thirds of the £200 million that they are to contribute has been secured.

Will the minister give way?

The minister mentioned that a number of roads in the north-east had been affected by the severe weather conditions. Can he provide any further update on what action has been taken to address the problems in that region?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making in tackling fuel poverty. (S4O-01653)

Given that the latest figures show that fuel poverty has increased, what is the status of the Scottish Government statutory commitment to eradicating fuel poverty by 2016? With organisations such as WWF and Energy Action Scotland calling for further measures to tackle fuel poverty, what progress is the Scottish Government making to secure the funding that ministers have identified for this area, especially given that two thirds of it is to come from the energy companies themselves?

I very much welcome the chance to debate the oil and gas industry’s role in Scotland and I endorse the minister’s motion. The debate is useful. As several members have said, those of us who represent the north-east are, of course, keenly aware of the industry’s central role in Scotland, not only in giving Aberdeen its status as the energy capital of Europe but in being the key driver of the wider Scottish economy. Its future is vital to us, and Parliament’s role must be to ensure that the industry plays a central role in our economy for many years to come. Of course, there will be debate today about where the levers of power should lie in forming policy for the industry, but the fact is that in the crucial issues for its future—ensuring that we have the skilled workforce that the industry needs and, in doing so, promoting a culture of safety; encouraging more of our young people to pursue careers in oil and gas and the energy sector more widely; and developing an infrastructure in Scotland and the north-east to support the long-term future of the industry—Parliament already has the key role. That is increasingly realised in the industry as well—particularly through the work of the Scottish Parliament cross-party group on oil and gas and at events at which we have had the chance to engage with the industry. Taxation is certainly a key issue when we discuss the prospects of oil and gas businesses. On the other side of the argument, Neil Findlay raised the impact of a cut in corporation tax—which is the Scottish Government’s policy—on revenue from the industry. However, the other major concern that we all hear again and again from the industry is that we need to ensure that we have the skilled workforce that the industry needs in the long term—both in the oil and gas sector, as Lewis Macdonald said, and in our energy sector more widely, including renewables. That issue is also highlighted in the excellent briefing that we received for today’s debate from Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce. Too often, we hear that firms cannot get people with the skills that they need, which not only threatens the ability of oil and gas businesses to maximise their economic impact in the North Sea, but represents an opportunity cost, especially for the young people who could be taking up excellent career opportunities. I am sure that the minister is aware that good work is being done to tackle those issues by organisations such as OPITO and in our schools by the your future in energy initiative, which is running a programme of events at Northfield academy next week. It is regrettable, however, that some of the Scottish Government’s actions run counter to tackling the problem. The further education cuts are outwith the minister’s bailiwick, but they are certainly affecting our local colleges in the north-east and will make the goals more difficult to achieve. The announcement by ministers that an energy academy is to be established is welcome, although we are still to get clarity on what the long-term funding arrangements for the academy will be and where it will be based. Particularly for all of us who represent the north-east, it is a no-brainer that, although the academy’s work will involve institutions across Scotland, the sensible place to base its leadership is in Aberdeen, because it is Europe’s energy capital and an industry hub, and because our four local academic institutions have joined together to develop exciting plans for the work of the academy. I hope that we will soon have more clarity from ministers on the north-east’s role in what is a positive and important development for the industry. I, too, will touch on the inevitability of Scotland’s oil and gas resources being part of the constitutional debate. There is no disagreement on the importance of a strong future for our oil and gas sector—although the Green Party may demur—nor is there disagreement that we have left on the UK continental shelf decades of oil production, which is of huge benefit to Scotland’s economy. We can all be confident and positive about the future of the industry in Scotland and our role in helping to secure it. Nevertheless, that does not lead members in this part of the chamber to believe that it is sensible to rely so much on one industry to balance the books. Oil prices are strong now, but we know that they fluctuate. The north-east economy is now strong in comparison with the rest of Scotland because of oil and gas, but there have been times when that has not been the case. In 1999, one newspaper article reported thousands of job losses in the industry and reflected that, from 1985 to 1988, when the rest of the country saw economic growth, the oil industry was in the doldrums and house prices in Aberdeen were falling by 10 per cent a year. Aberdeen has weathered the storm. The city now thrives and the outlook is bright, but its past shows that it would be folly indeed to pin to the price of a barrel of oil our economic fortunes as a nation.

Costs in both areas have gone up. My point about fluctuation still stands. Indeed, Mary Scanlon mentioned differences in price over just the past few months. We know that with decades of oil production remaining in the North Sea, the industry will be vital to Scotland for many years to come. The previous Scottish Executive and Lewis Macdonald, when he was a minister with responsibility for enterprise, ensured that Parliament played a full role in developing policies and planning ahead, through the PILOT initiative. I am pleased that the Scottish Government is continuing that approach to developing strategy in order to ensure that we have the policies that we need for a successful oil and gas industry in the future. I welcome this chance to discuss such important issues.

Housing associations have said that the Scottish Government’s reduction in the housing association grant has prevented them from being able to build new homes—in particular, homes for people on the lowest incomes. Does today’s announcement mean that the grant will now increase?

I congratulate the committee on its work on the bill. As is evident from the convener’s speech and from the report itself, the committee has been diligent in its scrutiny and has highlighted the key issues, including those that require more work from ministers and those that have been the subject of dispute in what is a largely uncontentious bill. I believe that the committee has reached the right conclusion that we should support the bill’s general principles and, although there are issues to resolve, we agree that the legislation will have a largely positive effect. It is fair to say that the bill does not live up to the expectations that there might have been about its significance. Given the language used by the First Minister when the bill was first announced, many people will have expected something a bit more momentous. Ministers argued that the legislation would have a transformational effect on Scottish Water, its impact on our economy and the way in which we protect and promote Scotland’s huge natural water resource. We were told that ministers had increased their ambition for the bill and, in June, The Times reported that the First Minister had decided that Scottish Water should be run as a public benefit corporation along the lines of Network Rail. However, none of that has come to pass. Ministers have rafted back from such indications and, indeed, have been wise to do so. Although other parties have argued—and might well argue again today—that changing Scottish Water’s structure and ownership will release significant funds for the Scottish Government—[Interruption.] I hear Mr Johnstone already commenting on that from a sedentary position, but I have to say that it is far from clear that that would be the case, or what impact it would have on the block grant under Treasury rules. Although the hydro nation policy itself might be described as ambitious, I am not sure that the terminology is right for the bill. What we have is a bill that places a duty on the Scottish ministers to take reasonable steps to progress the hydro nation agenda. I remain to be convinced that legislation is really necessary in that regard and, indeed, the committee’s report notes that the specific duty on the Scottish ministers to develop the value of Scotland’s water resources does not actually place new powers or responsibilities on them. That said, we broadly support the hydro nation agenda. It is right that we take steps to maximise the economic and environmental potential of the management of our water resources and to promote internationally our expertise in those respects. The cabinet secretary’s predecessor was given to making rather overblown claims about exporting massive amounts of our water south of the border—the convener touched very diplomatically and very well on that point in her speech—but nevertheless there are many other areas in which Scottish Water has the capacity to expand its business and boost our economy. It is right that we focus on such opportunities. In recent years, Scottish Water has had considerable success in many areas, one of which is its increasing international activity. I also welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments on Scottish Water’s work in Malawi; it is good to hear that its expertise is being used to good effect beyond simply its business ambitions. On the economic contribution to Scotland that is made by Scottish Water, Jim and Margaret Cuthbert made an interesting submission to the committee on Scottish Water’s approach to outsourcing activities and procurement, which they say has resulted in a situation in which management skills and research and development seem to be almost completely derived from outside Scotland. They advocate Scottish Water adopting a procurement policy that is aligned with sustainable economic development. That is in line with the proposals in the excellent paper on procurement that they produced for the Jimmy Reid Foundation. Although I have debated other matters with the Cuthberts, I say to the cabinet secretary that their paper on procurement should be required reading ahead of the publication of the long-awaited procurement bill early next year. There has also been discussion of the definition of the value of water in the bill and the committee has made the case that adding environmental and social elements would provide clarity and balance to the definition. I was therefore pleased to hear the cabinet secretary say that she accepts that point and will make the appropriate amendments at stage 2. The committee also asked the Scottish Government for clarity on whether peatland habitats are covered by the reference to water resources in the bill. I know that environmental groups were concerned about that and I would be interested to hear the cabinet secretary’s comments on the matter. In terms of the economic focus of Scottish Water, we acknowledge the broad welcome that there has been for the clarity that has been brought to the definitions of core and non-core services, and it is right that the Scottish Government should be able to lend directly to Business Stream. There is clear logic behind the new powers to enable licensed water and sewerage service providers to demand and recover charges from non-domestic customers in situations in which payment is due. All of those kinds of provision are right and sensible. However, in a number of other areas of the bill, there are further questions to be asked about the purpose of the legislation. There are laudable intentions behind many of the provisions, such as those on the maintenance and improvement of water quality and the protection of the sewerage network by ensuring that businesses that are responsible for the blockage of the network are responsible for those costs. However, some people, including people from business organisations who contributed evidence to the committee, have asked whether there is really a need for Scottish Water to have those new powers, given that in a number of areas there are already regulatory regimes operated by SEPA and others. If new powers are addressing a problem that exists in the current set-up, then of course they are required. If that is not the case, then it is right to ask whether there is a need for new legislation. Part 2 of the bill, on abstraction, is a case in point. As the proposals on abstraction were not part of the consultation process, the committee was right to ask the minister to undertake further consultation on the issue before reporting back ahead of stage 2. It is right that there should be oversight of major industrial and commercial abstraction of water, but ministers need to make a stronger case for the need for additional powers beyond the controlled activities regulations licensing regime that is operated by SEPA, to which the convener of the committee referred earlier. More consideration also needs to be given to the list of exempt organisations. Mary Scanlon pointed to the example of the Scotch Whisky Association, which has made strong representations on the issue. The committee also reported that there was little understanding of why 10 megalitres of abstraction had been set as the threshold for ministerial approval. Further clarification of that will be useful. Other provisions, such as those on water shortage orders and common maintenance of private sewage treatment systems, are sensible, and seem to improve on the regulations that are already in place. However, as I have said, there are a number of areas that require further reflection, particularly as some of them will mean new regulatory regimes where there is already a regime in place, and potentially new costs to businesses that are in challenging economic conditions. If the regulations are necessary, then of course they have to be there, but we need to be sure that they are indeed required. I hope that the cabinet secretary will reflect on some of the points that have been made in the course of the stage 1 consideration and we look forward to her engaging with the committee on them at stage 2. In general terms, the bill is beneficial. In some cases, that benefit is only marginal, but where it will make it easier to pursue the hydro nation agenda, that is welcome. We agree that Scottish Water and our natural water resources represent an area of significant potential for Scotland, and ministers are right to bring a focus to that work. That is why we will support the general principles of the bill.

I thank members of all parties who supported my motion on the provision of support for children with Edwards syndrome and babies with palliative care needs, and I particularly thank the members who are here, given the change to the time of the debate. We are here because of a baby called Caoimhe, who was born in Aberdeen royal infirmary and had Edwards syndrome. Caoimhe’s parents, Patricia and Peter, are here with us in Holyrood, because they want more people to be aware of Edwards syndrome; they want people to be aware of what Edwards is and of its impact on families who have a baby with the condition. Many members will not have heard of Edwards before today’s debate; I had not heard of it before I met Patricia and Peter. Its effects are devastating. It is a genetic disorder that is similar to Down’s syndrome but which has a much poorer prognosis for the child. It occurs in about one in 6,000 live births, so it is very rare. However, given that there were nearly 60,000 births in Scotland last year, there will be families in that situation every year, somewhere. The majority of foetuses with the syndrome die before birth, and the median lifespan of children who are born is just five to 15 days. Caoimhe lived for 65 days. The condition is rare, but its effect on families could not be more profound, which is why our health services must be ready with the information and support that families need if they are to make the best decisions for their children. Patricia and Peter feel that lack of awareness of Edwards affected them in a number of ways. Many parents whose babies are diagnosed with a condition during pregnancy understandably choose not to continue the pregnancy. Of course, that is an agonising choice to have to make. Caoimhe’s diagnosis was not finally confirmed until 31 weeks into the pregnancy, so Patricia felt that that was too late to make that choice. For her, that reinforces the need for early checks for Edwards in screening and for diagnosis as soon as possible. From speaking to Patricia about her experience, I have no doubt that she came across health professionals who were very much committed to doing their best for Caoimhe, but her overall experience left her with a strong belief that the local health and care services were simply not well placed to deal with an Edwards baby. She thinks that Caoimhe and the family would have benefited from more advice and support and from care provision that was more focused on the specific situation of a baby with palliative care needs. In particular, the family think that more could have been done for Caoimhe in the short time that she had at home. Those were days that the family cherished, but which were hugely challenging for them and for Caoimhe herself. There are charities and organisations such as Children’s Hospice Association Scotland that do wonderful work with children and young people who have life-limiting conditions, but Patricia’s experience with Caoimhe shows the need for a focus on support for families in the particularly difficult situation of having a baby who requires palliative care. Caoimhe’s family want families who find themselves in similar situations to have better support and care than they had. They have not been bowed by their experience, but have established a website and trust in Caoimhe’s name, to make people aware of Edwards and the needs of families who have babies with palliative care needs. We also know that about 150 babies a year die during late foetal life, between 24 and 40 weeks of pregnancy, because of congenital conditions. I have to say that, having had the chance to look further into this immensely challenging subject, I am in no way despondent; rather, I am confident that services will improve, because organisations such as CHAS and Together for Short Lives are working with professionals in the health service in Scotland, such as Edile Murdoch, who is a consultant neonatologist at the Royal infirmary of Edinburgh, to develop a Scotland-wide care pathway approach to delivery of care and support for babies who have life-limiting conditions. The pathway is designed to cover the whole journey for baby and family, from antenatal screening and breaking the awful news to the family to planning for going home, with a multi-agency care plan, and dealing with bereavement. The pathway is also designed to help professionals to engage with the child’s and the family’s needs and to ensure that everything is in place for families so that they can access the support that is right for them. Although the pathway will require provision of training and ensuring that the right staff are in place, it is not about more services or even about significantly more funding, but about the services that we have working better in partnership and following a nationally established pathway of care so that wherever the family is in Scotland, they can expect the same support and care, focused on their needs. All the professionals who are dealing with these difficult and rare situations will know what is expected of them and what steps they should take to support the baby and the family. The draft perinatal palliative care pathway for the south-east Scotland and Tayside managed clinical network has been completed and put out to consultation with a view to refining it by the end of January. It is hoped that the pathway will be accepted as a pathway across all three managed clinical neonatal networks in Scotland and that it will be presented to the Scottish children and young people’s palliative care executive as well. The establishment of a pathway of care is a commendable and logical step to take. When I discussed with Patricia the proposal for a pathway approach that Edile Murdoch had given us, Patricia said to me that if that had been in place for her family and for Caoimhe, it would have made all the difference to them. It would have made it easier to cope with the terrible situation that they faced. I know that ministers support that work and I hope that they will continue to support and endorse the establishment of the care pathway. The progress that is being made with the Scottish Government is very welcome. I believe that it will allow the people in Scotland who have expertise in these difficult issues to ensure that throughout the country we are better prepared to support families in these most difficult circumstances. Caoimhe’s family believe that putting those plans in place will, most of all, mean that there is better support for families who will in the future, unfortunately, go through what they have been through. I am sure that that is what ministers and the whole Parliament want, and I hope that ministers will continue to support families and professionals in creating a better care network for children who could not need our support more.

I thank the minister for his statement. Of course, we are concerned about the impact of the situation on those who rely on the lifeline routes that are provided by the northern isles ferry service. I am sure that those concerns are very much shared by the workers, who feel that they have been left with little option but to take such action. What further steps will the minister take to ensure that Serco engages properly with the RMT, and that a reasonable resolution is reached? What is his response to the RMT’s concerns that, despite Serco’s assurances in June that existing seasonal crewing arrangements would be maintained, it announced three months into the contract that it would reduce staffing levels, which means 35 job losses for RMT members, many of whom live on the islands? Does the minister now regret the shambolic procurement process for these crucial services—the aftermath of which we are feeling now—which involved bids being marked 80 per cent on price as opposed to quality of service? Does he regret instructing the previous operator, NorthLink Ferries, not to appeal the decision to exclude it from the process on a technicality? Why did the minister say that he was unaware of the value of the CalMac bid because it could not be considered, when we now know from a freedom of information request that the bid had indeed reached the final round of scoring? Has he misled Parliament on that issue? Is it time for a full investigation into the process, which I have asked the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman to look into and which the RMT has described as a “botched privatisation stitch-up”?

I congratulate Mark McDonald on securing the debate. I know that he takes a particularly keen interest in the issue. Across the chamber, we all want to ensure that steps are taken to support people with autism and their families, of course. Like members from across the north-east I have, since I was elected, met a number of parents of autistic children, so I know how challenging their lives can be in caring for the children, even into their adult years. Therefore, everything that we can do to help them and their families should be done. I very much welcome the National Autistic Society’s taking forward of the alert card initiative in Grampian. Over the years, there have been a number of debates on ensuring that we have the support services that we need for people with autism in Grampian. Mark McDonald said that there are some 6,000 people with autism in Grampian, so there is a great need there. In that regard, we had a debate over the future of St Andrew’s school in Inverurie in which MSPs from around the chamber took an active interest. There have been on-going discussions over the level and range of support services that are available to people with autism—for example, the constant need to provide more access to speech therapy and the need to recruit more speech therapists to Grampian. Although we have been successful in a number of such campaigns and, indeed, in securing a future for St Andrew’s school, one of the challenges for debates on such issues is that they are undoubtedly about resource-intensive issues. We will and should continue to campaign and work for improved services in such areas, but we all know that these are tough times financially. It is therefore welcome that today we debate an initiative that is not simply about resources but is a step that has been taken by a charity that is supported by local agencies, including Grampian Police and the other agencies that Mark McDonald mentioned. I am sure that it will have taken a lot of work to put in place, but it comes across as a straightforward concept. However, it is one that will make a real difference to people with autism. We want people with autism to play an active role in our communities, but of course social encounters that we might regard as being routine can be anything but for them. I hope that the introduction of the autism alert card will give people with autism greater confidence in social situations and make others more aware of the issues regarding people with autism and the fact that they find some encounters difficult to deal with, so that they can give more consideration to how to deal with such situations themselves. I am sure that the card will be broadly helpful in that regard. It is important that we do all that we can do to promote the use of the card, whether in dealing with the emergency services in the important situations to which Mark McDonald referred, or in going to the shops, making a purchase or getting on a bus. I am sure that in all such situations the cards will help people with autism and everybody involved. It will be important for not only Grampian Police but our councils and other local agencies to do all that they can to promote the card and awareness of the scheme to ensure that people know that the card is now being used and that we can maximise its benefits. It is therefore welcome to hear that other agencies, along with Grampian Police, have signed up to the scheme. I agree that the card will make a positive difference for people with autism. This excellent scheme was introduced by the National Autistic Society on behalf of those for whom they work so hard to support. I congratulate the society on its initiative and Mark McDonald on giving Parliament the opportunity to raise awareness of the project, to discuss it and to welcome it today.

Does the minister agree that the extension to the current franchise allows more time for us to consider different options for running the next franchise, including a not-for-profit model? Will he agree to meet trade unions and other parties that are keen to promote such a model for the future?

12. To ask the Scottish Government when the energy academy will begin its work. (S4O-01567)

That is good news, and the initiative is welcome, but the number of institutions that will be involved in delivering the academy is still unclear. Which institutions will be involved in the academy’s work? Does the minister agree that, as the energy capital of Scotland and Europe, Aberdeen—which he visited recently—should be the academy’s centre and should provide the base for its leadership?

This has rightly been described as an important moment in the debate on Scotland’s constitutional future. Agreeing to the motion will enable the Parliament to determine the legislative process for the referendum. We have long made the case that that is the right way to proceed. In the time before the referendum I suspect that there will be few moments of consensus. However, it is right today to congratulate all parties, who have worked to ensure that we can all agree to the motion at decision time. We are better together, after all. Both Parliaments and both Governments have done the right thing in ensuring that the referendum bill on which the Parliament will vote will follow a legal process and have the right legal authority. I congratulate UK and Scottish Government ministers, not least Mr Crawford, on achieving the agreement. To have proceeded without the legal authority to do so would have jeopardised the whole process and potentially created a chaotic situation on an issue that is of the utmost importance. The consensus to allow the Parliament to proceed in the way that is envisaged is welcome. All parties must have confidence that the referendum process is being conducted fairly and properly. Of course there will not be agreement on every point; to get to this stage there has had to be give and take on both sides. We agreed that a single question should be put, which was a matter of huge debate—although apparently we all supported having a single question—and we agreed a timescale, although we thought that the referendum could have been held far sooner. We await the exact date and look forward to ministers confirming it in the Parliament soon, although we suspect that it has already been announced in The Sun on Sunday. We shall see. The terms of the section 30 order have been agreed, but other important issues were raised in evidence to the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee. I highlight the importance of the Electoral Commission’s status in providing oversight of the referendum, which members mentioned. It strikes me that the Electoral Commission’s role is even more important in the unprecedented situation of there being a majority Government in Scotland. Crucial issues remain to be resolved, including the spending limits for the campaign, which must be reasonable enough to allow proper engagement with the electorate in a short campaign for a vote in which turnout is likely to be much higher than it is in normal elections. The final wording of the question remains to be decided. That is a matter for debate, because there is no consensus on the current wording. It is crucial that the Scottish Government not only seeks but abides by advice from the Electoral Commission on the issue. In his evidence to the committee, Alan Trench was right to say that giving the commission a more limited role than is envisaged in the agreement would carry significant “legal and constitutional risks”. I hope that ministers will reflect carefully on those issues in the time ahead. I hope that the debate can begin to move beyond process and on to the substantial issues in the run-up to a crucial referendum, the result of which I am hopeful and confident will be not the break-up of the United Kingdom but a confident Scotland deciding to retain its membership of a strong and successful partnership of nations.

I was talking simply about a short campaign. A long campaign is another issue, but in a short campaign that can be determined.

It has been clear from this afternoon’s debate that the future of the Remploy factories is close to the hearts of members across the chamber, as is concern for the future of those workers, who have gained so much and given so much during their employment at Remploy. A powerful message has been sent out to the UK Government today—to which we can only hope it listens—that it should halt this damaging process. As we have just heard, there has not been unanimity today. As in the debate earlier in the year, Conservative members have sought to describe the work of Remploy as unsustainable or outdated. That does not reflect the view of the great majority in the chamber, as expressed this afternoon, nor does it reflect our experience of Remploy. Members across the chamber have talked about the great contribution made by Remploy factories in their area—factories that in too many instances have now closed. Patricia Ferguson and other members have talked about the factory in Springburn. Many of us will have been concerned about the developments there that were reported in the Daily Record this week. Helen Eadie, who, with Unite and GMB, has worked extremely hard to fight for a future for Remploy and supported workplaces, talked about her work on the issue and the Remploy factory in Cowdenbeath in her constituency. We heard Lewis Macdonald and members from across my region, the north-east, talk about the great contribution made to our community by the Aberdeen Remploy factory. Along with Lewis Macdonald, I was with the Remploy workers on the day the factory closed. Over the past few years, the workforce had reduced, but the threat of closure had been staved off, through the efforts of the workforce, their trade unions and the city’s MPs, Frank Doran and Anne Begg. When the doors finally closed, it was an emotional and traumatic moment for the staff who remained, some of whom had been with Remploy for more than 20 years. The minister was right to highlight the complete mishandling of that process by the UK Government and Remploy. In too many instances, the hopes of saving factories and jobs have, at least in the short term, been dashed by the complete mismanagement of the process. What was particularly cruel about the UK Government’s decision to proceed with the closures was that it came just as a number of factories were making real progress in becoming viable social enterprises. No one can doubt that Remploy has suffered from management that has failed the organisation. That point has been well made by GMB and Unite, as the unions representing the workforce, and it has been made again today. That is why the previous Labour Government invested more than £0.5 billion to bring change to Remploy to make its businesses sustainable. I say to Mr Fraser that that is the difference—£0.5 billion of investment compared with complete withdrawal of funding by the current UK Government. We will stand proud on our record of supporting supported workers.

That is why £0.5 billion investment—

We have come to talk about the progress that has been made. Members across the chamber have referred to that progress, and to the opportunities to make the factories sustainable, which was there and which the Conservative Government dashed—[Interruption.]

Sorry, Presiding Officer. What is said in the Conservatives’ amendment is quite clear. [Interruption.]

The Conservatives do not believe that the models were in any way sustainable. I stand by every word that I have said. It was to make the factories sustainable that a social enterprise model was introduced in Aberdeen and a manager, Ben Mardell, was hired. There was success, particularly with Aberdeen Textiles and Workwear Services, which is a business that is seeking to continue its work and which had become profitable.

That is absolutely correct and that is the point that I was seeking to make as well. Frank Doran also continues to be actively engaged in seeking a long-term future for the factory and I welcome the minister’s comments about Frank Doran’s important contribution to that important work. Today the factory is closed, but that does not mean that the hope that its doors will open again to provide supported employment has been given up. We now have to look at what we can do through the Scottish Government and as a community in Scotland to support these factories. I commend Mr Ewing for his assiduous work in this crucial area. There can be no doubt that he wishes to take forward action by the Scottish Government. I am extremely pleased that he will accept Labour’s amendment. The cross-party approach that he seeks to take on this vital issue is to be commended, and we look forward to working with him on developing our proposals. The minister will know that those proposals are not simply proposals from the Labour benches. They were brought forward in a briefing that was sent to members by Unite—Lyn Turner of Unite is here today. I am sure that Unite will also be pleased that we can work together on the proposals, including for a scheme similar to the employer support grant that has been introduced in Wales; it will look forward to hearing after Christmas about the scheme that will be brought forward here. I am sure that Unite will also look forward to the development of a permanent supported workplaces task force, which Sarah Boyack also referred to—involving the Council of Economic Advisers, co-operatives, unions and businesses—to deliver a strategy to secure the long-term future of supported workplaces in Scotland. The final issue that I wish to raise is procurement policy, which a number of members have raised. I raised the issue in a members’ business debate on supported workplaces that I secured nearly three years ago when a number of supported workplaces were closing. I know that ministers have talked positively about using article 19, but I made the point then that—other than the work that Glasgow City Council does with Royal Strathclyde Blindcraft Industries—that simply was not translating into contracts for factories. That has remained the case over the past few years. I welcome the framework that the minister announced at the Equal Opportunities Committee meeting today. Progress on that is vital if these factories are to have a long-term future. The minister has said that that will be a feature of the procurement bill when it is published, and I hope that we see intention translated into action on that crucial point. All that the Remploy workers have asked for is the opportunity to work—to be in employment. Surely we should all support that. The fact is that without Remploy many of those workers would not be able to work. Dennis Robertson made that point powerfully. Today, those opportunities are being taken away for many, but with the right action we can provide a future for supported employment in Scotland. We can protect that opportunity to work that the Remploy staff have fought for—their right to work, which they should not be denied.

If the cabinet secretary is willing to spend £8 billion or £9 billion—which is even more than Annabel Goldie suggested—on the route, where is the logic of cutting a third of the budget from the Edinburgh to Glasgow rail improvement plan, the benefits of which would be far more cost-effective and felt much sooner?

The announcement yesterday of the new services that are to be operated by Virgin airlines from Scottish airports to Heathrow was welcome and a timely reminder, given the debate, of the importance of our airports to Scotland’s connectivity with the rest of the UK and the world. The issue is crucial for our economy as well of course. Tourism is a hugely important business for Scotland, and that is reflected in the fact that business tourism will be debated in the Parliament tomorrow, when we will see the minister again. Some years ago, the aviation industry was booming and there was keen competition to provide cheap fares. Today, with the world economic downturn, rising fuel costs and more people deciding to stay at home rather than travel abroad, airlines and our airports face a much tougher time. That has brought into sharp relief the issue of APD levels, which contribute to making many of today’s journeys by air a great deal more expensive. Because of the lack of direct routes into Scotland, APD imposes a greater burden on Scottish passengers and those travelling into Scotland. Although there are exceptions for the Highlands and Islands airports, there is no doubt that in general APD imposes a particular burden on the Scottish economy. That has been made evident in the study commissioned by the Scottish airports on the economic impact of APD, to which the minister referred. On the effects of high levels of APD on Scotland as a whole, the minister was right to point also to the earlier studies in 2010 that detailed the general economic impact on individual airports and their areas. For example, the study commissioned for Aberdeen airport, which is in my region, showed that Aberdeen airport supports more than 2,000 jobs and that the figure would rise to 4,000 jobs by 2030 with successful implementation of the airport’s master plan. The plan would also enable the airport to contribute more than £150 million to the local economy. The economic potential of airports is therefore clear. In addition, Aberdeen airport is of fundamental importance to the oil and gas industry, which is a key driver of the wider Scottish economy. If increases in APD continue at their current rate—the duty increased by 8 per cent last year—they will threaten the ability of our airports to make the maximum contribution to growing our economy. No doubt the Treasury is attracted by the nearly £3 billion that the current level of APD will raise, but that will be a false economy if it means that we cannot grow tourism as we would have hoped or if it means that airports cannot recruit the additional employees that they clearly hope to recruit. Concerns about the current level of APD have been expressed not only in this Parliament. In Westminster, a motion was agreed to with support from members on the Labour benches—and, indeed, from members on other benches as well—that expressed concern over the high level of APD and called for an urgent review of its impact on the economy prior to the next budget, when APD is due to increase again. There is a particular concern about the level of APD here in Scotland because we are particularly disadvantaged due to the lack of direct routes. That means that passengers from Scotland pay APD twice. A passenger from London flying direct to Orlando from Heathrow will pay APD once, but a passenger from Aberdeen flying to London and then on to Orlando will pay APD on both journeys. We see that as clearly unfair, because it means that there is a disproportionate burden on airports and passengers here. That is why we have called on the UK Government to address the issue as a matter of urgency. That is also the reason for our strong focus on the potential for devolution of APD, to which the minister referred. We, too, believe that an extremely strong case has been made for the devolution of APD, and we can agree with the vast majority of the terms of the Scottish Government's motion. We do not see devolving APD as being the only way of properly supporting the ambitions of the aviation industry—Willie Rennie made a good intervention on that point—given that there are a range of interventions that ministers can take, including marketing Scotland abroad and ensuring ease of access to our airports.

We established our position at the former Scotland Bill Committee—of which I see many members here in the chamber—and I do not resile from one word of that cross-party commitment. I absolutely agree on the issue of devolution of APD, which we agree is of fundamental importance. That is why the Calman commission recommended APD as a suitable tax for devolution. As we heard earlier from the minister—and as I have just restated—the Scotland Bill Committee found exactly the same, so we are persuaded of the case. Although we might look for action on this issue sooner from the UK Government, I have no doubt that devolution of APD will be an important consideration for all those who are looking at future powers for this Parliament, as Scottish Labour is doing through the devolution commission. Of course, with devolution of APD would come new responsibilities and challenges. Those would involve funding any reductions in APD and striking the careful balance that is required to support our crucial aviation sector in the context of the Scotland-wide targets on reducing CO2 emissions. We do not see spiralling APD as an appropriate tool for that agenda; instead, we look to other ways of encouraging the industry to reduce emissions. The motion refers to the environmental benefits of having more direct routes to and from Scotland and reducing the need for connecting flights. It was to promote just that goal that the Labour and Liberal ministers in the previous Scottish Executive introduced the route development fund. It was unfortunate that the scheme fell foul of EU state-aid rules, so it would be welcome if the Scottish Government would consider alternative approaches to support at least some of the objectives that the fund was introduced to make progress towards. The Conservative amendment is right to argue that ministers could have done more on that.

We absolutely welcome that instance of action, but we believe that the Scottish Government could have made a broader effort and taken that approach in other circumstances. The importance of the high cost of air travel as a barrier to achieving our goals for the aviation and tourism industries is reflected in the fact that it is not only our airports that have made a strong case on APD, but business organisations including the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, the Institute of Directors Scotland, the British Hospitality Association and, in my region, Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce. There is a strong coalition of concern about the impact of APD, not just on the aviation industry, but on the wider economy. Although the motion and amendments suggest that we will not achieve absolute agreement on every point, the minister is right to point to general concern about APD and a broad consensus on the role that the Parliament might have in determining the levels in future. We will not be slow in coming forward if we think that the Scottish Government is not implementing the right policies to promote growth in our economy. Clearly, in a number of areas, we believe that the Government is not doing so. We will press the Scottish Government to do more to support our aviation industry. We certainly believe that the Government should have done more to improve connectivity to our airports. Ministers should not have cancelled the rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports and must do much more to improve surface access to Aberdeen airport. As I said, we do not believe that APD is the only way in which to address the challenges that the industry faces. In itself, devolution of APD would not provide all the answers; there would need to be further debate on what the new level of APD should be. As the Liberal Democrat amendment states, that would require an explanation of how any changes would be funded. We believe that our amendment closely reflects the reality of the current debate. However, although the Scottish Government motion is not word for word what we would have written and although caveats apply, our concerns are not strong enough to persuade us that we should not send out as clear a message as possible from the Parliament about the concern about the effect on Scotland of the current level of APD and the strong case for devolution. On that basis and in that context, if our amendment falls, we will not oppose the Government motion and will seriously consider supporting it. We will make the case when the Scottish Government is wrong, but we believe that ministers are right to highlight the urgent need to address the impact of APD on Scottish passengers and airports and on the Scottish economy. I hope that the UK Government will listen to the concerns that I am sure will be raised by members from around the chamber and that the minister will consider supporting our amendment. We will certainly continue to encourage as broad support as possible for the progress that we need on this key issue for our economy. I move amendment S4M-04874.3, to leave out from “the only way” to end and insert: “the Scottish Government should work with Scottish airports and airlines operating in Scotland to explore what further incentives might be put in place to reduce carbon emissions in the industry; notes that the previous Scottish administration introduced the route development fund to bring new routes to Scottish airports; recognises that the Calman Commission on Scottish Devolution recommended that APD should be devolved and that the Scotland Bill Committee found a strong case for devolving APD and that this will inform the work of the Devolution Commission; further recognises that APD on long-haul flights has already been devolved to the Northern Ireland Assembly, and believes that devolution of APD to Scotland should form part of an immediate wider review of APD by the UK Government, which should, as a first step to addressing the current concerns over APD in Scotland, take immediate action to resolve the anomaly whereby passengers in Scotland pay APD twice through making journeys to UK hub airports.”

Will the minister take an intervention?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has had with the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities to ensure that the 2012-13 budget for housing supports its ambition for new affordable and social rented homes. (S4O-01405)

I know that the cabinet secretary is aware of the huge need for affordable homes in the north-east. How will the pledge of increased affordable housing be met given the budget cut of £66 million? Of the additional £40 million that he announced for housing in the budget statement, only £10 million is to be invested in the next year. I am sure that he will say that more homes are being built with less investment, but I am told by housing associations in my region that that is being achieved largely through the spending of their reserves, and those funds have now been exhausted.

It has been a good debate on an important issue. No doubt in his summing up the minister will say that if Scotland separates from the rest of the UK our climate will suddenly be more temperate and our winters less severe. However, in the meantime, we will have to deal with winter under the current constitutional arrangements, and there is every chance of cold and snowy conditions, which will present many challenges; indeed, the current forecasts suggest a colder than average winter ahead. We have had contributions from across the chamber on a wide range of issues, reflecting the fact that we all know all too well the difficulties that a severe winter can cause for the transport network, which a number of members have reflected on, and the delivery of lifeline services in our communities, and the impact that it can have on the most vulnerable households—too often, older people are still living in poorly heated homes. A number of members have spoken about fuel poverty, which is very pertinent to this debate. That is why it is vital that ministers, the Scottish Government and public sector agencies are properly prepared for severe weather if it occurs. Some eventualities are difficult to prepare for and we can rightly blame the weather for many things, but the minister who yesterday blamed poor weather for missing climate change targets perhaps took that a bit far. However, there is no excuse for failing to put in place the contingencies that we need for the problems that we know will occur if we have a period of severe weather this winter.

I fear that that is unlikely, but let us see what advice Mr Salmond has received on the issue first, before we make any judgments on that. Looking at where the Scottish Government is clearly responsible, I note that it was in the context of its failure to deal properly with the impact of the severe winter weather of 2010 that the minister came into office, following the resignation of his predecessor. There has been talk about people being jailed for mistakes at these times, but I think that the resignation of Stewart Stevenson was quite enough penitence on his part. I do not want to get into a situation in which forecasters are imprisoned for their mistakes. We should remember that, at the time, our forecasters got it right but, unfortunately, Government mistakes ensured that we did not have the response that was required. However, it is right that we look for a range of agencies—not just the Government but transport operators and others—to learn lessons from 2010 to ensure that we are better prepared this time. If today’s debate is an indication that ministers are being diligent in learning the lessons and making contingency plans for the future, we should welcome that. I am sure that that is the message that ministers want to promote through the debate. However, we must have not only the perception but the reality. Ministers must not only make plans but take the actions that are required. That is why our amendment highlights our concerns about the impact of the budget settlement on local authorities’ preparedness for wintry conditions. Elaine Murray and others have referred to the reduction in such budgets in a number of local authority areas. The minister said that there is enough salt and grit available nationally. However, where there are any concerns about the provision of those resources and associated facilities because of budget pressures, I hope that he will work with local authorities to ensure that we have the national coverage that we need. I would like to hear more in his closing statement about the dialogue that he is having with local authorities on that important issue. We must ensure that appropriate preparations are made so that we do not have frozen, impassable roads. As others have said, we do not want to have frozen, impassable pavements either, particularly for the sake of our older people. We cannot afford to take a silo approach to the issue, because it requires partnership. The motion rightly reflects the breadth of the collaboration that is required, which is what needs to happen. Joint working between the Scottish Government, councils and third sector organisations such as the Red Cross to that end is welcome and necessary. Further, as Hanzala Malik said, there must also be joint working with transport operators, road contractors and the various organisations that are involved in that. Many members referred to the ScotRail briefing. It is encouraging to learn that ScotRail is investing and seeking to learn the lessons of previous winters as well. We can all agree that we cannot afford a repeat of the same level of disruption that we saw two years ago, with the rail network grinding to a halt and drivers stranded in their cars, as they were on the M8 that winter. We want an assurance from the minister and the Scottish Government that the preparations that are being made mean that we will be able to deal with those conditions better if they arise. Clearly, the collective effort goes beyond the organisations that will be involved. As many members said, there is a role for all of us. We have to be good neighbours in the circumstances that we are talking about. We have to do what we can to make pavements passable and be aware of the needs of the vulnerable and the isolated. The Scottish Pensioners Forum estimated that, in the winter of 2010, 200,000 older people were trapped in their homes. Of course, such conditions make hugely challenging not only the work of emergency services but also the work of care services. At that time, we said that there should be a national hotline that people in that situation can call because, in a number of circumstances, local agencies were unable to deal effectively with the calls. I would like to know whether further consideration has been given to that proposal and, indeed, to the sort of buddy scheme that Chic Brodie proposed—it would be interesting to see how that would work. A number of members mentioned flooding, which is one of the features of the aftermath of severe winter weather. We have already seen instances of flooding this year, and my region—North East Scotland—has suffered particularly badly, with flooding in Aberdeen over the summer and in towns such as Stonehaven and Huntly. I ask the minister what work he is doing with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and local authorities to ensure that we are as prepared as we can be to deal with flooding and that, crucially, we put in place early warning systems, which can be a crucial element of dealing with the challenges that flooding presents. We have heard that severe weather presents many challenges, and we all have a role to play. We in the Labour Party hope that resilience week is a success and raises awareness of the measures that individuals and organisations can take. We welcome the debate today and are glad that it has been brought forward early. However, ministers will be judged on the effectiveness of the response if the extreme situations occur. We hope for a mild winter but we must be prepared for the worst of conditions. The minister’s intentions to deal with the potential problems of a severe winter are welcome, but they must be matched by the right actions to show that we are ready for any challenges. The experience of 2010 shows the cost of getting the approach wrong. I hope that we can be confident that the Scottish Government will be better prepared in future and for the winter ahead.

The minister has indicated that the AWPR will be complete in 2018. What impact will that have on improvements at the Haudagain roundabout, which ministers have linked to completion of the work on the AWPR? Can the minister give a completion date for that linked project?

Why can the Deputy First Minister do what the First Minister has consistently refused to do, which is to reveal the existence or non-existence of legal advice under the ministerial code? Has the advice from law officers changed, or is it just another example of ministers making the rules up as they go along? That is exactly why oversight of the referendum would be best left with the Electoral Commission.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making in establishing an energy academy. (S4O-01358)

The investment in the energy academy is welcome, but I ask the minister for further details. How many more people will receive training in skills for the energy industry as a result of the funding? How will it be allocated between the four institutions that have been announced as being involved? How will the academy be funded beyond next year?

Does the minister recall the fact that, in our TV interview yesterday, it was I who reminded him that it was completely within his powers to pursue a not-for-profit model for the railways in Scotland? He cannot promote any one bid for not-for-profit delivery, but he can promote the concept. I ask him actively to promote the concept of a not-for-profit model in Scotland, as I encouraged him to do only yesterday. He seems to have forgotten that.

Could a revised plan for a third Don crossing not work well with the current proposals for the Haudagain roundabout? Is the delay to the improvements at the Haudagain not being caused by the minister’s insistence on bundling the project with the AWPR and not beginning work at the roundabout until the AWPR is completed? The work could begin right now—it is a shovel-ready project—so why does the minister not get on with it?

Will the member give way?

I am happy that we did not proceed with plans for more than £100 million of borrowing for a scheme in the city centre to concrete over Union Terrace gardens. We know that when that is the kind of tough choice that we need to make, we will invest in services and not cut care services in the way that the SNP did when it led the council.

Clearly, the issue of timescale is important. When does the cabinet secretary expect the pilot projects will be evaluated?

In essence, I think that Mr Johnstone means that cars should be allowed to use bus lanes at every moment of the day. I am not sure that Mr Harvie will run with him on that. It has been a good debate and the speeches from members in all parts of the chamber have reflected the cross-party support for investment in more environmentally friendly buses for the Scottish bus network. As Elaine Murray said in opening for the Labour Party, we have called for such an initiative for some time. Back in 2010, Charlie Gordon, our then transport spokesman, urged the Scottish Government to provide investment in green buses, both as an important measure that would contribute to achieving our ambitious climate change targets, which a number of members described as a focus of the debate, and to ensure that Scotland could be a base for the construction of low-carbon vehicles through the work of the Alexander Dennis plant in Falkirk—again, a number of members mentioned that. Unite the Union also played a key role in that campaign. It is welcome that, through the green bus fund, we have seen the construction of new hybrid vehicles by Alexander Dennis, which has won contracts for Dundee and Edinburgh as well as other parts of the UK. The minister has said that there is an important economic motivation as well as an environmental imperative behind this policy, and we whole-heartedly agree with such an ambition for the green fund. However, in a good speech, Patrick Harvie made a good point about ensuring that smaller firms, even community transport schemes, benefit from the use of environmentally friendly vehicles. After all, they will play an increasingly important role in the future of public transport and should be supported in this important agenda. As a north-east MSP, I, like other members, have particular cause to welcome investment from the green bus fund and, in particular, the announcement in August that Aberdeen will benefit from the £3.3 million fund to enable the purchase of 10 hydrogen buses for the city. It is very appropriate that Aberdeen, Europe’s energy capital, should be a pilot area for the deployment of such buses; as the base for FirstGroup, the city has a history of piloting the use of new bus designs. Although important, Scottish Government investment is, of course, not the only funding that the project has received; it has also had funding from the European Commission—to remind us of the importance of our membership of the EU—and support from other partners, including the Aberdeen Renewable Energy Group and Aberdeen City Council. I congratulate the council, in both its previous and current forms, on supporting a very important project and I agree entirely with Kevin Stewart and Mark McDonald that we should welcome the scheme. Indeed, I very much welcome the sight of common cause being made at the launch of the green bus investment in Aberdeen with a cheery picture of the First Minister and Barney Crockett, Labour’s leader in the city, sitting together in harmony on a new hybrid bus. It was right that that investment should receive the personal endorsement of someone who has given strong leadership on the issue—and nice that Alex Salmond, too, could be there. I welcome the new buses in the north-east, not only those that are bound for Aberdeen but those that were announced in April for Banff, Buckie and Keith, and the new National Express buses that will be introduced in Dundee and which will be built by Alexander Dennis. Other members in other regions and constituencies have rightly welcomed investment in green buses in their areas. From Edinburgh and Perth to Glasgow, Airdrie and Cumbernauld, and indeed throughout Scotland, communities and our environment are benefiting from the deployment of those new buses. Of course, we can always do more. Patrick Harvie encouraged us to do just that and Transform Scotland has rightly encouraged members of all parties to be even more ambitious in introducing more low-carbon buses in fleets across Scotland. After all, investment in green transport solutions is crucial to Scotland’s ability to play its part in tackling climate change and investment in our bus network will be a vital part of that. Claudia Beamish emphasised that in her speech, as did Iain Gray when he made it clear that we really need to have done better in key areas of carbon reduction targets. We have to do more to encourage more people to leave their cars behind and make greener choices about their travel. I am sure that smart new energy-efficient buses will help to promote greater bus usage but, as members on this and other sides of the chamber have pointed out, we need a consistent approach from the Scottish Government to encouraging more people to use our buses. That means not only investing in green buses but ensuring that other areas of bus policy promote greater patronage of the bus network. The minister is well aware of our deep concerns about the cuts to BSOG; Neil Findlay highlighted that issue in his speech. Such concerns have been expressed not only on these benches; they are shared by Unite, which just last week organised a lobby in Parliament. The lobby, which was attended by a number of bus drivers, highlighted the impact of the cuts, not least on Unite’s members, and called for greater regulation of the bus industry. The same point has been made by Patrick Harvie and Iain Gray.

I do not actually recognise the figures that the minister has set out; I do not think that the Confederation of Passenger Transport recognises them, either. In the conversations that I have had with operators who are dealing with an 8.5 per cent increase in Aberdeen—and more than that in other areas—they have said that the minister’s claim of a 1 or 2 per cent increase is simply not consistent with the figures that they are working from. That goes to the heart of the regulation of the industry, which Iain Gray was right to highlight. The structure of the industry is important. Members have challenged us to make proposals on that. We did so in the previous session of Parliament, when Charlie Gordon proposed a bill on regulating the bus industry and introducing more quality partnerships and contracts. However, not one SNP member signed up to that proposal. We will continue to press that important point. Iain Gray also said that he preferred green buses to maroon ones. I know exactly where he is coming from on that, but we do not agree on it. As I mentioned in my response to the minister’s intervention, the cuts in BSOG have resulted in higher fares. That has had an impact on bus usage. The briefing that I received from Unite states that recent Transport Scotland data show that bus passenger levels in Scotland declined by 6 per cent in 2010-11. However, the picture in the regional breakdowns is even more depressing: passenger numbers in the north-east, Tayside and central Scotland are down 23 per cent; in the Highlands and Islands and the Shetlands, they are down 27 per cent; and in the south-west and Strathclyde, they are down 12 per cent. Those figures paint an extremely concerning picture of bus patronage in Scotland. When the effect of changing the formula for BSOG, which Jamie Hepburn mentioned, is higher fares and fewer people using public transport, it is an entirely counter-productive measure. Alex Johnstone referred to the impact of that change in cities, which must be considered carefully. Labour members have made the case that fare increases and the withdrawal of services particularly affect those on lower incomes and are an important issue of social justice. We want the new green buses to play an important role in a thriving bus industry. That requires ministers to take a different approach on issues such as BSOG. We welcome investment in green buses to reduce the carbon footprint of the bus industry, just as we support investment in bus services to reduce Scotland’s overall transport carbon footprint. We look forward to the Scottish Government working with bus operators, the European Commission, our local authorities and all those who want to be part of providing more green buses throughout Scotland. We hope that that important and exciting aspect of bus policy will go hand in hand with other policy approaches from ministers. We will continue to press for that to ensure that our bus services are green and affordable, meet the needs of our communities and are used by increasing numbers of people in Scotland.

Will the minister take an intervention?

The cabinet secretary talked of the importance of switching £700 million from revenue to capital. Where then is the logic in the Scottish Government’s decision to cut £350 million of investment from a vital rail infrastructure project—the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme? That is investment from Network Rail’s borrowing capability that trade unions and business organisations have made clear would also have boosted jobs and the economy. That was a shovel-ready project, so why is that one not going?

Is Colin Beattie saying that CBI Scotland, Transform Scotland and the Scottish Chambers of Commerce are all wrong in their interpretation of the cuts that have been made to the scheme?

Will the minister give way?

How many more jobs would have been created by the £1 billion scheme?

This has been a good and important debate—important because there is broad, if not unanimous, agreement across the chamber that it is right to invest in infrastructure to boost our economy and for rail infrastructure to be a key part of that approach. In July, Alex Salmond stated: “The Scottish Government has consistently argued for the need for capital investment to boost, not just construction, but also the wider economy ... Announcements about rail investment in three years’ time are no substitute for capital spending now.” There was an unintended irony in the First Minister’s comment, because only a few weeks previously his Minister for Housing and Transport had announced that the Scottish Government’s flagship rail infrastructure project—the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme—had been cut by a third. As others have said, we would not have thought that from the press release that Mr Brown issued. As Dr Murray said, it proclaimed “full steam ahead” for EGIP but, in fact, it was more of a case of leaves on the line for the programme. The press release made no reference to the significant cuts to the project—I presume that Mr Brown hoped no one would notice them—and just referred to £300 million of savings. However, as we have heard in the debate, the reality is that those are not savings but cuts to key aspects of the programme, which will reduce the benefits of the scheme to our rail network, to passengers and to our economy. If it was simply a case of delivering the scheme more efficiently, Mr Brown would surely have had no problem in outlining the changes to the plans for EGIP in this Parliament only the week before his news release, when our colleague Patricia Ferguson asked in the chamber about its future. Instead, he waited for recess to make the announcement, when he did not have to answer questions in the chamber. Dr Murray is, of course, absolutely right to say that it is not acceptable for the minister deliberately to avoid making an announcement of such significance in the chamber—the Scottish Government is developing a worrying amount of form on that. The reason that the announcement was not made in the Parliament was, of course, that the £350 million reduction in the project represented not savings but cuts, which remove key aspects of the scheme; members have referred to them during the debate. They include electrification in a number of areas, including Stirling, Alloa and Dunblane—and looking to extend electrification northwards to Perthshire and Aberdeen—the Polmont to Greenhill line, the line from Edinburgh to Winchburgh and at Grangemouth. In addition, the cuts remove the proposed grade-separated junctions at Greenhill and Winchburgh; journey time improvements from Dunblane and Alloa to Glasgow and Edinburgh; the planned half-hourly service for Bishopbriggs, Lenzie and Croy; and improved connectivity from Fife to the west of Scotland and from Glasgow to Edinburgh airport. Of course, there will now be no increase from four to six trains per hour between Edinburgh and Glasgow. Many potential benefits across the rail network have been lost as a result of this misguided decision.

I will come on to the funding issues. The minister is in an extremely weak position on the matter, given that the commitment that he made to the funding for the project was included in the SNP manifesto, when he had full awareness of his budget. If he thought that he could do the project, why could we or anybody else in the chamber not do it? [Interruption.] I think that I have answered the question, minister. An article in The Herald this morning makes it clear that the changes were not about making the project more efficient but about reducing spending, pure and simple. It reveals that, last November, the Government approached the Office of Rail Regulation with a view to deferring its repayments in respect of Network Rail borrowing. It is clear that the decision was considered for some time, even if it was not consulted on at all. We recognise that these are tough times for public spending across Scotland and the UK and we agree with ministers that the cuts in public spending are too deep and too fast and that that affects the Scottish budget, too. Nevertheless—as Alex Johnstone said—for the Scottish Government to pretend that it can cut a scheme by a third and not impact on it significantly does a great injustice to proper discussion of its plans for rail services in this country. We also take issue with the UK Government’s spending plans, but the fact is that the Scottish Government cannot simply palm off the blame for the decision to Westminster, because the investment was to come from Network Rail borrowing and is distinct from the wider issues of the capital budget. Of course, as Elaine Murray said, EGIP was a manifesto commitment made by the SNP in 2011 in the full knowledge of the budget that it had this year. However, perhaps it was just, as John Mason indicated, a collective dream that the SNP had, from which it seems to have awoken like Bobby in Dallas—and thus will follow its dreams of breaking up the United Kingdom. The cut was made in Scotland. Given the project’s importance to the Scottish economy, the decision was exactly the wrong one to take when we need Scottish ministers to take a different approach from their UK counterparts. It is deeply concerning that the decision appears to have been taken with little consultation and after sight of only a draft version of the Jacobs Consulting report, which we hear has—helpfully—been produced today, on the same day as our debate, and which appears to have been commissioned to justify the cuts. A broader assessment should have been made of the economic impact of the cuts to the project. There are serious questions about the impact on the Scottish Government’s often-quoted ambitions for electrification across the country. There are also questions about the decision’s impact on the climate change targets. Were those targets considered at all when the decision was being made? For all those reasons, a number of prominent organisations, including trade unions, have voiced their disappointment about the Scottish Government’s decision. Transform Scotland has called it “a major step backwards”. The Confederation of British Industry Scotland and the Scottish Chambers of Commerce have also expressed concern. Iain McMillan of the CBI has called the decision “sleekit” and, on “Good Morning Scotland” this morning, Garry Clark of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce said: “We saw a huge amount of consultation going into this project over many years and yet a third of it has been abandoned by press release without any clarity at all.” The decision could not have come at a worse time for the Scottish economy. The Government talks again and again about shovel-ready projects, but the scaling back of the EGIP scheme follows the scrapping by ministers of other rail infrastructure plans, be they Aberdeen crossrail, GARL or EARL. No wonder Iain McMillan says that the Scottish Government has a case to answer on improving the railways. The wrong decisions have been taken for passengers and for growth. Combined with cuts to college and housing budgets, they leave us with a situation in which the unemployment rate in Scotland is higher than the UK average. No wonder the Government wanted to avoid scrutiny of the decision, as it wants to avoid scrutiny of its increasingly unpopular plans to break up the UK. The Parliament and the country deserve better than that and better than the disrespect to the Parliament, which is why we will continue to press ministers to be more transparent on their plans for our vital transport infrastructure, more ambitious for the rail services that our country needs—for which they were more ambitious only a few months ago, too—and more ambitious to deliver the infrastructure investment that our economy desperately needs but which the Government is failing to provide.

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to delay the tendering process for the Clyde and Hebrides ferry service. (S4T-00043)

I thank the minister for his answer, but I am still not entirely clear on the point. RMT officials have been told that the process has been delayed by three years and Transport Scotland has pointedly not denied that. Is it the minister’s intention to delay the tendering process for those vital routes by three years?

With such a key decision, surely it is important that the Parliament is informed first about when the procurement process will take place. Will the minister give that guarantee? Will he also guarantee that in the procurement process—whenever it finally takes place—the recently given commitment by the First Minister not to debundle the routes for the services will still apply?

I acknowledge that Mr Stewart has brought to the chamber an important issue. Like others, I recognise the generosity of Sir Ian Wood’s offer of a contribution to the city garden project. He deserves credit for focusing minds on Aberdeen’s future. However, the project divided the city. That is evident from the narrow result in the referendum after a skewed process—the Office of Communications found today that rules on advertising had been breached. It is also evident from the consultation that the majority opposed the scheme. When we hear talk of democracy, let us remember—even if it is painful for the Scottish National Party—that Labour won the most councillors in Aberdeen at the election in May and that is why Labour leads a coalition administration. Let us also remember that the mandate on which Labour councillors were elected was not to proceed with the city garden project. That some members might suggest that the Labour group should break its own electoral mandate shows what a tenuous grip on the concept of democracy they have. To describe those who do not support the city garden project as therefore being against all development and to say that a message has been sent from Aberdeen against development is hyperbole that lets the city down.

I find it astonishing that Kevin Stewart criticises the Labour Party on the Haudagain roundabout, when it is the Scottish Government that has decided to delay for years the progress that we should be making now on the roundabout. That shows the paucity of Mr Stewart’s argument. He seems to be trying to blame the Labour group on Aberdeen City Council for everything, including the poor summer. Although I respect the views of those who genuinely believed that the city garden project was the right way forward, those who did not support the project also want what is best for the city and want development that works. The fact is that the city garden project involved almost £100 million of borrowing for the council on the basis of a business case that did not stack up and was based on huge assumptions. Much of the additional revenue that was forecast depended on infrastructure investment not in the city centre, but in the north of the city. Its design meant that the project was a massively risky and complex exercise and that the potential for overspend was enormous—as we in this building should be well aware. We need development, but it must be development that will work.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. I did not support no development in Union Terrace gardens. My preferred option was to proceed with the Peacock contemporary arts centre—an exciting and affordable project that would have breathed new life into the gardens. Members who support the motion may crave political capital, but I know many people who support the resolve of the Labour group and other councillors on the issue. The key issue now is to realise that the debate on the city garden project has been concluded and that it is time to move on. That is the view of all the groups in the administration. The administration of the city council is committed to development in the city that will genuinely bring economic benefit. That is why the city council is now developing a revised business case. It would be great folly for ministers to reject the business case before they receive it, particularly as they supported the city garden project before they saw the business case for that. Rather than seek to punish Aberdeen for not supporting their preferred project, it would be much better for ministers to accept the decision of the council and work with it to bring forward and support a revised business case and invest in Aberdeen in the same way as they seek to invest in other cities. I believe that what the great majority of people in Aberdeen now want is not a sterile debate on a decision that has been taken, but for ministers to work with the council to bring forward development in Aberdeen that is affordable and that will genuinely bring to the local economy the benefits that we want.

Is Mr Mackay aware of the Office of Communications finding that its rules on advertising codes were breached in the referendum campaign? Does he not realise that that is a serious issue about the fairness of how the referendum was carried out? Is he dismissing Ofcom’s concerns?

5. To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government has had with CalMac regarding the future of ferry services. (S4F-00831)

Does the First Minister agree that, in the process that takes place next year to replace the current contract—which CalMac operates—for the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services, the routes should not be debundled but should be tendered as a single contract as they were in the previous tendering process?

Just as I was putting the finishing touches to this speech over lunch, so much happened. Indeed, there appears to be rather more excitement in the lobby and, in particular, on the Scottish National Party benches over the Scottish cabinet reshuffle than over this legislative programme, which is entirely understandable. However, although I welcome Nicola Sturgeon to her new role at infrastructure and capital investment, that central move of the reshuffle reflects what is at the heart of the legislative programme that was announced yesterday—at the end of the day for the SNP, breaking up the United Kingdom is the be-all and end-all. Nicola Sturgeon has quit the health brief so that she can spend more time on debating independence, although I can tell her that the infrastructure and capital investment brief is not only time consuming, it is crucial. I would like to say how sorry I am to see Mr Neil move on from infrastructure and capital investment to his new role, but we all know that that would be stretching the bounds of credibility—something that Mr Neil does all too often. Actually, I do wish him well.

No, I do not. Mr Neil’s performance in his former brief also speaks of where this legislative programme fails. Although we will look forward with interest to the sustainable procurement bill, the fact is that in that key area of policy the Scottish Government’s underperformance has been damaging to our economy and to key sectors, including the construction industry. When it comes to the key issue of the economy, too often we have had warm words and not the action required from the Scottish Government. Yesterday, the First Minister talked again about shovel-ready projects, but his Government has delayed a host of key infrastructure projects at a time when our construction sector is crying out for work.

Well, I did not get a letter. I say to Mr McDonald, “Just keep trying, Mark. Eventually you’ll get there—persistence will pay off. Try not to be too disappointed about today.” Even with the best will in the world and my many abilities, if I do not get a letter, I cannot reply to it. As for the construction and capital investment that should be taking place, we find today that, on the basis of a draft report, the budget for the Edinburgh to Glasgow rail improvement programme was cut by £350 million. In Aberdeen, our energy sector requires 120,000 new recruits. Where is the plan to deal with that crucial issue for the economy of not just Aberdeen but Scotland? The call in the PricewaterhouseCoopers report for an energy academy has come at a time when the SNP is slashing college budgets. We heard yesterday that because Aberdeen City Council will not back the First Minister’s pet project, the Government is withdrawing support for new development in the city—and, in so doing, failing Aberdeen again.

No. In the previous session of the Parliament we were told that the Government’s overarching purpose was to secure economic growth. To emphasise the point, the issue was referred to as “the Purpose”, with a capital P. However, the debate about the Government’s programme has shown a Government that has taken its eye off the ball on the economy and whose purpose is only Separation, with a capital S. We will engage on the sustainable procurement bill, but Mr Neil has told us again and again that he cannot take the action that is needed on procurement because of European Union rules. We need to ensure that by using community benefit clauses and awarding smaller contracts we give small and medium-sized enterprises in Scotland a better chance of benefiting from public sector investment, thereby growing the economy. Far from blocking such action, the EU has proposed a directive that will encourage contracting authorities to divide public contracts into lots, to make them more accessible for SMEs, and which will oblige contracting authorities that decide not to do that to provide an explanation. Why does not the Scottish Government take such action, for which a bill is not needed? Why is it doing the opposite and creating contracts that are so big that only big businesses can bid for them?

I had better take him.

Mr Neil never lets the facts get in his way or confuse him. I refer him to the Jimmy Reid Foundation report that contradicts many of his comments on procurement. Yesterday, the First Minister said that the Government will “ensure that community benefit clauses are included in all ... public sector contracts”—[Official Report, 4 September 2012; c 10901.] Why has not that been done already? On the Forth replacement crossing, the ship has sailed and Scottish firms have lost out, which is unfortunate. We know how important new housing is to our economy and our construction industry. However, the most recent budget slashed housing investment by £86 million, and the vaunted housing bill that was expected in the current programme is conspicuous by its absence. That is not an auspicious record for Mr Neil to take to the health department. It is not good enough to say that everything will be sorted after separation, as if that would free us from Tory Governments, when the SNP’s proposal on monetary policy is that future UK Governments, whatever their political complexion, will still make key decisions on our economy, with zero influence from politicians in Scotland.

I am in my final minute. I apologise to Margo. Separation is the SNP’s obsession, but it is no solution. For all that the SNP says that the economy is its focus, the current programme of bills and today’s events show that the SNP Administration has its eye well and truly off the ball when it comes to taking the action that we need to restore Scotland to growth. That is why we need to get beyond the process of the referendum and get on with making the decision, so that once Scotland has decided to maintain our membership of the United Kingdom we can all get on with what we should be doing in this devolved Parliament: delivering on the priorities that really matter for the people whom we represent.

I thank the minister for making the statement, which we requested on the general issue of ferry services in the light of events over the summer, although the award of the NorthLink contract has been central to those developments and new information about that process has come to the fore. We all agree that ferry services are lifeline services and have a crucial economic impact on our island communities, not least as employers. Is the minister aware that the RMT and Unite have raised concerns about what the decision to award the NorthLink contract to Serco, rather than to the publicly owned CalMac, means for the route and, indeed, for other routes that are to be tendered next year? Does the minister recognise the concerns about the repercussions of that decision, including last week’s resignation of the chief executive of the David MacBrayne group and reports of disputes with ministers? Is it true that the minister or his officials instructed CalMac or the then directors at NorthLink Ferries not to appeal the decision to award the contract to Serco? Is it the case that, as has been reported, the CalMac bid was not more expensive than the Serco bid and that it was ruled out on a technicality that could have been challenged? The minister has raised the issue of EU tendering rules. In his statement, he mentioned the replacement of the contract for the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services next year. Does he agree that that should be tendered as a single contract, which he is empowered to do?

Is it not the case that the fact that the Scottish Government will not consider any variance of the TIF proposal is simply sour grapes from the SNP, which is determined to punish the council for daring to reject the SNP’s preferred plan—which would have involved hundreds of millions of pounds of debt for the council—even if it punishes Aberdeen at the same time?

How will the Scottish Government achieve its ambition that the rate of broadband take-up in Scotland be at or above the United Kingdom average by next year, when the current figure is significantly below that and the contracts for the work will not even be awarded until the first half of next year? Is it not time for superfast action from the broadband secretary and are we not lacking that at the moment?

5. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with NHS Grampian regarding its plans for the provision of maternity services. (S4O-01163)

When the Fraserburgh and Aboyne maternity units were threatened with closure in 2006, Andy Kerr intervened as health minister and they remained open because fears had been expressed over expectant mothers having to travel long distances to give birth. Will the cabinet secretary consider carefully new plans that have now been submitted to her that are different from 2006, but still include proposals to close the Aboyne and Fraserburgh units? Will she ensure that before those plans are put into action, she is personally satisfied that they are genuinely about better maternity services and not about reducing budgets?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement, which represents the end of a protracted climbdown after a much-criticised consultation that proposed ending cross-border services, withdrawing sleeper services and closing large numbers of stations. Those proposals met with opposition not only in the chamber but in communities and from trade unions. We welcome the Government’s change of heart on those proposals. However, the statement raises further questions. Since devolution, further powers on railways have been devolved to this Parliament. If the Government feels so strongly that more powers are required, why did that not feature as one of its six key demands for the Scotland Bill? The Government seeks to award the next franchise for 10 years. If a private company wins that franchise, is it not the case that that is how our rail services will be run for the next 10 years, whatever the constitutional settlement? There is another inconsistency in the minister’s statement. Given that he criticises the fragmentation of delivery of rail services, why does he want to create a new, separate, 15-year franchise for sleeper services? That proposal, too, has been met by significant concern from trade unions. The statement is very light on detail on future fare levels, which were consulted on as well. What will the minister do to prevent big hikes in fares in the future? The statement refers to innovative fare packages, but what future level of fare increases does the minister believe will be reasonable?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement and welcome the fuel poverty forum’s excellent interim report. We were disappointed that the Scottish Government reduced spending on fuel poverty by a third last year, when too many people in Scotland remain fuel poor, but we welcomed the restoration of the budget to its previous levels in the spending review. We also welcome the warm homes fund and look forward to its launch, given that we had proposed a green new deal to make 10,000 homes energy efficient. The proposals in the report can make a real difference to tackling fuel poverty, so I ask the cabinet secretary how much the Scottish Government will invest in the national retrofit programme, and how many people that will benefit. Energy-efficient homes and pricing are crucial to tackling fuel poverty. The cabinet secretary likes to talk about powers that he does not have, but the Scottish Government could play a role in reducing prices now, through promoting the collective purchasing of energy by local authorities and housing associations, as the report highlights. Will the Scottish Government take forward that proposal? Finally, does the cabinet secretary believe that, through those and other measures, the Scottish Government will meet its target of eradicating fuel poverty by 2016?

I, too, believe passionately in achieving the best future that Scotland can have. I want Scotland to succeed, and I believe that we have a successful future ahead of us. Our country has great advantages in our natural resources, people and academic prowess. If Scotland chose to go it alone, it would be tough, but we could do it. However, as a poll showed last week, a very clear majority of people in Scotland want us to stay within the UK, because another great advantage that our country has is that we work so closely in unison with our neighbours through our membership of the union. We could be a small separate nation, but we would be the poorer for it. I am not talking about only a shared history in a union in which Scotland has led the world in innovation and in which, together, we have built great institutions and stood shoulder to shoulder with the rest of the United Kingdom to defeat fascism. It is not just about the UK’s history; it is about the future, as well. Renewable energy is only one example in that context. As Stewart Maxwell said, Scotland can benefit economically from investing in renewables. We also know that renewable energy needs to be subsidised and that, on our own, Scottish consumers would not be able to pay that subsidy in their electricity bills because that would be prohibitively expensive. By being part of a UK market in renewables, with all UK consumers subsiding renewables production, our renewables market can thrive and grow.

I am sorry, but my time, too, has been cut. Uncertainty about Scotland’s future is not good for our energy industry. As a member who represents North East Scotland, I find that particularly concerning. Financial services is another crucial sector. If Scotland’s financial services do not recover, our economy will not recover. Financial services are a massive Scottish industry. Some 95 per cent of the customers of financial services businesses that are based in Scotland live in England. People invest in financial services here because we are in the same national market as the City of London; if we were not, those services would not be based in Scotland. That is another benefit of membership of the United Kingdom. We have the security of being part of a bigger economy. When HBOS and the Royal Bank of Scotland went bust, we were part of a state that could afford to bail them out. Membership of the UK is also crucial for the future of our financial services. “Independence” is an emotive word. No one desires to be seen as dependent, and I do not believe that we are. We contribute to a United Kingdom in which the whole is greater than the sum of the parts. However, the SNP is not offering any kind of meaningful independence, as was evident from the losing battle that Nicola Sturgeon fought in the BBC debate on Sunday and in the First Minister’s woeful struggle today to define the SNP’s position on monetary policy. The SNP proposes that an independent Scotland should retain sterling, with the Bank of England as the bank of last resort. The Bank of England would intervene if there was a repeat of the banking crisis. That would mean that inflation targets were determined by UK ministers with no accountability to Scottish parliamentarians—there is such accountability now—and it would mean the Bank of England setting interest rates without taking our economy into account, which would be a worse position than we are in now. Policy would be decided in London with no input from Scotland. What kind of independence is that? Even that deeply unsatisfactory position might be preferable to the alternative. The SNP says that it will not adopt the euro for the foreseeable future, but that is not in its gift; that would be for the European Union to decide. In this case, monetary policy would be determined in Brussels and there would be full membership of the euro zone. That would mean all the economic difficulties and dangers that we debated only yesterday. I agree with Patrick Harvie on several points, although not on the key issue of independence. Much more clarity is needed. How can we meet all the demands for more spending on welfare—which many Labour members would like—and slash corporation tax? What kind of logical approach is that to an economy? That is not my idea of social justice. No wonder the majority of people in Scotland are so unconvinced by the case for independence. Scots are not called “canny” for nothing. It is why so many know that, particularly in these times of economic troubles and uncertainty, Scotland’s leaving the United Kingdom would be a huge and needless risk. In a global economy in which countries are so dependent on the economic fortunes of their neighbours, the proposition that is put by those who support breaking up the UK is a proposition of the past, not of he future. As the United Kingdom, our countries have pooled our resources and strengths, and each member nation has benefited from that. Wales, Northern Ireland, England and Scotland benefit. We have a shared history and shared achievement through that most successful partnership of nations, and through continuing that partnership together, we will have a more prosperous future for Scotland.

I am sure that the recently returned Labour administration of North Lanarkshire Council will be happy to take part. However, is late 2013 not quite late in the day to be awarding specific sums for local projects when some of the targets in the infrastructure action plan are for the next two years?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement. I join him in recognising the important role that European structural funds play and I welcome the focus of future plans on tackling youth unemployment. I am sure that he will look forward to working on the project in his constituency with the Labour administration that was returned in North Lanarkshire Council last week. However, the focus of the funds on youth unemployment raises further questions about the Scottish Government’s decision to cut college budgets. I broadly welcome the statement and the commitment to future consultation on how the next tranche of funds will be invested. However, is the cabinet secretary aware of concerns that the plans should be more advanced than they currently are and that not all potential stakeholders, such as those in the life sciences sector, have been properly consulted yet? I looked at the future of the funds blog and found only three posts and eight comments, so will the cabinet secretary ensure that all relevant stakeholders are fully involved in the development of the partnership agreement? In doing so, will he also ensure that, as the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations has called for, there are opportunities for the third sector to be involved in programmes, given that sector’s proven track record in delivering programmes in areas such as tackling youth unemployment? Finally, when will there be further details on how the £25 million of currently unallocated funds will be invested, given the time limitations on spending that money and the current need for investment? Is it not important to make that decision as soon as possible? What lessons have been learned from the previous round of funding to ensure that we have maximum uptake and maximum impact from this coming round of funding?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to improve transport infrastructure in Aberdeen. (S4O-00944)

Is the minister aware of the increasing belief among businesses in the north-east that improvements on the Haudagain roundabout should begin before the Aberdeen western peripheral route is completed and that, in fact, that view is now shared by Aberdeen and Grampian chamber of commerce and Enterprise North East Trust? We are all frustrated at the on-going legal delays to the bypass but does the minister accept that he can make a difference by moving forward the timescale for the Haudagain? If he will not do so, can he really guarantee that the work will be completed within the next five years?

I thank members from all parties in the Parliament who have supported my motion for debate. I know that UCAN greatly appreciates the support that it has had from across the political spectrum in the north-east for its campaign for robot-assisted surgery and for its broader work for cancer patients in our part of Scotland. The campaign that UCAN launched to establish robot-assisted surgery for patients at Aberdeen royal infirmary is an initiative that builds on the success that the charity has already had. Many members who are present will have visited ward 44 at Aberdeen royal infirmary, where UCAN has already done so much to improve the difficult experience of treatment for urological cancer patients. UCAN was launched in 2006 by two consultant urological surgeons who are based at ARI—Sam McClinton and James N’Dow—with the aim of adding value to the national health service by raising £2 million over three years to create a recognised centre of excellence for urological cancers in the north of Scotland. They saw a need to raise awareness of urological cancers, to make a diagnosis as early as possible and to improve the patient experience of care, treatment and aftercare. Through the charity’s work, facilities at ward 44 have been greatly improved and substantial refurbishment has been carried out. There is now an office for staff and an information point for patients, as well as a lounge where patients and visitors can relax. That makes a huge difference for patients who spend a long time on the ward and for their families, and it helps to make the experience more comfortable and that bit less traumatic. For example, patients who might previously have been given the difficult news about their prognosis at a bed that was separated from others on the ward by only a curtain can now be told in the privacy of a separate room. That struck me as important on a human level. The improvements have been made because of the commitment of staff at ARI to their patients and the tremendous efforts of volunteers whose lives have been touched in many ways by cancer. They have a clear vision of how they want the patient experience to be improved and they have displayed a can-do spirit. That is epitomised by the work of leading local businessman George Stevenson, whom many of us will know, who has made huge efforts on behalf of UCAN. George is one of those people who simply will not take no for an answer. Even I felt a pang of sympathy for NHS Grampian’s estate department when George told me just how plain he had made it that he would not take no for an answer in relation to many of his goals for refurbishing the ward. That spirit and the determination to get things done have been crucial to UCAN’s success. The approach has led the charity to campaign for robot-assisted surgery to be based at ARI, as it offers the opportunity for a step change in the treatment of those whose conditions would benefit from the new surgical technology. The robotically assisted surgical system is an advanced tool that enables precision surgery to be carried out for many more patients and which speeds up operating times and reduces recovery times. Three of the four most common cancers—prostate, bowel and ovarian—as well as gynaecological conditions such as endometriosis, can be treated using the robotic equipment. Professor Sam McClinton, who is consultant urological surgeon at ARI and the chairman of UCAN, has said: “Robotic-assisted surgery is the best technology currently available for minimally invasive surgery and we want to ... buy this advanced equipment and the updated theatres to properly house it.” That is why the campaign to raise £2.5 million has been launched. The money will fund the purchase of the new technology and the establishment of two operating theatres that are required to enable its use. Let us be clear about the advantages that the technology offers to patients. Minimally invasive surgery has been proven to offer benefits for clinical outcomes and patient satisfaction, with a lower risk of post-operative wound infection; less post-operative pain; shorter post-operative recovery and a shorter stay in hospital; a reduction in the use of blood products; and a more rapid return to normal activity and work. The advantages that the technology brings would make such a difference to patients. Of course, if patients recover from operations more quickly, that brings benefits to the NHS by freeing up bed space and other resources. Currently, 26 robotically assisted surgical systems are in use in England, but as yet there are none in Scotland, so the scheme would be a first for Scotland. Ministers will of course want to be sure that the use of the technology will improve treatment in the way that has been outlined. I am aware that ministers must make difficult decisions on investment in these testing times for public finances, but I believe that the evidence that UCAN has established of the benefits to patients from the use of the systems elsewhere makes the case persuasively. UCAN is launching the fundraising efforts to bring the technology to Scotland, and I hope that ministers will assist in whatever way possible. The ambition to raise £2.5 million by the end of next year is a challenging one, but significant donations have already been pledged, and thousands of pounds were raised in just a week of a fundraising website going online. There are encouraging signs for the campaign. I hope that the Scottish Government will support and work with the charity, so that, if there is a funding gap at the end of the campaign, it will explore how that might be bridged. The hope must be that, if the use of the technology can be established in Aberdeen, other patients in Scotland will in time benefit, too, and the experience of its use in the north-east will lead to it being used in other hospitals. I know that prostate cancer campaigners in Edinburgh are very interested in the benefits that the surgical technology could bring. Let us congratulate UCAN on its efforts in this important campaign, which I know is already supported by many members across the chamber. I hope that the campaign will win favour with ministers as well. Ultimately, we all want the best treatment that we can give patients in the north-east and in Scotland as a whole. The technology and UCAN’s campaign offer us that opportunity.

Scottish Labour is proud of the 2012 commitment on homelessness made by the previous Scottish Executive. It was a bold commitment that set the course for ensuring that no one and no families in Scotland needlessly suffer the trauma of homelessness. As Shelter said ahead of the debate, the target has given local authorities the impetus to substantially improve homelessness services in a way that otherwise would not have happened. Of course, this Parliament’s pledge on homelessness is shared across the parties and there is a broad recognition of the importance of making good on the commitment. I welcome the committee’s report and the chance to debate it. Although progress has been made, it is clear that there is still a varying picture across the country in terms of how close local authorities are to meeting the target—Elaine Murray referred to that. Further action will be required from the Scottish Government and I welcome the committee’s stated intention to monitor progress throughout the year. Indeed, I hope that we will return to discuss this subject at greater length as we approach the time for the commitment to be fulfilled. In the short time that I have available, I will emphasise key issues that other members raised during the debate and which will need to be addressed if we are to get a successful outcome at the end of the year. A number of members referred to the UK Government’s changes to housing benefit and how they represent an obstacle for a number of reasons that are outlined in the committee’s report. We and the ministers share those concerns, and the committee is right to call for ministers to make a detailed plan of mitigation measures. I know that ministers have such plans in mind, and I urge them to bring them before the Parliament when they have been fully developed. Further obstacles to meeting the target have been created by the Scottish Government. Difficulties for local authority housing departments have resulted from the poor funding settlement for councils. A 30 per cent cut to the housing budget will only hinder the work of tackling homelessness.

I have only four minutes. The minister will be able to reply to my points during his summing-up speech. Such a cut will affect the provision of the social housing that is badly needed in Scotland. The ministers gave evidence to the committee that they intend to provide 30,000 affordable homes during the current parliamentary session, including 20,000 socially rented homes. However, as Jim Hume pointed out, that falls short of the Scottish National Party’s manifesto pledge to build 6,000 socially rented homes in each year of the parliamentary session. Has that manifesto commitment been jettisoned? The report is right to focus on how we ensure that we avoid cycles of homelessness. Too often, in cases in Aberdeen city, I have seen homeless people being provided with a tenancy but not with the support that they need to sustain that tenancy and deal with the problems that caused their homelessness in the first place.

I have only a minute left. That creates further problems for those homeless people and, too often, for others. When people with such problems are given a tenancy, that should not be seen as the end of the job. The support must also be provided. Shelter Scotland is therefore right to raise the concern that the new support duty for homeless households, which was brought in by the 2010 act, has still not been implemented, 17 months after the legislation was passed. Malcolm Chisholm was right to highlight that point. I hope that the ministers will be able to tell us when that duty will be implemented, and I hope that it will indeed be in the near future. As the report highlights, much has been done; we recognise that, but there is much more to do on the way to meeting the homelessness target. We welcome the ministers’ reaffirming of their commitment to meeting the target, and it will be for the committee and the Parliament to hold them to that. We can be proud that Scotland is leading the way in tackling homelessness and, in doing so, creating a better society for us all.

What has happened in Wales is a matter for the Welsh Assembly. The Welsh Government has listened to the concerns about the cut in the grant there and imposed a moratorium on the new changes to allow for further dialogue. Why will the Scottish Government not—at the very least—take the same approach?

Will the minister give way?

This has been a good and important debate, even if there has been little agreement across the chamber. It should be evident to all members that there is real concern not just in the Parliament but throughout the country about the withdrawal of bus services and the sharp increases in bus fares. As we have seen again today, the minister’s approach is to pretend that his Government has no role in the matter. He is sticking his fingers in his ears and ignoring those who have understandably expressed their deep anxiety at the developments. That is simply not acceptable. All that we have had today is excuses and complete intransigence. There is no willingness to engage with the issue or offer another way forward or discussion. That is failing bus passengers throughout Scotland. The Scottish Government should instead recognise the problems that their decision to cut the bus service operators grant has caused—problems that are compounded in our urban and city areas by the change in the formula for the grant. Rather than constantly attempting to pass the buck, the Government should halt the changes and work with bus operators and others in the industry, such as the bus workers who are in the Parliament today, to map out a better and fairer future for our bus services and our bus industry. As so many members on the Labour benches and others have pointed out, access to affordable bus services is vital to those on lower incomes. Patrick Harvie rightly mentioned the personal impact on those who depend on bus services, who cannot afford cars and who need buses to get about and to get to work. Far from protecting those who are on lower incomes from the UK Government’s cuts agenda, in this case in particular the Scottish Government has acted to make life more difficult for the less well-off in our society. It is no wonder that the SNP is making common cause with the Conservatives today. If someone is on a low income and their bus fare has gone up by a quarter, as it has on some routes in Glasgow, that is going to hit them hard in the pocket. In my city of Aberdeen, where we already have high fares, we have seen hikes of 8.5 per cent. We have heard from members about the effect that the grant cut is having on services in other parts of the country. In Glasgow, fares have increased and services have been withdrawn. In Dundee, fare increases were announced this week. Of course, the change in the formula for the bus service operators grant might be helpful for particular operators, such as Stagecoach, but it is more punitive for our urban areas. In Edinburgh, where there have also been significant fare increases, there has been a cross-party campaign to get the Scottish Government to change its approach to the bus service operators grant. Why is the Scottish Government so dismissive of the concerns when its group leader on City of Edinburgh Council has also asked it to think again?

I find it extraordinary that Mr McDonald refuses to accept that his Government’s actions have contributed to an 8.5 per cent increase in bus fares in Aberdeen. That is hitting the citizens of Aberdeen hard, and his refusal to acknowledge local concerns about the issues is breathtaking. The childish behaviour that we are seeing from Mr McDonald and other SNP members ill serves this debate and those people who have to pay through the nose for their bus services in areas of Aberdeen when they cannot afford to. The behaviour on the benches opposite is disrespectful to them and to Parliament, and is frankly disgraceful. Why is the Scottish Government as dismissive of these concerns as Mr McDonald seems to be when others from within the SNP have asked it to think again? The Scottish Government would have us believe that it has nothing to do with this; it is all everyone else’s fault and the bus companies, principally, are to blame. That just does not stand up to any scrutiny at all. Moreover, the horror that the SNP has expressed today at the profits that the bus companies are making has not stopped it taking sizeable donations from Sir Brian Souter. The fact is that a fuel duty rebate has been in place for bus services since 1965. We have greater fuel subsidy support for operators of other forms of public transport than we do for bus operators. Public transport—including bus services—does require subsidy. Patrick Harvie made good points about that. The bus service operators grant had already been cut by £6 million from the level originally agreed with operators before it was cut by a further £7 million in the last spending review, bringing the total cut to around 20 per cent, as Elaine Murray said in her excellent opening speech. Yes, there are other financial pressures on bus operators, with rising fuel costs—our motion acknowledges that—which make this the worst possible time to compound the situation with these cuts. Operators are already being disadvantaged by the cap on the costs of the concessionary travel scheme, despite the SNP’s pledge to continue—as we pledged—to fund the scheme in full. That underfunding threatens the future of the scheme. The minister asked me for figures and I have the Scottish Government’s figures for the concessionary fares budget. In real terms, between 2012 and 2015 there will be a cut of £10 million. I am happy to provide the minister with those figures.

To be clear, we have been committed to funding the scheme and its full continuation. The £7 million that I mentioned is the cut in the bus service operators grant for this year. The figures that I have show a clear real-terms cut of £10 million in the concessionary fares budget. The minister should know his own budget figures. The SNP’s approach to the concessionary travel scheme mirrors its approach to local government when it says that it is someone else’s job to deliver the commitment but it does not give that someone else the required funding. That is a dishonest approach to government. The timescale for the changes has created further problems. While there have been cuts to the grant at the UK level as well, at least operators have been given more notice to prepare for the change; only three months notice was given here. It would have been far better to have a moratorium on the cuts, as happened in Wales, because that would have allowed proper negotiations with operators. A number of factors are involved in the desperate situation in Musselburgh and Dalkeith, where not only are services being withdrawn, but bus workers are contemplating the prospect of around 200 jobs being lost, but the cut in the BSOG is the straw that broke the camel’s back. That is one reason why the Scottish Government’s decision is so damaging—as well as fare increases, it is resulting in the threat of job losses. That is why we ask the Scottish Government to think again. It simply will not wash for the Government to seek to evade all responsibility for its decision by blaming everyone else. We share the Government’s concern about the 2 per cent cut to the Scottish budget, but the cut in the grant is 20 per cent—10 times as bad—and is completely inconsistent with the Scottish Government’s stated aim of protecting people in Scotland from the coalition’s cuts. The decision will affect those on lower incomes in Scotland disproportionately. We are not alone in saying that the cut to the bus service operators grant is wrong; nor is it just the operators who join us in saying that. Bus workers and representatives of their trade union, Unite, are here in the public gallery because they care passionately about Scotland’s bus services. They want to continue to provide these vital services and they want passengers to have a fair deal. That is why they call on the Scottish Government to change its decision on the cut to the grant. Pat Rafferty, the Scottish secretary of Unite, said before today’s debate: “This decision beggars belief in a time where everyone is affected by economic conditions. Bus patronage is down across Scotland, fares are increasing and jobs and services are being cut—without intervention our bus industry is heading into a perfect storm. We are urgently calling for the Scottish Government to repeal the BSOG cut as a first step to bring some short-term stability to the sector but in the long term we must revisit the issue of bus re-regulation if we are to return affordability and growth to this vital public service.” It is ludicrous that the SNP refuses to accept the impact of its decision, blames everything on the bus companies, and then refuses to support greater regulation of our bus industry, for which the Labour Party has consistently called. In the previous session of Parliament, the SNP opposed a legislative proposal from Charlie Gordon that would have made it far easier to establish the quality contracts and partnerships that we should now have across Scotland, and which would have ensured greater accountability of the bus industry for the services that it provides, for which we provide the subsidy that we are discussing. The SNP’s position is that it is all the operators’ fault, but it does not want to do anything to provide extra regulation. The approach is that the operators should just get on with it and passengers will have to make do. That is a mess and a poor vision for the future of bus services in our country. The SNP’s refusal to make any concession on the cut to the grant or to consider revising its approach threatens to make the situation worse. However, it is not too late for ministers to recognise the concerns, change course and intervene now to protect services and avoid further fare increases. The Scottish Government might not accept our argument that the cuts should be reversed, but it should at least move away from intransigence and ultimatums and on to meaningful dialogue with bus operators, trade unions that represent bus workers and passenger groups to try to establish a different way forward. If the Government continues to ignore the concerns that have been raised and to pretend that there is no problem with the action that it has taken, the situation for bus services and passengers will get worse. Ministers do not have to dig their heels into the ground. They should be big enough to realise that they have made a mistake and to think again for the sake of bus services and passengers across Scotland.

If Scotland cut corporation tax and created a race to the bottom, that would simply mean that businesses would pay less corporation tax and less money would come in to pay for services. In no way could that be called a left-wing position—it is a very right-wing position on tax.

This has been an important debate. After a long process from Calman to the bill, it is good that we can reach a consensus of sorts that the Scotland Bill should be passed, because, as James Kelly and others have said, this is an important moment for the Parliament and devolution. Today, we are endorsing a bill that will provide new powers for the Scottish Parliament. Not only will it allow greater financial accountability through the provisions on income tax, stamp duty and other financial provisions, it will bring important financial powers too, with the greater borrowing powers that will be in the hands of the Scottish Government being of particular significance for the economic strategy that can be set by this Parliament. It is right that we have the legislative consent motion before us today and that it be approved by Parliament. When, after the election last May, the First Minister made a series of demands for extra powers to be included in the Scotland Bill and, in doing so, announced that a reconstituted Scotland Bill Committee was to be established, it was perhaps not something that all of us came to with unbridled joy, but I am happy to say that I enjoyed my time on the committee. Although members disagreed on fundamental areas of policy, there was, on a number of issues, good and helpful discussion, and even at times a degree of consensus, as we have heard throughout the debate. Although I disagree with the convener virulently on a number of aspects of her analysis, I congratulate her on the way in which she carried out her important role, with sterling support from her deputy convener, James Kelly, who also deserves great praise. The process of scrutinising the bill further and of testing the cases that were made in a number of areas by the Scottish Government and UK ministers was useful. Of course, we have not reached agreement on all issues—that is only to be expected, given the differing views of the parties on the constitutional question. However, in a number of areas we have reached significantly greater consensus. The Crown estate is one important issue, which Dave Stewart will discuss in members’ business this evening. On other issues, such as the relationship between the Scottish courts and the Supreme Court, we do not have agreement but we are at least approaching greater consensus. We all accept that there has been progress on the Scotland Bill and that the debate on the constitutional settlement will now move on from the bill and the work of the Calman commission. Labour has never suggested that it would not take time to arrive at the right settlement of powers for this Parliament. In our role, with the Liberals and Conservatives, in constituting the Calman commission, we make it plain that we have never seen the Scotland Act 1998 as something to be preserved in aspic. We will debate the pace, scope and detail of further devolution, but further devolution will come. We have always maintained that the Scotland Bill will be an important step forward in the powers of this Parliament. I was concerned earlier in the process at the sabre rattling of the SNP—or perhaps we should now call it the anti-United Kingdom party—and its threats to thwart the passage of the legislation. The prospect that its ministers might turn down increased powers struck me as bizarre and unjustifiable. Although I greatly enjoyed Mr McLetchie’s analysis of the SNP’s discomfort on the issue, we must recognise that the Scottish ministers have engaged constructively with their UK counterparts. We should welcome the position that has been reached today because it is sensible and correct. It was not unreasonable for Scottish ministers to press the UK Government on the impact of the changes in tax. Alison Johnstone made a fair point on that issue. It is important that we can be confident that the operation of the new powers will not lead to an unfair diminution of income to the Scottish Government. Members will know that Mr Kelly and I pressed UK ministers hard on the issue of the no-detriment policy. We were satisfied early on that UK ministers had made the appropriate commitments. I do not quite understand why it took so much longer for SNP ministers to accept those reassurances, but they have done so and they were right to do so. As many members have said, there are important measures in the bill that will benefit Scotland. To have turned down this opportunity to have far greater borrowing powers would have been extreme folly and economically damaging to Scotland in the long run. As members know, Mr Kelly and I pressed for the borrowing provisions in the legislation to be extended beyond what is currently in the bill. We are disappointed that they have not been. However, £1.5 billion of borrowing is nevertheless an important step forward for the Scottish Government and the Parliament. When we have at least a degree of consensus on the importance of investing capital in infrastructure to grow our economy, securing that borrowing capability was always going to be crucial. There is much to welcome about what we would be achieving by agreeing to the LCM today. However, an aspect of the process that I found in one sense deeply worrying and, in a more partisan sense, quite encouraging, was the fiasco around the evidence for some of the SNP’s demands for powers additional to those outlined in the bill. Although we had some interesting, if brief, discussion of an area not raised by ministers—namely aspects of the welfare system that it may or may not be beneficial for Scotland to have devolved to it—for a number of the key demands that were presented with great fanfare by the First Minister, the case was routinely threadbare or nonsensical. In particular, the case for corporation tax devolution not only failed to persuade committee members but achieved the admirable feat of forming a coalition of opinion between the Confederation of British Industry and the Scottish Trades Union Congress, both of which rejected the Scottish Government’s proposal. Stephen Boyd of the STUC in particular decimated the case and made powerful points about the damage that would be caused by unhealthy tax competition within the United Kingdom. That addresses comments made earlier by Mr Mason, who unrealistically tried to describe it as a left-wing policy. That is an impossible square to circle.

The European Union has been quite clear that it is going to crack down on unhealthy tax competition, and it is right to do so. It is nonsensical for the SNP to say that we can cut corporation tax, lose hundreds of millions of pounds in income, and spend millions and millions more on services left, right and centre to keep all its promises. The SNP’s position on the economy is entirely incoherent. A right-wing policy on taxes and a left-wing policy on social funding do not add up, and the SNP will be found out by the electorate. The case that was made for the devolution of excise duty was Keystone cops stuff from the Scottish Government. Alex Salmond demanded the devolution of duty on alcohol and tobacco. We repeatedly asked how that would work and, after many weeks, answer came there none. By the time we took evidence on the proposal, we still did not have a paper from the Scottish Government. We had heard on the grapevine that it was not worried about cigarettes any more; it just wanted the excise on alcohol. When the back-of-the-fag-packet case for the devolution of excise duty finally emerged, it was only for the assignment of revenue. That came from a party that had derided proposals for assignment when Calman considered them. For each of the First Minister’s demands, the Labour Party made clear that the test should be whether the devolution of the powers would benefit Scotland and our economy and that we should not seek more powers for their own sake. On those key issues, the SNP’s case was found to be wanting again and again, as I believe the case for breaking up the United Kingdom will be found to be wanting. We in this chamber will not agree on whether Scotland’s best future lies with separation or with a strong devolved settlement, but I am pleased that we can agree the motion tonight and endorse the important measures in the bill. They will strengthen devolution, give more powers to the Scottish Parliament and, if those powers are used wisely, they will strengthen our economy and our country.

This is the second time that we have returned to the issue of ferry services in Labour business in the past few weeks. Once more, it has yielded a good debate on an important issue. We have returned to the subject to highlight an improvement that we and many others wish to see in our ferry services. These are lifeline services for our island communities, which is why we oppose the removal of the RET for hauliers because, in effect, it will be a tax on island households. It is why we propose today that a new additional ferry service be established between Lochboisdale and Mallaig. Disappointingly, the cabinet secretary talked down that proposal throughout his speech. More important than our proposal for the establishment of that route is the overwhelming support that it has locally. It is not just us saying this; it is people who have come to Parliament today from the missing link campaign. As Elaine Murray said in her excellent opening speech, four community councils—Benbecula, Bornish, Lochboisdale and Eriskay—have joined Stòras Uibhist to form the Lochboisdale to Mallaig ferry group, and 1,500 people have signed a petition calling for the service to be reintroduced. As Elaine Murray said, the population of South Uist is only 1,950, so that is a phenomenal level of support. It may even dwarf the percentage of the population that is likely to respond to the Scottish Government’s consultation on the referendum.

Absolutely, and of course that point has been supported previously by SNP members. I will come to that later. We believe that the ferry group makes a powerful case. It argues that “Eriskay, Benbecula and South Uist are some of the most remote and economically fragile areas of Scotland” and that “it is unacceptable that the only direct ferry service from South Uist to the mainland of Scotland operates only four days a week and can take up to 7.5 hours to reach Oban—the worst provision of any lifeline ferry service in Scotland.” It also makes a strong case about the benefits that a new service would bring, saying that it would “support the local economy and boost the committed efforts of an island community that has been working towards its own economic regeneration by taking ownership of the South Uist estate in 2006.”—[Official Report, Public Petitions Committee, 6 September 2011; c 70.]

Unlike the cabinet secretary, I will happily take an intervention.

The fact is that the ferry broke down and we tried to replace it. The cabinet secretary’s Government has not bothered. I will return to that later. [Interruption.]

Again and again, the cabinet secretary has misrepresented the history of the route. We believe that the Scottish Government needs to support the local economy and boost the efforts of an island community that has done so much for its own economy. Poor transport links continue to constrain the benefits that investment has brought to the islands. As an example, the group referred to the constraints and capacity of the current services, which deter potential ferry users from travelling to the Western Isles at all because desired sailings are fully booked. Hotel operators regularly report bookings being cancelled because potential guests cannot book a ferry to reach the islands. It is clear that the demand is there. With a frequent daily ferry service to Lochboisdale, the constraints on the tourism sector would be significantly reduced, particularly on the important Saturday changeover day. If the status quo remains, those constraints on the local economy will remain in place, too. A new service would not only benefit island residents but boost the area economically. A Lochboisdale to Mallaig ferry service would significantly cut travel times for business users, tourist visitors and residents on all the major routes to Glasgow, Edinburgh and Inverness. It would encourage more people in Scotland to visit a beautiful part of our country and increase the impact of the significant investment that has already been made in the area. Since the community purchase of the island estate, Stòras Uibhist, in partnership with Western Isles Council, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the Scottish Government, has directly secured more than £20 million of investment from the public and private sectors. The new service would provide a further, much-needed economic boost, and the Scottish Government would capitalise on its investment if it played a role in securing the new service for the area. The new service would also be important to the local fishing and fish farming industries in providing more routes to market. We agree with the Lochboisdale to Mallaig ferry group that the benefits of the new service are clear. That is why we are bewildered that it is not referred to in the ferry services draft plan, which refers to many other potential changes to ferry services, and that the case for the new route has not found favour with the Scottish ministers, particularly in light of statements by the SNP’s Angus Brendan MacNeil. Once again, in a ferries debate, I find myself quoting what he said, which is against the Scottish Government’s position: “The need and case for a Mallaig to Lochboisdale ferry gets stronger each year”. Dr Allan has participated in the debate to refer to the case that many of his constituents have made for the establishment of the service, but the amendment that he supports makes no commitment on that; it does not even provide for the establishment of a trial, for which Dr Allan and Mr MacNeil have previously announced their support. The SNP has a track record of warm words about a new service and failing to deliver. Under the previous Scottish Executive, Alasdair Morrison and Tavish Scott held talks on the proposal. In the incoming SNP Government, Stewart Stevenson, as the responsible minister, indicated after dialogue with Peter Peacock that £1 million was available for a new service and invited a submission from Stòras Uibhist on the new route. The SNP then rafted back. It argued that a ferry was not available and then, as Rhoda Grant said, the £1 million disappeared when the community identified a vessel that could be used. The Scottish Government’s position is therefore extremely weak. Whatever the Scottish Government’s amendment says about welcoming views on a new service, the draft ferry services plan makes it clear that it does not feature, despite there being many proposals for changes in ferry services elsewhere. Indeed, as Elaine Murray and Mary Scanlon have pointed out, paragraph 150 of the draft plan goes out of its way to state: “We have considered whether a Mallaig to Lochboisdale service could become the principal route for the Uists and Benbecula.” It goes on to rule that out in favour of the status quo. However, we are not calling for a replacement of the status quo; we are calling for a new, additional service. The tack that the minister has taken ignores the fact that 83 per cent of residents in South Uist want shorter journey times, as the campaigners remind us. That response is despite the call for a new route being backed by representatives of all parties. We understood that Mike Russell supported the campaign as well, but he seems to have changed his mind. He seems to have been given to doing that recently.

No. There are things that Mr Russell needs to hear. I will continue. We believe that it is very much worth the Scottish Government’s making a commitment to a Lochboisdale to Mallaig ferry service. [Interruption.]

It would be good if Mike Russell gained some consistency in his approach to politics for once. If the Scottish Government is serious about ensuring that there is a clear focus on economic growth in our rural areas—we hope that it is, and Mike Russell should be serious about that—the initiative that we are discussing is exactly the kind of initiative that should be supported. It has the backing of the local authority and local residents. They have not simply given their voices to the campaign; they have delivered investment in their area, and through the community purchase of the island, Stòras Uibhist has shown its commitment to the welfare and future of its community. The Scottish Government should share that commitment. It is clear that there is widespread support for the service, and the opportunity is too important to be passed by for communities that need our support. Earlier, Alex Neil said, “read my lips”. Members should remember what happened to the politician who said, “Read my lips”. If members are genuine about supporting a new ferry service, there is only one course of action. It is perfectly clear that they should vote for the Labour motion and a vital ferry service.

If there are further delays to the AWPR, it will frustrate the majority of people in the north-east. Will the cabinet secretary at least give careful consideration to bringing forward the work on the Haudagain roundabout, which is a key congestion pinch point in the city, and not delaying that work until the AWPR is completed?

It is right that this Parliament should debate the very damaging impact that the cuts to housing benefit will have as part of the UK Government’s ill-advised changes to our welfare system. The housing element is crucial and will affect some of the most vulnerable families and individuals in our country. It will also affect housing providers—local authority providers and housing associations. We on this side of the chamber have not been slow to criticise the Scottish Government when we have believed that it has made on matters that are within its power decisions that have been damaging for housing. For example, we opposed the 30 per cent cut to the housing budget and we share Citizens Advice Scotland’s concern that the decreasing budgets for housing services and for local authorities, alongside the impact of welfare changes and increased demand, will result in a perfect storm of challenges for housing providers. At the same time, when the Scottish Government makes reasonable points about what will result from changes to housing benefit by the UK Government, we will, of course, agree. We have previously expressed concern about what actions Scottish ministers took to impress on their UK counterparts the need to make changes to the housing benefit proposals, but the fact is that the bill has been passed largely unchanged, despite the efforts of all those in both Parliaments and in civic society who have pointed out just how flawed it was. We have heard throughout the debate about the impact that the cuts will have on thousands of people in Scotland. This will be an anxious time for many people as they face the prospect of either having to go through the upheaval of moving to a different property or meeting the costs themselves of an extra room that they need for what could be—as members have said—a host of perfectly justifiable reasons, such as disability issues or caring responsibilities. For the majority, of course, paying more is simply not an option. They will, understandably, feel that they are being kicked when they are down. We all accept that reforms in our welfare system have been required, but there will be no consensus that those changes are justifiable in view of the speed of their implementation, the depth of the cuts and their impact on the most vulnerable people. The poorest are paying the price for the mistakes of the superwealthy and the failing economic strategy of George Osborne and Danny Alexander. Several very good speeches have been made. My colleague Elaine Murray opened for Labour by talking about the impact that there will be on individuals, particularly those who are in ill health or in disability situations. She also referred to the severe challenges that housing providers throughout the country face. They are without the stock that would enable them to reallocate tenants who will be affected, and they face the prospect of trying to recover lost income from tenants who cannot afford to pay. They are being placed in an impossible situation. That is only one aspect of the difficulties that are being caused to housing providers, of course. My colleague Jackie Baillie pointed out in October, in an earlier debate on the bill, that removal of direct payments to social landlords will increase rent arrears and lead in many cases to court action. Jamie Hepburn also referred to that. More people might fall into debt and consequently find themselves homeless. The overall picture is gloomy for tenants and for those who provide their homes. The Scottish Government has been right to criticise those cuts, but we need to hear from ministers now about what action will be taken to minimise their impact on those who will be affected, particularly the most vulnerable people. It is important for members to hear now from ministers about what scope there might be to mitigate the impact of the cuts and what actions are being taken. Those actions should include ensuring that there is adequate financial advice for those who will be affected and that local authorities will proactively contact people who receive housing benefit and tax credits, because I have been advised that reductions in tax credit might be compensated for by changes to their housing benefit entitlement. There should also be work with local authorities and housing providers on provision of future stock and on the requirement for more one-bedroom homes, which will, unfortunately, result from the changes through the Welfare Reform Act 2012. The debate must result in more than the expression of opposition, however much we agree with the Scottish Government on that point. It must also result in practical steps that are taken in Parliament and throughout Scotland to minimise the impact of the changes and to mitigate their effects on the vulnerable people and families who will suffer as a result of them. We appreciate that that is not an easy task for ministers and that they have not sought the task, but they must carry it out and rise to it. All that can be done by Parliament and by all the other agencies that have responsibilities in the area must be done to help those about whom we have expressed deep concerns and about whom many people in civic Scotland and many experts who work in the sector have expressed concerns. Many people face the future with anxiety and uncertainty because of the heartless and damaging changes to housing support, which all right-minded people in Scotland and throughout the UK strongly oppose, and which Parliament will rightly oppose again today.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive when it received the business case for the Union Terrace gardens project in Aberdeen and when it will decide whether to approve it. (S4O-00796)

Given that the business case was published in the Aberdeen press some weeks ago and the referendum has passed, I am somewhat surprised that the cabinet secretary has still not received the business case for this vital project. When does he expect to make a decision on whether he will approve it, given that there is so much controversy about whether the business case for the Union Terrace gardens proposal stacks up? If there is a shortfall in the ambitious plans to raise additional revenue from business rates, will the Scottish Government assist in plugging any funding gap that may emerge in the project?

In relation to the Forth replacement crossing, what is the total value of the contracts that have included community benefit clauses, which are in line with European Union rules and are common practice throughout the EU?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what dialogue it has had with Aberdeen City Council on the potential for funding new contemporary arts initiatives in the city. (S4O-00751)

The business case for the Union Terrace gardens project says that Creative Scotland has been involved in the plans for a contemporary arts space in that proposal. Has Creative Scotland committed any funds to the development, as it did to the previous proposal for a contemporary arts centre in the gardens from Peacock Visual Arts?

In our last Labour Party debate, we discussed the impact of Scottish Government policies on bus passengers. Today, we return to two more transport issues that are of crucial importance. In our second debate today, we will focus on support for ferry services, but in this debate, we will discuss the need to provide the rail services that Scotland requires and, specifically, the need to ensure that railway stations that perform a crucial role in their communities are not closed. We make no apology for returning to transport issues in our debates; after all, an efficient public transport system that serves the travelling public’s needs is crucial not only to service provision but to boosting our economy to ensure that we move on from the current position of flatlining economic growth and rising unemployment towards the creation of a stronger and growing economy for Scotland. Our motion results from proposals in the “Rail 2014—Public Consultation” document for the new ScotRail franchise. We and many others have expressed serious concerns about a huge number of issues in that document because we want better, not worse, rail services in Scotland, and because the need for progress is clear. More needs to be done to make rail services more punctual, faster and more affordable, and to extend their availability to give commuters more options for boarding the train rather than getting in their cars. We are not saying that there has been no progress in all those areas; that is not the case, and we have welcomed initiatives to extend services, to improve journey times in some areas and to open new stations on the rail network. However, in a number of areas, there has not been enough progress and certain options in the consultation document threaten not to improve rail service provision in Scotland but to make it far worse. One aspect of the consultation document that has caused great concern is the proposal to close a number of railway stations.

Yes I can. As the minister is well aware, the proposal is in section 7. The proposal to close a number of railway stations is just one of our concerns about the consultation document. Although our motion highlights that issue, it is far from being the only aspect of the document that has met with huge opposition. Yesterday, I was fortunate to attend a briefing on the future of rail and ferry services in Scotland, which was held as part of Scottish Trades Union Congress week in Parliament, at which I heard the concerns of a number of the transport unions about the document’s proposals. They expressed their opposition to proposals on the future of the sleeper franchise, on the separation of routes in franchise arrangements according to profitability and social provision and, of course, on the closure of stations. Despite what I imagine the minister is pointing to in his intervention, the trade unions are in no way comforted by his statement that they are just proposals. The fact is that the proposals have met with such widespread opposition because they are contained in a document about future rail services and have been put on the table in a consultation process. However, although we believe that, on a range of issues, the consultation document is fundamentally flawed, we had hoped that our motion might find consensus and help to clarify the Scottish Government’s position on at least one subject that is covered in the document. The motion simply acknowledges that there are a range of concerns and that further discussion on the issues is required and, specifically, calls for rejection of the proposals that are set out in section 7 of the document to close 11 stations in and around Glasgow, which have been the subject of local campaigns for their retention and a campaign by Glasgow’s Evening Times. We hope that now that the consultation has concluded, the minister can confirm today that not only are there no current plans to close any of those stations, but that there is no question of their being closed. The easiest way to obtain the clarity that we need on the issue is for Scottish National Party members to support our quite reasonable motion, although it is evident from some of the noises off that they will not do so. My colleague Patricia Ferguson has been particularly active on the issue. In her members’ business debate on the subject, the minister refused to reject the proposition outright. He said then that there are no plans to close the stations and has reiterated that in his amendment. Of course, in the previous session of Parliament his predecessor announced that there were “no plans” to cancel the Glasgow airport rail link project, but only a week later the SNP did exactly that. The minister’s attempts to downplay the significance of the proposals—which are clearly there in the consultation document—is undermined by the fact that SNP regional members in Glasgow have been issuing leaflets under the banner of the save our stations campaign. Although the minister may be adamant that there is no threat to the 11 stations, it is evident that he has failed to reassure his own back benchers in Glasgow on that point. Although there are more than 60 stations in Scotland that are within 1 mile of another station, when further information was requested on which stations are under consideration in the light of section 7 of the consultation document, a list was provided that identified the 11 stations in question. Indeed, the consultation document refers specifically to their costing £208,000 in lease costs. The ambition behind highlighting that part of the consultation document is clearly a cost-saving exercise. The concerns have been justified and it is extremely important that any threat of closure be lifted from those stations and that the people who rely on them every day, for example to get to work, can be reassured that the stations will continue to be a vital part of the rail network in Glasgow and Scotland. What we want to hear from the minister in the course of the debate is not simply that there are no plans to close any of those stations, but that they will not close and that the proposal that they should close has already been rejected. If he is able to confirm that, I would question why the SNP does not support our motion. As Patricia Ferguson highlighted in the motion for her debate, all nine stations in Glasgow that featured on the list of 11 have seen an increase in passenger numbers in the past two years; in one instance, passenger numbers have grown by 189 per cent since 2005. There is a clear demand for the services that the stations provide. They provide crucial services not only in Glasgow, but in Paisley and Motherwell. That is why they should be a key feature of the work to grow the local economies in those areas as we seek to grow the wider Scottish economy. There will only be increasing scepticism about the credibility of plan MacB if, in this area, as with others, the actions of ministers do not match the rhetoric. We want a rail network not with a reduced number of stations but with increased access to rail services. As I highlighted at the beginning of my speech, the proposals on the closure of rail stations are but one of a host of issues on which we are at odds with the consultation document. We are deeply concerned that the effect of the proposals on passengers will be higher fares, overcrowding on trains, longer journey times on certain services and an end to cross-border rail services, with many passengers being forced to break their journeys. We are concerned by the proposal on the sleeper franchise, and the separation of franchises between those that are deemed to be profitable and those that are deemed to be provided for social reasons. There are also proposals in a number of other areas that we believe are unacceptable. Although we will return to many of those issues in the coming months in Parliament, we wish to emphasise today that the consultation process is fatally flawed. It has raised questions that it seeks to answer with proposals that will do nothing but damage the provision of vital rail services. We need to go beyond the consultation process and have a debate about the opportunities that exist to improve rail services in the years ahead. I commend to the minister—indeed, to all members—the briefing from TRANSform Scotland, which very much reflects our thinking when it says that further consultation is required of the Scottish Government on the future of rail services, including further consultation on specific areas in which there have been inadequate opportunities for passengers and stakeholders to engage in the crucial debate on the future provision of rail services. The consultation document represents a threat to, not an opportunity for, our rail services. The Scottish Government should come forward with a far superior vision for the future of those crucial services for our society and economy. That should be the focus for building the rail services and the rail network that Scotland needs. I move, That the Parliament recognises the concerns expressed in Glasgow that the Rail 2014 - Public Consultation calls into question the future of 11 railway stations in and around the city; calls on the Scottish Government to reject any proposals for the closure of these stations; also recognises that this is only one aspect of the Rail 2014 - Public Consultation, which has already given rise to questions regarding the quality of the provision of rail services across Scotland in the future, and believes that further debate and dialogue will be required beyond the conclusion of the consultation process, both in the Parliament and with all those for whom the future of rail services is of vital importance.

Is the minister saying that, as long as he is in office, none of the 11 stations in question will close?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the minister agree that the last increase in Scotland was 6 per cent, as opposed to a 5 per cent increase south of the border?

I do not think that the myths and misrepresentation that characterised the cabinet secretary’s speech do justice to this very important debate about the future of our island communities.

If the cabinet secretary would stop shouting, it would help. The chamber should surely be as one in its desire to ensure that our island communities and their economies and families receive the support that they need—the cabinet secretary himself said that in his speech. Travel has to be affordable for cars, passengers and tourists and for those transporting goods and products to and from our islands. However, following the outpouring of fury and indignation in the communities affected, we are now having a debate in Parliament on the impact of withdrawing RET for commercial vehicles, which Rhoda Grant highlighted in her speech. Tavish Scott was right to highlight the fact that a number of the affected island communities would be happy to support his amendment. The Labour Party has a long and proud record of supporting island ferry services and discounts for ferry travel to the islands. A 25 per cent discount for commercial vehicles existed prior to the SNP’s new scheme. I am aware that calling that scheme RET is in itself highly debatable, as Dave Stewart pointed out, but the crucial issue is that it provided a further, welcome 15 per cent discount for vital lorry journeys, which has clearly been crucial in dampening the cost of goods and services in the island communities. That is why we supported the retention of the additional discounts last May. I am aware that Halcrow’s analysis that the extra discount was not being passed on to customers is being challenged by the Outer Hebrides transport group and others, as Mary Scanlon said. Island hauliers will happily show invoices to demonstrate the reality of their case and the injustice being visited on islanders by the SNP. The reality of removing that discount is, as Elaine Murray pointed out, that costs for island communities and families will rocket. The Government is about to usher in and impose an SNP haulage and household tax for the islands. RET will go for commercial vehicles, albeit over a longer timescale. As for the extensions to include 6m vehicles as small commercial vehicles, the reality is that most goods are transported in the 17m vehicles, which are the ones that will bear the SNP’s new tax. The concessions are limited; even with the transitional scheme, 17m commercial vehicles travelling between Ullapool and Stornoway will see their fares increase by 50 per cent, from £190 to £286 from April 2012. If the transitional fare was scrapped, the fare would increase by 134 per cent, to £447. The reality is that the transitional fare is scheduled to go. That is not scaremongering; that is the current proposition. We know that the SNP in the Western Isles is split from top to bottom on this issue. We lodged a helpful motion today that SNP members should have no difficulty in supporting because it entirely reflects the spirit, tone and content of a motion that the SNP supported at a meeting of Western Isles Council a week ago today.

No, thank you. The motion was passed unanimously, with the support of the chairman of the transportation committee, Councillor Donald Manford. Clearly, local members of the SNP and their nationalist MSP are politically impotent and have failed miserably to secure anything resembling “major progress”—the words that Alasdair Allan used to describe an increase of 50 per cent on ferry fares. I hope that Dr Allan goes to the pubs and clubs of Stornoway this weekend and tells his constituents that a 50 per cent increase on lorry fares is “major progress”. God willing, we will see him back here next week. SNP members might want to reflect on an article in last week’s West Highland Free Press. It was from 35 years ago—the cabinet secretary may recall it—and describes the decision at that time to increase ferry fares by 7.5 per cent. The decision was described by the then Western Isles MP, Donald Stewart, as “absolutely appalling”. We can only imagine what Mr Stewart would think of the decision of his political successors to increase fares by 50 per cent.

It is not just members on the Labour benches who believe that islanders will bear the brunt of the massive increases. The minister will have read the letter that was sent to him by Angus Campbell, the leader of Western Isles Council, in which Mr Campbell says that the council has commissioned a “preliminary assessment of Government’s proposals to help us understand the potential impacts. The results of this preliminary analysis suggest that the impacts, in terms of jobs, will be”— as Jamie McGrigor said— “a loss to the local economy of” around 100 full-time equivalent jobs. Mr Campbell goes on to say: “As you will appreciate this would be a significant and highly damaging impact for a fragile, peripheral economy such as the Outer Hebrides. You will be aware from the meeting that the commercial sector strenuously denies that the benefits of RET were not passed on to local consumers.” That is why, in our motion, we are backing the council’s position that there should be a moratorium on the changes to allow for more detailed evaluation of their socioeconomic impact. SNP councillors supported that position and many people will be bemused that the Scottish Government is ignoring the serious concerns that exist. Those concerns are so great that the Outer Hebrides transport group has campaigned hard on the issue and has secured, in only five weeks, the support of more than 100 businesses, countless individuals and the local authority. The SNP will seek to dismiss the concerns that we have expressed today, but it should listen to those voices, as they come from those who will be directly affected by this ruinous and flawed policy—a policy that was recently denounced as “economically illiterate” by the business economist Professor Neil Kay of the University of Strathclyde. The SNP may dismiss our concerns, but surely it should listen to the concerns of lifelong nationalist and Lewisman Iain Don Maciver, who had been selected as an SNP candidate for the forthcoming elections in May. Mr Maciver is also the port manager for CalMac at Stornoway harbour and a man who, we may safely say, will have forgotten more about ferry fares and the importance of economical ferry links than the minister or Dr Allan will ever know. Announcing his resignation from the SNP and his decision not to stand as an SNP candidate, Mr Maciver said: “This is not a decision that I have arrived at easily, especially as it means that I have to give up my SNP membership, but given the abandonment of RET for Commercial vehicles, which is going to have such a detrimental impact on the islands I see no other choice for me.”

I note that Dr Allan agrees with Mr Maciver’s analysis in the quote that I have just given. Or is Dr Allan going to support the Government today and stand in absolute contradiction to those words from Iain Don Maciver? We believe that the case is clear: scrapping additional support for commercial vehicles will damage the welfare and economies of our island communities at a time when they can afford it least. Today, SNP MSPs, particularly those who represent the communities that are most affected, have a choice. They can vote to proceed with tax increases that will directly affect our island communities, or they can back Labour’s motion, step away from that damaging decision and give our island communities, their families and their important local economies the support that they need.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to improve transport infrastructure in North East Scotland. (S4O-00660)

I welcome the £5 million that has been earmarked for the design of the improvements at the Haudagain roundabout that was announced yesterday, but people in Aberdeen have waited for a long time for them. When will the work begin? Also, having rightly agreed that the Balmedie to Tipperty dualling should no longer have to wait until completion of the western peripheral route, will the minister also now agree that the works to address congestion at Haudagain should not have to wait until then, and so prevent further years of delays?

The budget process has undoubtedly lacked the drama of budgets in the last parliamentary session, although we have had quite a lot of comedy—ludicrous comedy at that—from Mr Gibson. The cabinet secretary could be forgiven for thinking that the absence of stress in his life is a good thing, but that should not lead anyone to doubt just how important the budget and the spending review will be over the next three vital years. I am not sure that Mr Gibson’s speech recognised that. The Scottish Government often talks about the new powers that it wants in order to grow the economy. For me, its case is not persuasive, but what should be beyond doubt is that the most important lever that it has to deal with our economic problems is how it deploys a budget that remains in the order of £30 billion. A key area in which the Scottish Government can use that budget to stimulate our economy is investment in our infrastructure—in building and construction—about which the cabinet secretary spoke a great deal. On that basis, we supported the switch from revenue to capital, but the problem is that, again and again, those funds, which should mean significant amounts of work going to Scotland-based firms, are going outwith Scotland, overseas. I am pleased to hear about the A737, but Labour members are asking who will build that road. Only recently, the award of the £800 million steel contract for the new Forth crossing went abroad rather than to Scotland-based businesses. That makes a mockery of plan MacB. The SNP makes great play of standing up for Scotland, but its procurement policy is failing Scottish firms and workers. If the capital spending that it set out today is deployed in the same way as the billions of pounds of contracts that have already been awarded, Scottish firms will continue to lose out on major contracts. That is highly damaging to our economy.

Yes.

It might have been better to leave her microphone off, Presiding Officer. Some £800 million of steel contracts went to India and China. I do not think that anybody could say that that represents a good deal for Scottish businesses. Although I am not often in agreement with the economists Jim and Margaret Cuthbert, I note that their report this week made it clear that the Scottish Government is not getting it right on procurement, which is damaging for our economy. We welcome the move to preventative spending, although we would like more clarity in that area. When the cabinet secretary says that he wants to invest in growth, we can, of course, agree with that sentiment. The problem that we have, as we have outlined repeatedly in debates, is that what is apparently the Government’s intention is not matched by the decisions that it has made in the budget. A fundamental problem with the spending review is that, even with the reduction in the Scottish budget, the cabinet secretary has said again and again that this is a budget to create growth and a budget to protect services. We do not believe that it is either of those things. If the cabinet secretary was genuine about reaching out to other parties in the process, he would have published his proposals for spending the consequentials somewhat earlier than two hours before the debate. Let us be clear that, when the cabinet secretary suggests a huge cut that will have devastating consequences in a budget area, and then makes that cut somewhat less severe in the hours before a debate, that is not a victory. It still leaves us with a very bad budget. Even after the announcement this afternoon, we are left in a situation in which, far from protecting services from Tory budget cuts, as the SNP said that it would do at the election, the Government is making the cuts worse for councils. The Scottish Government budget has been cut by some 2.7 per cent, but the Scottish ministers have cut council budgets by some 6 per cent, which is more than twice the cut for the Scottish Government. College budgets are still suffering, even after the cabinet secretary’s announcement. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council’s circular outlined a cut of nearly 10 per cent to teaching budgets. For Aberdeen College, in my region, that amounted to a £2.5 million cut, and the huge cut in student activity means that hundreds of full-time places or thousands of part-time places will go. Even with an extra £8 million for the teaching grant, those places will still go. There will still be a huge and damaging cut to our college sector. The same applies to our housing budget. The cut is being eased by the consequentials, but we will still be left with cuts of some 30 per cent. That extremely significant reduction in funding is bad news for not only all those thousands of people in Scotland who are waiting for social housing, but our construction sector. Again, the decision runs counter to the Scottish Government’s stated aim of prioritising economic growth.

We want the billions of pounds of capital spending to go to Scottish firms and companies. That is a major change that the Scottish Government could make in the way in which it uses its budget, and it would benefit our economy and have an impact by creating growth. It would be folly for an Opposition party to support a budget of which the Scottish Government has not facilitated proper scrutiny and in which the sums do not add up. I remain completely unpersuaded that it is sensible to base the budget on a forecast of £850 million of additional revenue from business rates over the spending review period, given that gross domestic product growth is so low. That is just one area in the plans that threatens to lead to a black hole.

We cannot support a budget that makes cuts in key areas for economic growth and in which the capital spending that is allocated is not directed in the right way to provide the maximum benefit to our economy and Scottish firms. The cabinet secretary might believe his assertion that, even with reduced funds, he has produced a budget for growth and the protection of services, but it is clear that he has not done so. We cannot accept that the budget will achieve its stated aims, so of course we must oppose it.

When will we have clarity on the amount of Scottish Government funding that will be allocated to some of the local schemes that have been proposed and are outlined in the action plan?

I am delighted that the cabinet secretary has had an excellent moment of common sense and will support the amendment in my name. I think that all members are aware that a great deal is riding on the Scottish Government getting its digital infrastructure strategy right. It is about ensuring that everyone in Scotland can benefit from broadband. Whether we are talking about online banking, online retail or the ability to make videocalls to relatives abroad, more Scots need to take advantage of the opportunities. In a world in which the internet is increasingly the focus for accessing goods and services and in which Government services are increasingly online, Scots’ access to broadband is more and more an important matter of social inclusion. Broadband access is vital to Scotland’s economic growth, too. In his evidence to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s inquiry, Professor Michael Fourman, of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, said that the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development estimates that “A 10 per cent increase in take-up” will lead to “a 1 per cent increase in gross domestic product”.—[Official Report, Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, 7 December 2011; c 445.] Given that gross domestic product growth in Scotland stands at a less-than-inspiring 0.5 per cent, we need to take all the action that we can take to strengthen our economy. As broadband take-up in Scotland is only 61 per cent, compared with the UK figure of 74 per cent, the potential for progress is clear.

I am not sure that I would be quite as fawning as that. Did the RSE say, “Well done, cabinet secretary,” or did Mr Thompson add that? He might well have done. However, we can get behind the ambition. I will say lots of positive things about that, as always. The national strategy is crucial and—for the avoidance of doubt, I say to Mr Thompson—we welcome the publication of “Scotland’s Digital Future”. How refreshing it is to discuss ways of bringing people together rather than pulling them apart. There is not much in the programme for action in the document with which we can disagree. For example, we do not disagree with the ambition for an uplift in broadband speeds by 2015. “Achieving world-class by 2020” is surely a lofty and admirable objective, and everyone should support the goals on developing local solutions and increasing take-up. Not for the first time, we can agree with the Scottish Government about the ambition of the policy. Of course, there are many questions about how the policy will be delivered. The key issue is that the rhetoric should match the reality. Once again, we have a Scottish Government plan that majors on ambition but is somewhat short on the detail of how that ambition will be achieved. The funding that is available to develop digital infrastructure will be crucial to the success of the work. The plan is right to identify the need for private sector involvement and Scottish Government support for Scottish bids to the UK urban development fund. We are happy to join in calls for the UK Government to provide additional funding. Given that Scotland currently has only 85 per cent coverage, we also agree that Scotland should derive an appropriately significant share of the £150 million that the UK Government is allocating to address areas in the UK that do not have even 2G coverage. If we agree that the Scottish Government should press the UK Government to give Scotland the right priority with regard to investment in our digital infrastructure, the Scottish Government in turn needs to ensure that it is getting its funding of the initiative right. Although the Government funds of £154 million are significant, far more money could be spent on developing our digital infrastructure and more investment from other sources will be required if the ambitions in the Scottish Government’s plans are to be realised. In particular, we need to hear how some of the exciting local plans that have been developed will be funded, not least for the sake of the flurry of local press releases that will obviously follow the debate. The £5 million of seed funding is welcome, but I am aware that, in my area, Aberdeen city and shire economic future has made a bid for £15 million of funding from the Scottish Government. The cabinet secretary referred to the plans there. Aberdeenshire Council has already allocated £18 million to its rural access strategy and the open access fibre network in the area. I do not always agree with the councils’ decisions on a range of issues, but it is clear that there is local commitment to developing the much-improved broadband infrastructure that our local economy and residents need. The Scottish Government must match that commitment if the plans are to succeed. Obviously, that applies not only to my region, but to other rural areas such as the Highlands, of which I am sure we will hear more during the debate, and to the local strategies that have been developed in our cities. However, we still do not have clarity from the Scottish Government on how much of the pot of £154 million will be devoted to local initiatives. The cabinet secretary says that we will have more clarity in the weeks ahead about exactly which funds will be allocated to local schemes but, given the timescales that he has set—we applaud the ambition on that—we need more clarity on those important issues sooner rather than later. We welcome the fact that a national strategy will be put in place, and no one wants unnecessary duplication of effort, but the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, in its broadband inquiry, heard evidence from several witnesses that local leadership and direction of broadband initiatives will be crucial to their success. In a country that is so diverse in need and in geography, which presents a variety of technical challenges, there will be no one-size-fits-all solution. Therefore, I can see the sense of having a national programme board overseeing a national strategy, but I hope that within that structure there is scope for regional leadership to find local solutions and that the approach is not overly directive and centralised. It is good to be ambitious, but some of those who are involved in the industry have impressed on me the scale of the task. In particular, the 2020 target will require a step change in access to broadband in Scotland from where we are now. It has also been impressed on me that we must invest in the right technologies that will have the optimal impact on expanding access. The action plan document recognises that and the nature of digital communication as a fast-moving area of technology. The Scottish Government will need to consider carefully how to achieve the widest roll-out of a fibre network and the role that 4G can play in extending broadband coverage. The cabinet secretary and Dave Stewart rightly referred to that. I hope that the Scottish Government will take steps to ensure that fibre roll-out can be linked to major public infrastructure projects. In my region, the Aberdeen western peripheral route, when it is finally delivered, can be a prime candidate for that, and there will be other examples throughout the country. Given our comparatively low rate of take-up, it is clear that, to achieve the goal of Scotland having the highest take-up rate in the UK by 2015, a range of technical solutions will be required. The key will be to get the balance right to achieve the maximum return on investment. I will close on the point with which I began: that the strategy must benefit all Scots and should promote social inclusion. Simply expanding the potential for access to broadband throughout the country and at higher speeds is not the same as ensuring that the technology will be used by as many Scots as possible. That point has been made in some of the briefings that members received for the debate. The issue is not just about access; it is about ensuring that people can use broadband facilities. There are harder-to-reach groups such as some older people and those who will be deterred from using broadband in the home because of cost. If we want to realise the ambition that the document sets out for increased take-up, we will need to involve Scots in all sections of society. We need to hear more from the Scottish Government about how people who can access broadband now but who choose not to or who are deterred from doing so will be encouraged and enabled to use broadband in the future. There is much to applaud in the strategy, but questions remain for the cabinet secretary about how those important goals will be achieved. I hope that he will be able to answer them today, because they will be crucial in ensuring that the aims are realised and that we have the step change in digital infrastructure in Scotland that is crucial for the future success of our economy and society. I move amendment S4M-01893.1, to insert at end: “, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that local and community projects receive an adequate share of the available funding and to develop strategies to improve broadband uptake among people over 55 and low-income groups who are currently excluded from the benefits of broadband access.”

In his discussions with bus operators about the bus service operators grant, what action did the minister take to ensure that fares would not increase, particularly for people on low incomes who rely on buses? In my city, Aberdeen, there is a fare increase of 8.5 per cent.

Is it not the reality that, when in the previous Executive, we legislated to introduce quality contracts and quality partnerships? We very much regret that none of those have been introduced. They would give more importance to accountability and having fully operational services in local communities.

If the problem was the ability to introduce such schemes, why did the previous SNP Government oppose our proposed bill to make it far easier to introduce them? I am afraid that the member is making no sense whatever.

Will the member give way?

Several members have mentioned that this is not the first time that Labour has brought the issue of bus services to the Parliament. We make no apology for returning to the issue, because we have heard again today, sometimes in feisty discourse, how important bus services are. So often, they are lifelines for communities. That applies in rural communities, such as those that Elaine Murray and Claudia Beamish referred to, as well as in urban areas, as Elaine Smith highlighted. Members have discussed the many reasons why bus services are vital, but a key reason is their importance to excluded groups and to older people and the disabled. The concessionary travel scheme has been important for those groups. Too often, they have been financially and socially excluded, but there are now no financial barriers to their using buses, whether it be for shopping trips into town or to visit friends and family. That is why the continuation of the scheme is important to us. We also hope that, in future, consideration will be given to extending it into areas such as community transport. Of course, it is not only older people and the disabled who rely on bus services; they are vital for our economy because they are the method that many Scots use to get to work. There should be unanimity in the Parliament about encouraging more people to use public transport for such journeys. Affordable bus services are also crucial for those in our society on lower incomes, for whom times are particularly tough right now. That is why we are so concerned about what is happening in Scotland. A number of important services are being withdrawn from communities throughout the country and, following decisions by the Scottish Government, there are hikes in bus fares as well. In this debate, I clearly do not agree on every point with the Confederation of Passenger Transport, but its briefing raises important issues. It makes it clear that the Scottish Government was made aware that its decision to cut the bus service operators grant by 20 per cent would lead to fare increases. I am not persuaded by the minister’s maths on that issue. In Aberdeen, the cut has resulted in fare increases of some 8.5 per cent, which will start on Sunday. Such increases particularly affect those who are on low incomes, and there is no evidence that ministers made any attempt to take account of that fact in their decision or to mitigate its impact.

We will vote on the entirety of the Scottish Government’s budget. As Elaine Murray said, the Scottish Government is able to lodge amendments at stage 2, but we are not. I very much hope that the minister will lodge an amendment, because the 8.5 per cent fare increases in Aberdeen will hit the poorest, will hurt others in other parts of Scotland and are totally unacceptable. The situation was made all the worse because of the late notice that operators were given of the cuts. That will be a great disappointment for those who will have to pay higher fares. How will that contribute to the Scottish Government’s stated aim of encouraging more people to use our buses? The Scottish Government says that it wants to use its budget to protect Scotland from the coalition’s reckless spending cuts but, again and again, the rhetoric does not match the reality. The situation that I outlined is yet another example of those in Scotland who are least able to afford increased charges having to pay more. Let us be clear about local authority budgets as well. For councils, the Scottish Government has doubled the cut that it received. It is making the situation doubly bad for local authority budgets, so to say that they have been protected is simply untrue. We part company with the Confederation of Passenger Transport, the Conservatives and the SNP on regulation. Paul Martin made an important speech on that. Tavish Scott made some thoughtful comments on the issue, too. Deregulation has not worked. Too many areas have, in effect, monopoly services and no accountability.

I am fond of Mr McDonald, but he must learn that, if I am to take his interventions, he must take mine in future.

We introduced more legislation for regulation. In opposition in the previous session of Parliament, we proposed a further bill, which the SNP opposed. However, to judge from George Adam’s comments earlier, we can look forward to the SNP supporting Patricia Ferguson’s bill when she introduces it, because the party has indicated that it favours more regulation. On a UK level, we acted on the matter through the Local Transport Act 2008. Elsewhere in the UK, more regulation is working effectively. We are also starting to see at least some bus quality partnerships in Scotland. We wonder why the SNP, having previously supported reregulation, opposes it so vigorously in government. The more cynical among us might wonder whether Mr Souter had a word in the SNP’s ear. As I am not a cynic, I will leave others to muse on that. It is clear from increasing bus fares and the loss of key services that the Scottish Government is letting down bus passengers and communities across Scotland. We would have thought that a party that aspired to run an independent country would want to show that it could run the buses properly first—right now, it is not managing that. Most Scots would prefer the Government to get on with the job of ensuring that vital bus services are available when people need them, at a price that they can afford.

The fundamental principle of the sovereignty of the people of Scotland set out in the claim of right was put forward by the Scottish Constitutional Convention in the campaign for this Parliament, and Scottish Labour representatives support it today, as so many of our party did then. Given that the SNP did not sign up to that document in 1989, it ill behoves any SNP MSP to try and lecture this side of the chamber on the claim and the important principles that it stands for. It is far better that we celebrate the principles of sovereignty and democracy that the claim sets out and to which we can all adhere. Not having signed the claim of right in 1989, the SNP is not in a strong position to lever that document into the Parliament’s discussions on plans for the referendum. This side of the chamber has no difficulty in applying that statement and the principle of the sovereignty of the people of Scotland to our approach to the debate on Scotland’s constitutional future. Fundamentally, it is about empowering the people of Scotland to make their own decision about the future of this country. We believe that we establish the sovereignty of and empower the people by ensuring that they can take part in a fair and legal democratic process that delivers clarity on the key questions about our country’s future. The choice is as stark as Margo MacDonald has put it and those principles should be discussed and debated. Nevertheless, we feel that our alternative vision is superior to that put forward by Margo MacDonald. We also believe that we establish the sovereignty of the people and empower them by holding the referendum at a time and in a way that does not suit the ends of one political party or one view, but is in the interests of all the people of this country; by giving the people of Scotland a clear question on the future of this country; and by ensuring that alternative visions of the future are made clear to them. That is where the devo max or devo plus proposals fall down with regard to their inclusion in the referendum. It is not because such ideas are not worthy of debate—they are. It is not because we believe that this Parliament should have no further powers—indeed, we have just endorsed extra powers. It is because there is no clarity on the proposals. We believe that voting on an undefined or ill-defined constitutional future does not serve democracy or the people of Scotland. We welcome debate about the Parliament’s future powers but we believe that that, too, is best served by a different process. There has been a lot of talk about who has a mandate to be involved in discussions on the referendum’s format. Although mandate can be a more difficult concept to pin down than sovereignty, we have nevertheless accepted the Scottish Government’s mandate to hold in this Parliament a referendum on taking Scotland out of the United Kingdom. I do not accept that the SNP had a specific mandate on the timing, but we have done nothing other than acknowledge that the mandate to hold the referendum in this parliamentary session is clear. However, although the SNP might not like it, the fact is that Scots have given a mandate on Scotland’s political future not only to the SNP, but to other parties. Scots voted in great numbers in the Westminster elections for representatives who have a mandate to be involved in the issue. The SNP does not like that, but that is the current constitutional settlement. I have no problem agreeing that the form of the referendum should be driven by debate in Scotland, but that should meaningfully involve all those who have been elected by the people of Scotland to represent them. The problem with the Scottish Government is that it too often seems to confuse its party and Government with the people of Scotland. No one can deny that the SNP achieved a significant electoral victory last May, but we are not a one-party state, and let us hope that we never are. The views of the people of Scotland are diverse and are represented by a range of political opinion. The Scottish Government has implied too often that the process should principally be a matter for it and for its majority in the Parliament, but that will not wash. Ministers should be aware that a Government that has a majority in the Parliament should work harder to include the views of others and should not use that position to discount and exclude others. I hope that we are moving away from that approach and that there is progress. Dialogue between the Scottish and Westminster Governments appears to have begun, which is welcome, but we also need meaningful dialogue between the parties in the Parliament and with civic Scotland to complement the consultation process. That is of huge importance.

I await with expectation the white paper that will come with the bill on the referendum, which will allow us to debate all those issues in the Parliament. I am happy to debate the issues more widely, and we look forward to the talks that the First Minister said he wished to have. I am confident that Labour will take part seriously in those talks. That approach is an obvious way to ensure that the range of political opinion is included. It is the most effective way to ensure that progress towards a fair referendum is driven by discussion in Scotland. The First Minister’s comments on round-table talks are welcome, because we believe that, if we seek to forge a consensus on how the referendum is held, we can aspire to excellence in that democratic process. That is how we will empower the people of Scotland to make that crucial decision and how we will respect their sovereignty to choose their future.

I point out that it was a Thatcher Government that the SNP ushered in. Section 1(3) of the draft bill sets out the date of the referendum as “[insert date]”. Why can the First Minister not tell us his preferred date now? Although we want an earlier referendum, will he guarantee that, on his timescale, it will be held no later than autumn 2014?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that if local businesses in the north-east are to benefit from the work on the A96 and the Inveramsay bridge, and from other local infrastructure projects, there must be a fundamental change in Scottish Government procurement policy? Does he appreciate the concerns of local construction companies, which say that they are now not even able to win third contracts for work locally? That has been a major factor in 15 local companies going out of business in the past 18 months. Will those concerns be addressed in the forthcoming procurement bill?

I am pleased to speak in the debate and pleased that we on the Labour benches have provided members with the opportunity to debate the independence referendum. However, many people might reasonably have expected the debate to have been introduced by the Scottish Government, not only because it says that independence is its most important priority or because it has been the foremost issue in Scottish and UK politics this week, but because the First Minister announced on Tuesday to the media his new proposed timescale for a referendum. It is an important issue for the Parliament. There are a number of bizarre aspects of the Scottish Government’s position, and none more so than its grim determination to delay a referendum for as long as it can. After the election, along with other Opposition parties, we were quick to accept that the SNP had secured a mandate for a referendum. It is therefore bewildering—and it must frustrate many nationalists—that, after more than four years of consultation on the issue, a draft bill and several consultation documents, a majority nationalist Government is stretching every sinew to hold off a vote when for so long it has impressed on us the urgent need for a referendum.

I will take one intervention and then I will have to finish my speech.

We have had years. We had a draft bill in the previous session of Parliament from the member’s Government, which pressed for a referendum as soon as possible. I am afraid that the Scottish Government is in a weak position on the issue. There is simply no compelling objective reason to delay the vote. As Johann Lamont said, in 1997, it took only months to hold a referendum and, within two years, a Parliament was established. The SNP manifesto did not state that the referendum should be in the second half of the session, although failing to honour election pledges has not troubled the First Minister previously. Many people will believe that the only reason why the First Minister is showing uncharacteristic reticence in bringing forward a vote is that he is scared of what the result would be now and he seeks delay, in the hope of gaining political advantage. However, the issue is too important to be treated in that way and it is bigger than any single political party or individual. It is about the future of the whole of Scottish society, which is why we are arguing a case—which I believe many Scots will support—that consultation processes by Scottish or UK ministers are not enough and that the debate on the process should be concluded quickly and concluded here in Scotland. That is why we have called on the First Minister to enter into cross-party talks on the format of the referendum and to involve wider Scottish society. That can only help to generate confidence in the referendum process, encourage participation in a vital debate for Scotland and help us to move quickly on to the substantive debate on the issues. In any discussions, we will make the case for the need for clarity on the legality of the referendum, and on the outcome of the result. That is why, whatever debate rightly takes place on more powers for the Parliament in a devolved settlement, we believe that the referendum must be a straight question on a single choice. It is disappointing that, after the Deputy First Minister signalled that there was consensus on that, the SNP has rafted back from that and we are left with its ludicrous proposition that, even if more people voted for more powers than voted for independence, we would still end up with independence. That will not strike many people as a fair process.

I must make progress because I have only six minutes. We will continue to ask questions about the franchise, not just on the debate over 16 and 17-year-olds voting but on broader issues of franchise that still require more debate. On such issues, it is vital to seek advice from the Electoral Commission. It should be self-evident that the Electoral Commission should oversee the running of the referendum. With an independent body already in place for the running of elections and referendums that has experience in ensuring fairness in the democratic process, many people will understandably ask why Scottish ministers wish to create a new body and make new appointments of their own to oversee the referendum. We will also continue to raise our concerns over the issue of when the referendum is held. We still await a specific date from the Scottish Government. We believe that the continuing uncertainty is damaging to Scotland’s economy at a time when unemployment is already rising and economic growth is stalling. Even if the Scottish Government believes that investment in Scotland is not being damaged by such uncertainty, there is clear evidence that, at the very least, casts great doubt on that assertion, so why even risk such an impact on our economy when the referendum could simply be held earlier? That would then allow ministers and the Parliament to firmly focus their undivided attention on creating jobs and restoring growth. In the past few days—at least until this debate—the First Minister sought to take a more conciliatory tone, and suggested that he will work with UK ministers to resolve the debate over legality and seek a consensus on other aspects of the referendum. I hope that the First Minister’s tone persists and that he recalls his words at the beginning of the current parliamentary session, when he said that no party has a monopoly on wisdom, because it is certainly the case that no party has a monopoly on deciding what constitutes a fair referendum. On such a pivotal decision for Scotland. it is vital that all parties and all Scots have confidence that the referendum will be held at a time and in a way that are not for the benefit of one party but are instead in the interests of all Scots and fairness. That drives our motion today and that is why, if the Government truly wants a fair referendum, it should back it.

Will the member give way?

As I rise, Presiding Officer. [Laughter.] To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will reassess its growth forecasts in light of the revised forecasts for United Kingdom growth by the Office for Budget Responsibility. (S4O-00493) He is not going to resist, is he?

Given the revision downwards in the growth forecasts both by the OBR and, for the Scottish economy, by the Ernst and Young independent Treasury economic model—ITEM—club report, does the cabinet secretary intend to produce Scottish Government forecasts for economic growth and supply such figures to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee? Given the worrying growth trends that we are facing, will he rethink key aspects of his spending review, including his proposals on college budgets and to reduce the budget for affordable housing?

Does Chic Brodie agree with the First Minister’s previous statement that, in the years before the crisis in the banking sector, the banking industry had gold-plated regulation and not the light-touch regulation that we would have in an independent Scotland?

The debate has largely been constructive. Given that the work of the regulatory review group is focused on technical issues of implementing legislation and monitoring compliance, the debate has, as Mary Scanlon suggested, been quite lively. There has been debate on the clarity of Scottish Government policy, good ideas from across the chamber on improving regulatory practices, and criticism of some areas of the Government’s approach. As always, I will be a voice of conciliation and consensus. There can be no doubt that real progress has been made as a result of the regulatory review group’s activity since it was established in 2004 by the previous Executive and then continued by the current Government. The group has focused on its requirement to ensure that we are not overburdened with unnecessary regulation, but that we have in place the safeguard of a healthy regulatory framework. The need for that balance was referred to by a number of members, and well summed up in the FSB’s submission, which stated that we need a regulatory regime that correctly balances protection of the public, employees, and the environment with the necessary conditions for economic growth. Those are key principles and the review group’s work has focused on enhancing their operation in Scottish society. We have all heard in the past about great ambitions in this area. All parties at various stages have had ambitions for a one-in, one-out approach to regulation. Gavin Brown was right to say that the Scottish National Party had a one-in, one-out policy; we had that policy, too, so in a rare moment of solidarity with the minister, I recognise that it is right that thinking can evolve. I find myself rather more in agreement with the minister’s comments today. A one-in, one-out policy on regulation is easier said than done but we will see how the UK Government proceeds. Legislation can introduce valuable regulation, such as that which protects the public and provides safety at work for employees. Mr Ewing rightly referred to ensuring that workers are not placed in dangerous situations such as handling asbestos, for example. Families in Scotland are still dealing with the fall-out from that today. Mark McDonald referred to health and safety in the oil and gas industry, which we are both aware of. There are concerns about the HSE’s budget being cut in that area. Regulation is important in a range of areas. John Park was right to say that deregulation will not be a panacea for our economic ills. At the same time, no one wants unnecessary regulation that hampers businesses and the operation of necessary regulation. It is therefore right that the RRG has worked to create better regulation for all. This morning’s debate largely reflects the fact that the RRG has sought to achieve consensus on its work among the various agencies with which it has worked successfully, as well as politically. That is evident in the group’s diverse membership, which includes Stephen Boyd of the Scottish Trades Union Congress. Russel Griggs has worked hard and effectively to ensure cross-party backing for the broad approach that the group has taken. I cannot touch on every theme that has come up in the debate or everything that the report has raised in the time that is available to me, but I will touch on a few things. As parliamentarians, we must be conscious of the impact of the legislation that we pass on Scotland’s regulatory landscape. I am therefore pleased that the group is asking whether the right people are involved when legislation is being initiated, including those who will be responsible for its implementation. The group asks whether we are framing legislation in a way that will aid regulatory efficiency and whether there is too great a prevalence of enabling legislation. In my opinion, that has been an increasing trend not only under the Scottish National Party Government, but throughout the Parliament’s history. Finally, and most fundamentally, the group asks whether the legislative process is fit for purpose. Therefore, there are important questions for ministers, the whole Parliament and individual agencies. Agencies are already making progress through working with the group. I am a member for North East Scotland and am very much aware of the importance of the regulatory framework in the farming industry, to which Rob Gibson rightly referred, and land management. It is pleasing to see progress on the issues from SEPA and others that are referred to in the report. It is not only the clients of those agencies who benefit from better regulation; it is clear that the agencies themselves are seeing a material and positive difference in the results of their work through collaboration and changing strategic approaches to the implementation of regulation. The report highlights the need for national consistency in the implementation of regulation. A number of members have referred to that. That is why such a focus is correctly placed on the work stream on consistency, and why the joint working group’s engagement with COSLA is clearly so important. Variation in the application of regulation not only frustrates individuals and businesses; the confusion that can result impacts on those who are implementing the regulation. The report is therefore right to call for national co-ordination, with a ministerial lead often being important. Of course, that must also be informed by the experience of the local authorities and others who are responsible for implementation. A number of examples are given, but licensing stands out. That is one reason why we have long called for a national licensing forum. I hope that that development and similar developments in other areas will arise, given the importance that the report places on consistency of implementation. I would like to touch briefly on business and regulatory impact assessments, which members have mentioned and which the report highlights as being of great importance. The report welcomes the increased use of business and regulatory impact assessments, and the group will look at how ministerial exemptions have been used and how the system may be improved. I am sure that we can all agree that those assessments are important. As such, although we have not come to a final view as a group on the proposed new retail levy, we believe that Gavin Brown’s amendment makes reasonable and sensible points that we hope that the Scottish Government will accept.

I am sorry, but I cannot do so. I have only a minute left, and Mr McDonald would not take an intervention from us, so there are some false tears from SNP members. As Rhoda Grant outlined in her speech, our amendment refers to our desire for a procurement bill, which we hope would streamline processes for businesses and bring benefits in other areas, including the promotion of contracts for local businesses, the use of article 19—Mr McDonald should take note that Helen Eadie was right about that, too—and, of course, the promotion of the living wage. Tavish Scott made key and important points on that issue. At the moment, our procurement processes are too often a hurdle and obstruction for local businesses when they should be an opportunity. That is why we agree entirely with Tavish Scott that the Scottish Government needs to take a different approach. We look forward to the procurement bill, which we hope will improve matters, and to the better regulation bill. In conclusion, it is clear that there is a great deal of work to be done in this important area to get the balance right and not to overburden people with regulation, although we should recognise the great importance that regulation can have not only for a successful Scottish economy, but for the quality of life in our society. On that basis, we join members across the chamber in their variety of ways of expressing congratulations to the regulatory review group on its work.

The cabinet secretary has rightly referred to the revision downwards of growth forecasts. What impact will that have on the Scottish Government’s spending review? Will he revise his growth forecast figures? For example, what impact will it have on business rates revenue forecasts?

This is a welcome opportunity to debate the autumn statement and its implications for Scotland. It comes at a critical point for our economy and for the world economy, when so many of the indicators are bleak. The Ernst & Young Scottish ITEM—independent Treasury economic model—club report that was published this week shows the extent of the problem here in Scotland. It found that our economy is recovering at a slower rate than in the UK as a whole. Growth north of the border totalled 1.4 per cent in the past two years, compared with 2.8 per cent across the UK. The report says: “Scotland is not expected to return to peak employment until the early 2020s.” The report also downgraded its forecast for Scottish growth in 2012 from 1.9 to 1.1 per cent following a year in which the Scottish economy has grown by only 0.6 per cent. The last gross domestic product figures showed growth in Scotland actually slowing from 0.2 to 0.1 per cent. We must be determined to take the necessary action to return Scotland to stronger growth, but we must also recognise the gravity of our economic situation and the scale of the challenge. That is why we need government at all levels to take the correct decisions to create the right conditions for economic growth. Unfortunately, it is clear that the right decisions have not been taken. We will find much common ground with the cabinet secretary’s assessment of the UK Government’s strategy and the autumn statement. However, as there has been a recent tendency for some to quote out of context the instances in which I agree with the cabinet secretary, I emphasise that we do not believe that the Scottish Government’s response to the economic situation has been sufficient. Given the Scottish Government’s crucial role in promoting economic growth, it is simply not credible to blame all our ills on the UK Government. The coalition strategy certainly is not helping and it is the wrong one for the UK economy. The autumn statement is in effect an admission of defeat for Mr Osborne’s austerity strategy. It is now clear that David Cameron’s and George Osborne’s reckless, ideology-driven economic plan has backfired.

I presume that Mr Carlaw would not have acted to bail out the banks. The UK Government has left us the lowest rates of growth in the world, and it has choked off the recovery that Labour set in motion. As the cabinet secretary said, the UK Government is set to borrow £158 billion more than it planned to a year ago. That is the bill for economic failure, higher unemployment and the increased spend on benefits that are the result of its failed plan. Its pledge to balance the books by 2015 has gone. Instead, the coalition has announced plans for further cuts into 2016-17, as the cabinet secretary said.

No, because the figures that I have show that the UK Government plans £37 billion more borrowing in future years than the amount in Labour’s plans that were announced at the election. It is clear that, under the Conservatives’ plans, we are in an even worse situation, even in terms of borrowing, that there has been pain but no gain, and that families are paying the price. The autumn statement shows the clear need for a different economic strategy for the UK and Scotland. There are elements of the autumn statement that at least reflect some of the concerns that we have raised, although we think that they do not go far enough. There is a youth jobs programme, although it will be smaller than the future jobs fund initiative, which should never have been scrapped. Young people will not be helped until April next year, but consequentials will be brought to the Scottish Government, which we have urged ministers to invest in expanding the future jobs fund. We welcome the fact that that fund has been retained here in the voluntary sector with a great deal of success, and we wish to see it extended into the private sector. The credit easing and national loan guarantee is an admission that the project Merlin deal has not worked. It gave the banks a tax cut this year in return for vague and unfulfilled promises to increase lending to small businesses. We can only hope that the new scheme will prove more successful. The new UK Government proposals on infrastructure projects, to which the cabinet secretary referred, make it clear that it was a mistake to reduce capital spending in the first place. We can only hope that those proposals will actually deliver new projects, but again we want to see the detail.

I have already given way to Mr Brown. I will try to take an intervention from him later. We understand that there will be limited consequentials in the new plans for housing from the UK Government. We hope that they will be invested in social housing in Scotland. Labour has offered alternative proposals for a different strategy—for a plan B. We have come forward with a five-point plan for our economy that includes a tax on bank bonuses to fund a national jobs plan for young people, a temporary reversal of the damaging increase in VAT, a one-year cut in VAT on home improvements to 5 per cent, and a one-year national insurance tax break for every small firm that takes on extra workers. Those points are for the UK Government, but the fifth is very much a Scottish Government responsibility too, as the aim is to bring forward investment in infrastructure projects to get people back to work. We have, of course, also offered alternatives to the Scottish Government policy, as we outlined in the debate on youth unemployment last week. We have called for a number of measures, including the appointment of a dedicated minister for youth employment. We are pleased that the Scottish Government has made that appointment, and we welcome Angela Constance to her new role. Beyond expanding the future jobs fund, we have also called for new legislation on procurement to support local businesses, and a capital investment plan that works. When we heard the cabinet secretary say in the summer that he wanted to pursue a different route from the UK Government and prioritise investment in infrastructure—he outlined that again in today’s debate—we very much welcomed that. Indeed, that is the kind of strategy that Labour has been promoting on a UK-wide basis. However, although we have had agreement on the analysis, we have been disappointed in the delivery. The budget for affordable housing is being cut by 50 per cent, and major infrastructure projects have been delayed or there is no timetable for their completion. We hoped that the release of the infrastructure plan yesterday would bring greater clarity on future projects, but I could not put things better than The Scotsman did this morning. It reported: “Hours after infrastructure secretary Alex Neil set out his blueprint for new building projects in parliament yesterday, it became clear that many of the schemes had already been announced, while others are not due to be completed for decades.” We need clarity now on delivery and on the detail of how the schemes will be funded. We will continue to press the Scottish Government on these issues, because we need action, not aspiration, on key infrastructure projects.

My understanding, from what the cabinet secretary said earlier, is that there will be consequentials later in the spending review cycle involving increased spending for infrastructure. However, we need a greater emphasis on infrastructure spending right now. Unfortunately, as I have just illustrated with yesterday’s reactions to the plan, not only from The Scotsman but more widely, there are still too many questions about delays, about a lack of timescale for specific projects and about cuts in areas such as affordable housing. Another central concern is the proposed 20 per cent cut in college budgets, which will damage our economy and further damage opportunities for our young people at a time when youth unemployment in Scotland already stands at 100,000. If the only concession that we are to get from the Scottish Government is £15 million in change funds when college budgets are to be reduced by £74 million, that will be entirely inadequate. It will mean that colleges will have to proceed with cuts, which will reduce educational opportunities for many people in Scotland. We therefore ask the Scottish Government not to make the mistakes that the UK Government has made. We ask it to implement an infrastructure plan that will actually deliver new projects, and to think again about cuts that would damage our economy. We ask it to think again on these vital issues because the autumn statement was a demonstration of the cost of getting it wrong, and Scotland cannot afford for ministers to get this wrong. The people of Scotland do not want an economic strategy that is driven by an ideological obsession with cuts in public investment or with constitutional upheaval. They want an economic strategy that is driven by the need to return to growth and to get people back into work. We believe that, even in these tough times, with the right decisions, we can put Scotland on the right road to a more prosperous future. That should be the priority for ministers, because it is a priority for the people of Scotland. I move amendment S4M-01501.3, to leave out from first “supports” to end and insert: “calls on the UK Government to confer borrowing powers on the Scottish Government from April 2012 to allow for an expanded capital infrastructure programme; notes the publication of the Scottish Government’s Infrastructure Investment Plan 2011; urges the Scottish Government to provide milestones for each infrastructure project to ensure that the list of delayed infrastructure projects does not grow longer; notes that Scotland’s economic growth over the last 12 months has been disappointing despite economic growth being the stated purpose of the Scottish Government; calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that the measures in the Scottish budget support economic recovery to improve Scotland’s growth rate; to this end, urges the Scottish Government to reconsider the significant cuts that it has made to the affordable housing and further education budgets; notes that disposable household income has fallen by 2.3% this year, a post-war record, and is forecast to fall again next year, which coincides with public sector workers in Scotland and the rest of the UK having to pay more in pension contributions; notes that the Chancellor has outlined a further two years of spending cuts and that the proposed six years of cuts in spending are unprecedented, and regrets that the actions of the UK Government will lead to an increase in child poverty.”

What is the cost to our economy from the fact that our growth rates are higher than only those of Greece and Portugal, out of the whole euro zone?

We are hearing a bit of revisionism. I remind the member that Alex Salmond said in The Times, in April 2007: “We are pledging a light-touch regulation suitable to a Scottish financial sector with its outstanding reputation for probity, as opposed to one like that in the UK, which absorbs huge amounts of management time in ‘gold-plated’ regulation.”

It is funny that when this started it was all Labour’s fault and had nothing to do with the global economy; now it is the euro zone’s fault. Beyond that, however, how does Murdo Fraser explain the fact that, if it is the fault of the euro zone, why is growth in the euro zone superior to that in the UK?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the member give way?

Is it not the case that when Labour left office, youth unemployment was falling? Indeed, we introduced the £1 billion future jobs fund to tackle youth unemployment. Was not it incorrect of the UK Government to decide to abolish that fund?

It has, largely, been a very good debate. It is an important debate for Parliament to have—as all members have acknowledged—because there should be no more pressing concern for the Parliament and the Scottish Government than tackling the crisis that we face in respect of youth unemployment. “Crisis” is not a word that we use lightly, but the sad fact is that that is exactly what we face when we see the numbers of young unemployed people in Scotland reaching 100,000. The debate has also produced material results, which we welcome. I will outline our response to the First Minister’s announcements later, because the problems of youth unemployment demand a substantial response. There is clearly a variety of views across the chamber about how we should deal with the problems. There were attempts to characterise the difficulties for our young people in Scotland seeking work as being somehow not as critical as they are in other parts of the UK. I will go into a number of reasons why I am not persuaded by those arguments. I believe that there is in Scotland a harsh reality that no member should challenge: youth unemployment is unacceptably and needlessly high and is robbing far too many of our young people of the life opportunities that they want and should have, and threatening the long-term economic prosperity of our country. While we will debate what and how much Governments should do, members on this side of the chamber are clear that neither the UK Government nor the Scottish Government has been doing enough to tackle the problem; indeed, some of their actions are making it worse. That is why we made alternative positive proposals in our motion. However, we welcome the fact that in this debate, which we have led, we have heard the First Minister announce that there is to be a dedicated minister for youth employment. We are pleased that the Scottish Government has responded to the call in the motion and I hope that it can now support our motion rather than delete it through its amendment. Our motion reflects the recommendation of the Smith group, which has rightly been applauded for its work and its report. We agree that every minister, as Liz Smith said, should have a role in promoting employment, but we feel that that also requires a ministerial focus. It is clear that the Smith group believes that, too. We also welcome the £30 million for tackling youth unemployment, which will be attached to the ministerial post. We previously pledged £40 million for the futures job fund alone, but we welcome the £30 million and will be pleased to suggest how it might be productively deployed. I agree entirely with Mark McDonald that there is good work to build on and that Aberdeen Foyer is an excellent example of that. Let us be clear about the scale of the challenge that the new minister will face. The unemployment figure for 18 to 24-year-olds in Scotland is 21.5 per cent, which is higher than the UK figure of 20.2 per cent. That figure is from a Scottish Government document, and we should all recognise the gravity of the situation. Iain Gray talked passionately about the appalling impact of youth unemployment in Scotland in the 80s on the lives of young people. His commitment to tackling youth unemployment is one of the reasons why we are having this debate. We should applaud Iain Gray for his fantastic contribution this morning. Members have been keen to get behind the statistics and to speak about the human impact of youth unemployment—for example, those who leave school or training but who do not find a job and who want to get a foot on the ladder of work but have had that opportunity denied them. That is why our motion deliberately refers to a lost generation. The threat for young people who do not find work is that it will affect the rest of their careers; we need them to succeed if we are to succeed as a nation. We know that we cannot compete as a low-skill, low-wage economy and that we can succeed only as a people of skills and ingenuity. For that, we must ensure that there are the right employment opportunities at the start. I was somewhat puzzled by John Mason’s speech. Let us be clear that our young people in Scotland want to work and want opportunities to succeed; all we have to do is to give them the tools and they will take those opportunities. There can be no doubt that the UK Government’s economic strategy is making the situation in Scotland worse. The autumn statement was, in effect, an admission of defeat from George Osborne. His strategy has failed, but rather than learn the lessons of that, he has a strategy that appears to be designed to make the situation worse by making cuts too fast and too deep—and by making even more cuts in the years after the next UK general election. Our young people will pay the price and the price will be unemployment. It will result in the perverse situation in which job opportunities are restricted and the UK Government will borrow more in order to pay benefits to the young people whom its strategy has left behind. I am pleased that a number of members referred to Labour’s five-point plan for the economy, which would result in effective measures to tackle unemployment more broadly, and youth unemployment in particular. I hope that the Scottish Government will support our call for a tax on bankers’ bonuses that will result in consequentials for it to spend on youth unemployment strategies. We are calling for investment in infrastructure. That call in our five-point plan was to the Scottish Government, and I will return to that theme later. We are calling for the future jobs fund to be rolled out to the private sector. Even if the UK Government does not back our plan for a tax on bankers’ bonuses to fund such a scheme more significantly, it will have consequentials that the Scottish Government should invest in the future jobs fund. It could also be an important part of the £30 million that the First Minister announced earlier today. We want a procurement bill so that public sector contracts can be geared towards businesses that have good employment practices and that encourage employment of young people. Such a bill should have been in the Government’s legislative programme, but we will welcome it if it is introduced now and we look forward to having the opportunity to scrutinising the details in Parliament. We want a capital investment plan that works. In the summer, when we heard that the cabinet secretary wants to pursue a different route from that of the UK Government, and to prioritise investment in infrastructure, we welcomed that. The problem for us is that the intention has not been matched by reality. I will put it this way to Mr Chic Brodie: we think that we need “A little less conversation” and “a little more action” on delivery of the proposals. Major infrastructure projects have either been delayed, or there is no timetable for their completion. The budget for affordable housing has been cut by 50 per cent. That is simply repeating the mistakes that are being made at UK level.

I am always delighted to take an intervention from the First Minister.

We did not make the statements about capital investment; it was the Centre for Public Policy for Regions. The First Minister has only to ask his friend Professor John McLaren, who did the analysis of the figures. They show exactly what we have stated. [Interruption.]

If the First Minister is not going to traduce individuals again, he will simply have to accept that the decisions and the budget are his, and he should take responsibility for them.

I am going to make some progress. I visited North Glasgow College on the day that youth unemployment figures reached 100,000 in Scotland. The building apprentices there made two concerns clear to me: the lack of job opportunities in construction, and the threat to other young people who are entering industry because of the proposed cuts to college budgets. The Scottish Government can change course on both those issues and make the decision to give our young people a better chance to find employment. If the Conservative group—which does not share our aversion to cutting important budgets—also sees the college cuts as being too deep, surely the Scottish Government must know that it is time to think again. It is simply not acceptable to hear SNP members talking about the importance of colleges to employment opportunities for young people when the SNP Government is slashing college budgets. Our young people will pay the price. Mr Russell should accept that he should change course now. We believe that the Parliament was set up exactly for times like this, so that we can take a different approach in order to better serve the needs of our people. This Parliament and Government should serve the needs of our people by taking the additional action that has been proposed today so that we will not have 100,000 young Scots out of work. The SNP might have a different vision of what the Parliament is for, but that is what we believe its purpose is. If we agree that we should take a different approach to that of the UK Government, we should not simply talk about it; we should do it. That is why we set out the plans today. We look forward to debating the details of the announcement that the First Minister made earlier. If we do not respond to the crisis of youth unemployment, our young people will pay the price, and the cost will also be told in rising inequality in a nation that should aspire to be fairer and more prosperous than it is today. Let us safeguard that ambition, which is the real ambition for Scotland, and act to give young people in our country the opportunities that they deserve.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am glad that Mary Scanlon has given me an opportunity to make my point so that she can establish whether I am wrong before she replies to it. Mary Scanlon talked about Lord Hutton’s recommendations. He said that the move from the retail prices index to the consumer prices index would result in a 15 per cent cut in pension benefits not just for people in public sector schemes but for people in private sector schemes. Does she think that that is fair? Does she agree with Lord Hutton that that move represents a significant cut in benefits in private pension schemes?

I, too, welcome Mary Scanlon to her new post, but I must say that the Conservative motion today might be best described as a “Life on Mars” motion. While everyone else is looking for the way forward to steer Scotland from recession, the Tories are harking back to the 1980s and their disregard for the trade union movement. I note, however, that not only did Ruth Davidson strike in her previous career as a journalist, she seems to be boycotting parliamentary business already. She is just out a week early; perhaps she will be out with us on 30 November after all. The decision to raise the issue of public service pensions as part of Tory business today merely highlights the failure of the Tory-Liberal coalition to deal properly with pension reform. Instead of working in partnership with the trade unions to try to reform and future proof pensions and ensure decent provision for workers in retirement—we agree with what the cabinet secretary said about the potential in the Hutton proposals—we are being treated to one of the worst-handled negotiations in Government history. We still hope that action can be averted by sensible negotiations between the Government and the trade unions, but thus far there have been months of dither and delay by the UK Government, and we are still waiting to be told what many of Danny Alexander’s most recent proposals mean in detail. Let us be clear: the unions understand that pension reform is needed. Every trade union takes the position that pensions need to be looked at in a fair and progressive way, but we have seen a series of botched announcements from the coalition, which concluded with Francis Maude’s latest brainwave that the unions could go out on strike for 15 minutes and the Government could then carry on with business as usual, as it were. Mary Scanlon neglected to refer to the change from the RPI to the CPI for the uplifting of pensions, which will have a serious effect; the required 50 per cent increase in annual contributions; the fact that those increased pension contributions will be required for up to eight years longer; and that pensions will be payable to retired workers for up to eight years fewer. Very significant changes are being proposed. The Tory motion describes the planned strikes as “deeply irresponsible”, but who are the civil servants who are so “deeply irresponsible”? Who are the far-left militants who are determined to smash the state? Perhaps the Tories mean the FDA, which was formerly known as the First Division Association and is now described as the senior public servants union. Some 81 per cent of its members have voted to back strike action. Even the trade union of Sir Humphrey and Sir Peter Housden has had enough. Perhaps Sir Peter will even tear himself away from his blog for long enough to stand by the brazier with his colleagues. Who knows? That is the extent of the hash that the coalition has made of reform. Even senior civil servants who work in Her Majesty’s Government have voted to go on strike. However, it is not the Sir Humphreys or even the Sir Peters of the public sector who will get hit hardest. Rather, it is the lowest-paid public sector workers who will see the biggest cuts in their pay because of the proposed increase in contributions. In fact, those who earn the least will end up paying much more relatively. It is the refuse collectors, dinner ladies and care home and nursery workers who will get hammered, not the mandarins. Alongside that, the decision, which was taken without consultation or negotiation, to change from the RPI to the CPI for the uprating of pensions will mean a reduction of at least 15 per cent in the real value of pensions even before any further changes are implemented. There is inherent dishonesty in these changes. They are not about making pensions more sustainable. Rather, they are a clumsy attempt to cut the deficit by hitting public sector workers. It is not so much a reform as a ruse—and a badly played one at that. If the Tories want to cut the deficit, they could back Labour’s plan for a levy on bankers’ bonuses, but I expect that we shall hear scant support for that from Conservative members—indeed, I already hear Mr Johnstone grumbling. The Tory motion glibly talks about the strikes doing “nothing to help Scotland’s recovery from the recession”, but it is the UK Government’s botched economic strategy that is cutting growth and increasing unemployment. It does not have to be that way in Scotland. The Scottish Government is not doing enough to take a different approach here, but it can do so, and it can take a different approach on pensions, too. It falls to Mr Swinney to make decisions on a number of pension schemes. Indeed, we encouraged him to take a different approach on the local government scheme, and it is right that he did so. Different choices can be made for other schemes, although we acknowledge that those choices are not easy. We support much of what the Scottish Government has said about public sector reform, but the choices that it has made on public sector jobs also affect those who will strike on 30 November. Those people put up with a great deal of pain, including from thousands of job losses—those losses have been proportionately more in Scotland than in the rest of the UK—before reaching the difficult decision to take action. It is not action that is lightly taken, but it has the support of the Labour group in the Parliament.

As expected, the debate has been sharply polarised, but a number of speeches were thoughtful and persuasive. Hugh Henry described passionately and persuasively the flaws in the coalition’s policy and the Liberal Democrats’ unfortunate position as a human shield for the Conservatives in the exercise. We welcome Liam McArthur, who has joined us for the end of the debate, at least. Neil Findlay talked about the importance of the changes to pensions and about job losses, to which I will return. I agree with a number of SNP members—Roderick Campbell, Paul Wheelhouse and Chic Brodie—that some changes threaten the sustainability of pension schemes that are otherwise performing well. That highlights the great flaws in the UK Government’s policies and proposals. However, I disagree strongly with Chic Brodie about what should happen on 30 November; we should ask trade union members what they want the Parliament to do on that date. I take issue with the Conservative members who have defended the UK Government’s position. Let us be clear—the increased contributions will not go back into schemes to make them more sustainable, but will simply go to the Treasury. It is part of an economic plan by the UK Government that is failing to such an extent that even the International Monetary Fund has urged George Osborne to prepare a plan B. For all the travails of the euro zone—which the UK Government now blames for the economic woes in this country—we in Scotland have one of the weakest growth rates, as does the UK. The UK Government is making a cash grab from public sector workers, many of whom are poorly paid, which will mean another reduction in spending in our economy. It is quite clear that the Conservatives simply do not get it: their economic strategy is not working. Of course, we agree with a number of points that were made by Scottish National Party members today. We appreciate that there are difficulties associated with delivering alternative approaches to pensions here—although it is in the gift of the Scottish Government to do that—but there are other aspects behind workers’ decision to take the action on 30 November for which the Scottish Government is responsible. Those include the extent of the job losses in the public sector in Scotland, the cuts to local government budgets, which will mean further job losses and—as we heard only recently—teachers having to purchase equipment for their classrooms because education budgets are being cut again due to the council funding settlement. The Scottish Government has made choices that are making life for public sector workers far harder. We urge the Scottish Government to make different choices that we believe will also benefit the wider Scottish economy. Nevertheless, the content of the Scottish Government amendment is in line with our thinking on the pensions debate. We would have liked the chance to debate Patrick Harvie’s amendment, which reflects strongly our views on this important matter. Of course, we will not support the Scottish Conservative motion today. In failing to recognise the impact of the proposed changes to pensions on public sector workers, the motion—and that party—does not properly recognise the contribution that those workers make to our society and our economy. Although we hope that industrial action can yet be avoided through proper negotiations, the motion does not recognise their right and their need at this time to take proper industrial action to protect their rights to fair pensions and to protest against an economic strategy that is hurting them and families across this country. I moved the amendment in my name because we support the trade unions. We support the action on 30 November.

5. To ask the First Minister what measures the Scottish Government is taking to tackle female unemployment in light of concerns that women are being disproportionately affected by job losses. (S4F-00271)

Given that yesterday we found out that unemployment in Scotland increased for the second month, does the First Minister share my concern that, along with the worrying figures on young people who are out of work, which include a rise in female youth unemployment, female workers more generally have been particularly affected by recent increases in unemployment? Will he outline what further action he intends to take to deal with the problem? What discussions has he had with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities on the issue, given that the 6.3 per cent cut to local government budgets is likely to affect female workers disproportionately?

14. To ask the Scottish Executive how many more businesses will be required to pay non-domestic rates in order for its plans to increase revenue from such rates to be achieved. (S4O-00351)

Like Mr Pentland, I hesitate to dampen the cabinet secretary’s optimism. However, even after the answers that we have heard, I ask him why he has not revised his forecast for the growth of business rates revenue from buoyancy in the sector, given that gross domestic product growth is only 0.1 per cent, the figure for buoyancy to which he referred earlier was only 0.91 per cent and, only this week, the Fraser of Allander institute halved its forecast for growth in Scotland. When will he supply the annual growth figures that Gavin Brown rightly requested?

I, too, congratulate Rob Gibson on securing this important debate, which we welcome, on the future of energy production in Scotland. I reassure Rob Gibson that we share the Scottish Government’s enthusiasm for increasing renewable energy production in Scotland, and we welcome the ambition of its electricity target. We have made that clear in previous debates in the chamber; indeed, we have had quite convivial debates on the issue with the minister. We think that expanding our use and production of renewable energy in Scotland is an environmental necessity for our country if we want a sustainable energy policy for the future. There is also a huge economic opportunity for Scotland, particularly for the north—Rob Gibson highlighted that in his motion—but also for the north-east. There are many skills in our oil and gas sector that we hope will transfer into a growing renewable energy sector. I quibble with parts of the motion. Germany’s energy policy is a matter for it. Our party’s position has not been to rule in new nuclear power for the future of Scotland’s energy production and consumption, but neither have we ruled it out. Our focus has been on ensuring that we have the base-load and security of supply that we need. The history of nuclear power in Scotland has been very different from its history in other countries—Mr Gibson described international incidents that have occurred. However, we recognise that the Scottish Government’s focus is clearly on meeting the renewables target, and we hope that the goal of meeting 100 per cent of our electricity needs from renewables by 2020 is achievable and realised. We have made that clear but, as a constructive Opposition, we think that questions need to be asked about how the target will be achieved, how the policy can be properly scrutinised and how the Government is progressing to meeting the 2020 target. That is why we again call for the Government to set out clear interim targets on the way to achieving the 2020 target to allow us to monitor progress. Rob Gibson rightly mentioned the issue of investing in infrastructure for renewable energy production. We have welcomed a £70 million fund in Scotland, but investment in infrastructure in Germany outstrips what we are putting in here. We understand that these are difficult times for public spending but, if we all agree that such infrastructure needs to be a priority, we need to prioritise investment in it. Rob Gibson also mentioned the important issue of energy efficiency. We have previously expressed concern about reductions in the fuel poverty budget, which have been somewhat but not entirely redeemed in the budget and the spending review. We are all rightly concerned about the rising fuel costs, which threaten to increase fuel poverty. Renewable energy is welcome, but there are cost issues, and we must keep driving down fuel poverty. That means that we must address the issues of costs and consumption and tackle energy efficiency. We must ensure that homes are energy efficient and insulated. Reducing consumption is also crucial. We welcome the Scottish Government’s ambition on renewables as outlined in the motion, but we look forward to the details about how its ambition will be achieved so that we can be confident that we have a sustainable energy policy that will meet Scotland’s needs.

Further to Patricia Ferguson’s comments, what evidence has the Scottish Government obtained, and what research has it carried out, in considering whether to establish an enterprise zone in West Scotland or any other area, to show that enterprise zones will stimulate new economic activity, rather than just displacing it from other areas, as happened in the 1980s when the policy was first pursued by the Thatcher Government?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. This year, the budget process will lack the drama of budgets in the previous parliamentary session. No knife-edge votes or brinkmanship will take place, and Mr Swinney will not need to turn to the Conservative group, on which he could always rely, in his hour of need. The Government has a majority and can pass the budget that it wants. However, even if the process has no drama, all of us in the Parliament are keenly aware that the budget and the spending review are critical. The budget must be for economic growth, because the challenge that faces our economy is huge. The most recent gross domestic product figures show that the Scottish economy is on the cusp of contracting again. Growth was only 0.1 per cent, which was lower than the rate in the rest of the United Kingdom. The unemployment rate fell in the most recent figures, but youth unemployment increased again to levels that have not been seen in our country since the early 1990s and John Major’s Government. The Scottish Government often complains about the powers that it does not have, but now must be the time to focus on the significant powers that it does have to strengthen our economy. Even with the cut in the Scottish Government’s budget, its control of spending—which is still not far off £30 billion—is a powerful weapon in meeting the economic challenges that we face. The Scottish Government tells us that this is a budget for growth and that it is, in difficult times, delivering investment that will stimulate high-growth industries such as renewables. It says that it will reform the public sector, tackle problems such as youth unemployment and invest in prevention and not only in cures. Of course we can agree with the sentiment behind all that, but we must question whether the budget will deliver what it sets out to deliver. Aspects of the budget will have damaging impacts—not only socially, but economically. That is why we will make the case that the budget needs to change. That is not to say that we do not acknowledge that Mr Swinney has had a difficult job to do in producing the budget. He is dealing with a budget that is £1 billion lower than that in 2010 as a result of the Westminster coalition Government’s spending plans. Labour members do not disagree with the Scottish Government that the cuts are too fast and too deep and that they threaten the recovery. However, the rub for the Scottish National Party is that it has known for more than a year exactly how much its budget would be. We said that the SNP should have published a full spending review last year, as the Welsh Government did, and we have argued that the delay in publishing the spending review has caused further damaging uncertainty, particularly in the public sector. While the rest of us did not have the detailed figures for the spending review period, the SNP did. It made commitments at the election in the full knowledge of what its budget would be, so the budget is its responsibility. The Scottish Government cannot pass the buck for the decisions that it has made. The budget might meet the SNP’s political priorities, but let us be clear: Mr Swinney has pulled no rabbit out of the hat. The budget holds a great deal of pain for key parts of our economy and many people in our society. We have fundamental concerns about the budget plans that have been set out for local authorities. The fact that the overall budgets for councils are not being cut in cash terms tells only part of the story. Major real-terms cuts in council spending will be made. UK inflation is higher than was expected a year ago and, by 2015, prices are predicted to have increased by 13.3 per cent on their 2010 levels. It is clear that, far from protecting councils from cuts, the Scottish Government is passing on the pain. A crucial part of that is that it seeks once again to pass on to local authorities the responsibility for its pledges, too—the five-year council tax freeze, and the pledges on police numbers, teacher numbers and more. That is all taking place when the Christie commission tells us that the gap between revenue and demand for local authorities will be some £3 billion by 2016. If councils are to meet the costs of the SNP’s pledges, more council workers will have to lose their jobs and further service cuts will have to be made. The evidence from the previous parliamentary session is that education and social work budgets will be particularly badly hit. More public sector jobs will go—with all the consequences of that to our economy—some of the most vulnerable people in our communities will be denied the services that they depend on, and local education budgets, which are crucial to our young people, will be hit. The Scottish Government might think that that is a good political trick, but the cuts will not be council cuts; rather, they will be the Scottish Government’s cuts because of decisions that it has taken, and I have no doubt that they will be strongly resisted in communities throughout Scotland. We know that there is great concern among our local authority leaders—at least among those who are allowed to be concerned—about the settlement. That is clear from the fact that there is no agreement—I understand that this is the case—with local authority leaders that the settlement is adequate in a number of key areas. On maintaining police numbers at the current level, all that has been agreed is that there will be flat cash settlements for police boards. There is no commitment that that will be enough to maintain police numbers. We have already voiced concerns about the loss of hundreds of police staff posts. Despite the many statements that were made in advance of the election on the Scottish Government’s policy of no compulsory redundancies, no such agreement has been reached with local authorities, and there is, of course, great concern among councils about Mr Swinney’s plans to cut their capital spending by £120 million and £100 million in the next two years in the expectation that they will borrow to fill that gap over that period. I am a supporter of the Scottish Government having borrowing powers at a higher level and at a faster rate than those that are proposed in the Scotland Bill, but in asking local authorities to do its borrowing for it, Mr Swinney has received no commitment that that will happen. Given the financial pressures that local authorities are already under, that cannot be surprising, especially because he has apparently not said whether he will reimburse councils for the substantial interest payments that will accrue on those loans. We can only hope that that move will not mean that planned local infrastructure investment will be stalled or cancelled. We do not believe that it is a fiscal stimulus; rather, it is sleight of hand. The matter is crucial, because one issue on which we and the Scottish Government agree in principle is the need to maximise spending on infrastructure in order to stimulate economic growth. Therefore, we welcome the other action to reduce the impact of the cut to the capital budgets from the UK Government, but it is now vital that more be done to deliver key infrastructure projects more quickly. In the previous session, we made it clear that we did not believe that sufficient progress was being made on school building programmes, and we opposed the decision to axe the Glasgow airport rail link project. We believe that it will be important for the Scottish Government to set clear timescales in this session for progress on its key infrastructure projects, particularly as we have heard only this week of the prospect of delays in the Borders rail project. I know that key projects in my region are delayed, and there are several projects to which the Scottish Government has said that it is committed that are either delayed or for which there is no clear timescale. The cabinet secretary has said that £2.5 billion will be available through the Scottish Futures Trust. In response to our proposal for a Scottish infrastructure bank, he said that the Scottish Government is already levering in high levels of private investment. Members should therefore be able to expect that those projects will now proceed without delay. Delay in them represents failure to take the action that is required to stimulate growth. The Scottish Government has for too long talked about projects rather than getting on with the business of delivering them; that needs to change. We are also particularly concerned about what the budget will mean for spending on education. We will take time to scrutinise the implications for higher education and for our universities’ ability to bridge the funding gap with their English counterparts. We have already said that we are concerned about local education budgets, and it is clear that further education is also a major loser in the budget. Further education should be a focus for investment when we still have skills gaps in our economy and rising youth unemployment. Year-on-year cuts will mean teaching staff going and cuts in course provision. It is hard to square that with the Scottish Government’s stated goals of guaranteeing places in full-time training or education for all 16 to 19-year olds and tackling youth unemployment. That budget decision undermines that work and comes at the cost of opportunities for our young people. The Scottish Government has said that it will protect the health budget, but today we hear from nurses that efficiencies are becoming cuts to the front line. We have already seen 1,700 nurses’ jobs go since 2009. The budget has consequences for teachers, nurses, patients and pupils.

I will be outlining our different priorities in this speech. I am pleased that Mark McDonald made that point, as I am about to come to them. Obviously, I would have liked to have been in a position to set the budget, but it has been set by the Scottish Government, and it is for it to account for the decisions that it has made. We are being asked to take part in this budget process. This is the start of that process. We will do all that we can to improve the budget, because there is no doubt that the budget very much needs to be improved. Earlier, I said that the Government has a majority and will pass the budget that it wants. However, I acknowledge that the cabinet secretary has said that he will seek consensus and will continue to speak to other parties during the budget process. I have made it clear today that we have grave concerns about important aspects of the budget, but we will, of course, engage in any opportunities that we are given for discussion of the changes that might be made to the budget as it is debated in Parliament. We welcome such an approach. We will continue to press for proposals that we have brought forward and which we believe will help to contribute to the stated aim of the budget, which is to promote growth. We want to see broader initiatives to promote higher levels of employment, which is why we will continue to call for an expansion of the future jobs fund. We welcome the fact that the initiative has started in the voluntary sector, but we believe that it should be extended to the private sector. We support the goal of creating a low-carbon economy and growing the renewables sector, for which investment and infrastructure will be crucial. We will continue to make the case for our green new deal policy, which would make 10,000 homes energy efficient, and would tackle fuel poverty and create 1,000 jobs and apprenticeships. We will also continue to make the case for a living wage for all public sector workers and for public sector contracts to make provisions for a living wage, too. In these times of pay freezes and higher inflation, it is all the more important that we protect the most poorly paid people in our society. We agree with the cabinet secretary’s analysis of the UK Government’s pensions policy. We hope that he will engage with trade unions on those issues, although he has limited room for manoeuvre. We believe that he is right not to force changes in the local government scheme. This is the start of a process around determining the spending review. Winning the vote in this Parliament will be the easy part for the Scottish Government. I believe that it will be far harder for it to win beyond this chamber the argument that this is indeed a budget for growth and the protection of public services, because key decisions that have been made in this budget by this Government will mean cuts to services and opportunities missed to invest in growth. I hope that the Scottish Government will take seriously the case that we will make for this budget to change, because it will need to change if it is to attract our support and, I believe, the support of many others in this country.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is an answer: Ed Balls has set out a different approach, which is to make the cuts over a longer timescale. In fact, has George Osborne’s approach not been shown to be the wrong one? Growth is shrinking in our economy. Only yesterday, the IMF revised down the forecast for growth in the UK economy. It is clear that the chancellor’s plan is simply not working.

When the First Minister announced the Scottish Government’s calls for the Scotland Bill to be extended to give new powers to his ministers, we made it clear that we would not simply reject all the proposals but would judge them on the evidence that was brought forward on how they would benefit the Scottish economy. That is the test: not new powers for their own sake, but whether they will boost our economy, particularly at this time of low growth and cuts in public spending. On borrowing powers, we have made common cause with the Scottish Government and—I hope—with other parties in the chamber, particularly given the comments by Nick Clegg yesterday on infrastructure. We support the calls for the Scottish Government's borrowing powers to be increased and accelerated beyond the current provisions in the Scotland Bill so that we can invest in new infrastructure and, through that, boost our economy. We are still scrutinising the other calls for new powers. For example, we have yet to hear from the Scottish Government the detail of the case for devolution of excise duty. On corporation tax, the Scottish Government has failed to make its case. It has pointed to some prominent individuals who support devolution and the cutting of corporation tax, which we heard again today. However, for every supporter of the cause, a cast of others are unconvinced or downright opposed. As Iain Gray said earlier, the Government managed to build a consensus against the proposal between the Confederation of British Industry Scotland and the Scottish Trades Union Congress, which is no mean feat. Why does the Scottish Government’s case break down? It is because, not for the first time, the sums do not add up. Cutting corporation tax is not a panacea for our economic tribulations. The Scottish Government’s case must be examined and it often rests on the example of the Republic of Ireland.

I do not agree with the analysis put forward: there appears to be scant evidence that taking that step will achieve the additional economic activity in areas that has been argued. There are other things that the Scottish Government can do.

The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland tells us that there is very little evidence indeed to suggest that corporation tax cuts in this country have resulted in more revenue from corporation tax and more economic activity, so I very much doubt the figure that Mr Stewart has given. The Scottish Government often rests on the case of the Republic of Ireland. The minister will no doubt be aware of the report by PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Corporation tax: Game changer or game over?” The report found that there was no evidence that the Republic of Ireland’s corporation tax rate had been the prime driver of overseas investment. In fact, PWC said that 30 years of low corporation tax had delivered “comparatively little” direct foreign investment. In a separate study, PWC concluded: “Low Corporation Tax is not a key driver of investment for foreign businesses locating in the UK, ranking 17th in a list that prioritised: language; culture and values; infrastructure; skills; and proximity to market”. Those are the issues that should be the focus of the Government’s activity, with the powers that it has. Let us consider the international evidence on whether lowering corporation tax benefits the economy. Countries that have a lower rate of corporation tax than the UK include Portugal, Greece, Ireland, Iceland and Spain. Those countries do not appear to feature on the Scottish Government’s current list of members of the arc of prosperity—if it still manages to find an arc of prosperity. Let us also consider the evidence from the Scottish Government that lowering corporation tax would create growth. The Government published estimates that a reduction in corporation tax from 23 to 20 per cent would increase gross domestic product by 1.4 per cent and increase employment by 1.1 per cent after 20 years. We must wait 20 years in the hope that the estimates will be realised. At the Scotland Bill Committee meeting this week, the economist Professor Chris Heady described the estimates as “brave”, in the finest tradition of Sir Humphrey. The prediction is brave, indeed. It does not take account of, for example, what happens if other devolved nations cut their corporation tax rates. If we follow the Scottish Government’s logic, why would businesses choose to pay corporation tax at 20 per cent in Scotland if Northern Ireland has cut its rate to 12.5 per cent to compete with the Republic? Where will the Scottish Government’s forecasts be if all that happens is that the devolved nations of the UK embark on a race to the bottom on corporation tax? The Government’s proposal to cut corporation tax is risky and the establishment of different rates across the UK would be very risky, at the least. The STUC has made a strong point that such tax competition is harmful to sustainable long-term growth and to the fair distribution of the proceeds of growth. The approach might well encourage businesses to ensure that their taxable profits arise in Scotland, but that does not mean that businesses will transfer economic activity here.

Such ambitions could be achieved if the Scottish Government used the powers that it has on, for example, business rates. It could be counterproductive to change the headline rate of corporation tax, thereby opening up avenues to the risks that Patrick Harvie talked about. I ask for a different approach, although I acknowledge the issues that he rightly raised. There is a real danger of companies engaging in a brass-plating exercise and simply robbing other parts of the UK of corporation tax income without attracting jobs or creating extra growth in Scotland. The evidence to support the Scottish Government’s contention that the measure would boost growth is, at best, hotly contested and weak—and that is before we consider the important issue of how the measure would be paid for. The Scottish Government contests the HM Revenue and Customs figure of £2.6 billion. That is a dispute for the Government to have with HMRC, but whether we are talking about half that figure or just hundreds of millions of pounds, the question is how the money will be found in the Scottish Government’s budget, particularly given all the Government’s commitments in a range of areas, including its commitments on higher education funding and freezing council tax for five years. If cutting public expenditure to provide for a corporation tax cut means losing thousands more public sector jobs in a gamble to create more private sector jobs, on the basis of flimsy evidence, then we should not take it. The motion refers to Northern Ireland. The issue is hotly contested there, where it has been estimated that the proposal will cost £400 million. Trade unionists there do not support the move. Over the summer, John Swinney presented a cut in corporation tax as a cure for our economic ills, but today he has left Mr Ewing to make the case for the Scottish Government. I am sure that Mr Ewing will make the case for tax cuts unfettered by the constraints of a social-democratic analysis with gusto on this occasion. Today, the SNP has managed to put itself to the right even of the Scottish Conservatives in arguing for business tax cuts and cuts in public spending. I do not imagine that that will cause Mr Ewing much discomfort, but I cannot believe that all SNP members will be quite so comfortable with that, because the plans are not a magic bullet—in fact, they represent voodoo economics. It is impossible to sustain Scandinavian levels of social investment with a Reaganomic approach to taxation. The SNP would have us believe of this proposal and of its plans for independence that it is possible, but its sums do not add up. That is why we will oppose the Government motion today. I move amendment S4M-00856.4, to leave out from “recognises” to end and insert: “believes that proposals by the Scottish Government for new powers to be included in the Scotland Bill must be backed by evidence that their devolution will benefit the Scottish economy; believes that, in its case for corporation tax, the Scottish Government has failed to provide the required evidence that such a move will be affordable or beneficial to the economy; notes that neither CBI Scotland nor the STUC support this proposal, and recognises that the broader issues of tax competition within the UK are complex and challenging and that no decision has yet been made on the devolution of corporation tax to Northern Ireland.”

Will the minister give way on that point?

The cabinet secretary mentioned opportunities for employment in the high-growth sectors. Does he agree that it is important to have more opportunities for young people to undertake training and apprenticeships specifically in those sectors, given the unfortunate figures that were released today that show another increase in youth unemployment?

We welcome the debate on the Scottish Government’s economic strategy. This morning, some of our newspapers had harsh words for the refreshed strategy. We, too, are not unconditionally positive about the new document, but we welcome its publication. We have joined the Scottish Government in calling for a plan B from the coalition Government at Westminster, whose economic strategy clearly is not working, but we have said that it is equally important for a new plan to be put in place here in Scotland. We continue to hear from ministers the mantra that the recession in Scotland was “shorter and shallower” than that in the rest of the UK, but the reality is that we continue to be in a parlous economic situation. The most recent gross domestic product figures show the Scottish economy on the cusp of returning to contracting. Growth was at only 0.1 per cent, which was lower than that for the rest of the UK. Today, figures from the Scottish Retail Consortium show the second-worst annual drop in sales for 12 years. Today’s employment figures show an increase in employment and a drop in unemployment, which is against the UK trend. That is, of course, welcome, but there is absolutely no room for complacency, given that the benefit claimant count has increased significantly and youth unemployment is up again to levels that have not been seen since John Major’s Government in the early 1990s. That is why we have said, and continue to say, that the economic challenges require a new response from the Scottish Government. Despite ministers’ focus on demands for new powers—which we heard again at the end of the cabinet secretary’s speech—the Scottish Government is far from powerless in the situation. It has at its disposal significant levers to influence our economy. How it spends a budget that remains in the order of £30 billion is crucial in shaping our economic fortunes. That is why the spending review, which is to be published next week, will be important to our wider economic future. Our welcome for the strategy document is qualified, because we would have liked more new thinking, given the new concerns about future developments in the Scottish and world economies. Many of the initiatives are welcome, but they have been previously announced. We can, of course, particularly welcome the proposals in the document that were brought forward by Scottish Labour. It was refreshing, if surprising, to read in The Scotsman last week George Kerevan—of all people—rightly giving Labour the credit for the initiatives on modern apprenticeships. He could also have given us credit for other policies, such as the first-foot scheme for first-time house buyers, but I am sure that he will get round to doing that at another time. We await with interest the announcement from the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning on the opportunities for all initiative. We sought a statutory right to a job or training for all 16 to 19-year-olds, but we welcome the guarantee that the Scottish Government is putting in place. The importance of progress in that area is made clear from today’s youth unemployment figures. The document rightly identifies the opportunities that exist in our economy even in these difficult times, and it is sensible to focus on areas in the Scottish economy in which there is particular potential for growth. The Scottish Government is right to highlight the economic benefits of moving towards a low-carbon economy, but many of the proposals are not new—I refer to the targets on renewables, the renewable infrastructure investment fund and the creation of the four enterprise zones. That is, of course, a UK coalition initiative that brings back a policy from the days of Margaret Thatcher and about which we are understandably sceptical. Therefore, I hope that the strategy is a process rather than an event. Given the challenges that we face, we must look for more new ideas for promoting growth. I have said that we need new ideas and fresh thinking; it is therefore incumbent on us to suggest such ideas and thinking. We have made proposals that the Scottish Government has not yet adopted or, at least, has not adopted in full. We want to see broader initiatives to promote higher levels of employment, which is why we will continue to call for an expansion of the future jobs fund. We welcome the fact that that initiative has started in the voluntary sector, but believe that it should be extended to the private sector, and we would like there to be a particular focus in the scheme and in modern apprenticeships on the high-growth sectors, such as renewable energy, food and drink, and the creative industries. We want a focus on the kind of experiences that the apprentices whom Mr Swinney visited in Fife are having. We want such experiences to be enjoyed by more young people in Scotland. We will also continue to make the case for our green new deal policy. We believe that that scheme could make some 10,000 homes energy efficient, which would be a crucial contribution to tackling fuel poverty at a time when energy costs are increasing. It would also create some 1,000 jobs and apprenticeships. We must boost employment and create a better environment for business. We welcome the work that the document outlines on helping more Scottish businesses to win contracts, but we remain disappointed that the legislative programme did not include a procurement bill. We believe that there was an opportunity to respond to the concern of small and medium-sized businesses in particular that the current procurement process is still too complex and offers too few opportunities for local businesses to gain contracts from local public sector agencies, so we want more progress in that area. We have said for a long time that developing our infrastructure is crucial to ensuring that our economy can grow as it should, and we have previously expressed concerns about infrastructure projects throughout Scotland being delayed or being pledged by the Scottish Government but still being unfulfilled. That is damaging to businesses—in our construction sector, in particular. The Scottish Building Federation has made it clear that its members are feeling the pain. That is why we believe that there must be a clear timescale from ministers on when projects are to move forward. Investment in infrastructure is investment in economic growth. We therefore propose another new measure: we ask the Scottish Government to consult on the potential for the establishment of an infrastructure bank—an i-bank—in Scotland. The strategy document repeatedly and correctly highlights the block on investment that results from an inability to access finance at reasonable rates of interest. It is clear that lobbying the banks is not enough, so we believe that we need to engage in new thinking. A Scottish i-bank would be established principally for the purpose of lending for construction of infrastructure. We believe that the Scottish Government’s future borrowing powers, which we would like to see extended further still and accelerated, offer increased potential to make the proposal work, and that we should explore with the business community other opportunities for investing in such an institution. Other European countries and states in America already have similar banks. In Germany, there is a state-backed institution that funds business schemes and sees environmental issues as its key activity. In France, there is a body that offers social housing providers loans at a low interest rate, with conditions attached relating to energy efficiency. In California, there is already an infrastructure bank, and now President Obama has suggested that there be a federal i-bank in the USA. The proposal is for Scottish Government funding and, potentially, other funding streams to be used to unlock investment, particularly in infrastructure, by offering loans at affordable rates. We realise that that requires further research and consultation, particularly with the business community. We do not demand that the Scottish Government immediately establish an i-bank, but we ask it to give it serious consideration and to consult on it. The economic situation demands fresh thinking. If we agree that investment in infrastructure is key to encouraging growth, as we do, then we must look for new ways to make it happen.

In our manifesto, we said that the cost would be £40 million. We understand that that would require investment from the Scottish Government budget. We have put the case for that to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth and we will continue to do so once we have seen the draft budget and have reflected on the consequences of that for the spending review. The economic strategy document also talks of uncertainty damaging economic growth. It will come as no surprise that I agree with the business leaders who identify the on-going questions over the independence referendum as creating uncertainty in our economy and threatening growth. I believe that that undermines the very economic strategy that the cabinet secretary has brought forward. We need an economic strategy that will succeed. I have said that we wanted more new ideas in the economic strategy and that we want it to go further, but that is why we want to make a positive contribution to its development. I hope that the cabinet secretary will listen seriously to contributions from other parties who wish to see the plan develop. However, we can all agree that, even in these straitened economic times, the ingenuity and resilience of the Scottish people means that we can move through this period and into one of greater prosperity. If ministers are truly focused on that goal, we can achieve it. We must achieve it, because it is a challenge that our country cannot afford to lose. I move amendment S4M-0844.4, to leave out from “supports” to end and insert, “but while also welcoming a focus on accelerating economic recovery and tackling unemployment particularly among young people, believes that the Scottish Government needs to make full use of its existing powers to stimulate economic growth; endorses the goal of the Scottish Government to support the recovery through expanding capital investment, raising access to finance and boosting consumer confidence, and therefore calls on the Scottish Government to consult on the establishment of an infrastructure bank and to bring forward a budget bill that explicitly and clearly supports economic recovery.”

Will the member give way?

Both the Scottish Trades Union Congress and CBI Scotland oppose the devolution of corporation tax, so do they, too, not understand the needs of Scotland?

5. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to support the promotion of the visual arts in Aberdeen. (S4O-00136)

The cabinet secretary might be aware of Peacock Visual Arts in Aberdeen. It secured funding from the Arts Council for an exciting new art centre in Aberdeen’s Union Terrace gardens, but those plans have not been able to go ahead due to a proposal to create a city square there. Can the Cabinet Secretary assure me that the Scottish Government and Creative Scotland will actively assist Peacock so that a new proposal can be progressed for a new contemporary art centre that would benefit the city economically and culturally?

The First Minister has said that economic growth is the focus of the legislative programme. We welcome that intention, but what matters now is that it is matched by the actions of the Scottish Government. Given the economic challenges that we face, the Government must use the significant powers that it already has to deal with those problems, which include low growth in our economy. On the rising level of youth unemployment, in particular, we have called for concerted action, so we look forward to hearing more from the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning on the opportunities for all initiative. In addition, we hope for further action in the budget bill and in the spending review. All the proposed legislation that has been announced today, whether it be on water or public sector reform, should seek to contribute to the goal of creating growth. We would have liked to see more legislative proposals with a direct locus in the economy. In the previous session of Parliament, ministers often talked of “the purpose”. That purpose—which often came in capital letters, so that we would know how important it was—was achieving economic growth. We have heard rather less about “the purpose” recently—certainly since Mr Mather took his leave of the Government, taking his mind maps with him—but the purpose of achieving economic growth must be at the heart of the Government’s work now because we know that our economy is in trouble. The most recent gross domestic product figures show that the Scottish economy is on the cusp of contracting again. The figures for Scotland were worse than those for the rest of the UK. I am afraid that the First Minister’s boast that the recession has been shorter and shallower in Scotland than it has in the rest of the UK, which we heard again today, now rings somewhat hollow, and we look to the Government for a plan for growth. We know that the Scottish Government’s cause is not helped by a UK Government that refuses to acknowledge the evident need for a plan B on the economy—there will be no disagreement between Mr Swinney and me on that. We have said that we need not just a plan B from Mr Osborne but a plan for Scotland from Mr Swinney, so the new Government economic strategy that Mr Swinney is to announce will be crucial. We will engage in that strategy, because it is vital that it makes a difference to our economic outlook, as must the budget bill and the spending review. As several members have said, immediately after the election, the Scottish Government demanded a number of new powers that it argued would boost economic growth. We have said that we will listen to any evidence that the Government produces in making its case for such powers, but we have also said that the problems are with us now and that ministers’ focus now must be on using the powers that they have to do what they can to improve our economy. When we discuss the budget bill, we will continue to argue that we must invest in growth, even in these tough times for public finances. Margo MacDonald (Lothian) (Ind) rose— For the sake of debate, I will give way to Margo MacDonald, although I might well regret it.

We are open to that debate. For example, we have said that the Government should have new and extensive borrowing powers that go beyond those that were proposed in the Scotland Bill. We will be keen to enter into the debate fully. However, the evidence for the need for a range of powers—such as those to set corporation tax and excise duty—has been somewhat lacking from the Scottish Government. We have an open mind, but we need the evidence to show how the powers would benefit our economy. We have powers now to make a huge difference to economic growth. Our biggest power is a £30 billion budget. We will make the case for an expanded future jobs fund, to give more opportunities for those who are without work to get into or go back into employment.

No—I want to make progress. We will press for a new green deal to provide investment to make 10,000 homes energy efficient and provide hundreds of jobs and training places. That would give our construction sector a much-needed boost and tackle fuel poverty. With rising energy prices, we will all be anxious that more Scots will end up being fuel poor. That is why it was not the right decision to cut the fuel poverty budget in the previous budget and why we ask ministers to take a different approach in the spending review. Tackling fuel poverty and poverty more widely in our society will benefit our economy, so we will continue to press for a living wage in the public sector and beyond. I said that we had hoped that the legislative programme would include more legislation that would directly affect the economy and a procurement bill. We have heard from small businesses that the opportunities for local businesses to benefit from contracts that public agencies award are still too few. Legislation on that would listen to business concerns, which is what the Scottish Government should do instead of dismissing them and attacking business leaders’ views, as it did last week. That was highly bizarre from a party that has done much to woo the business community. We need action to help business and make our public sector more efficient. [Interruption.] Presiding Officer, I understood that I had six minutes for my speech. The Deputy Presiding Officer (Elaine Smith) indicated agreement. I have used only five minutes and 40 seconds. I will talk briefly about public sector reform. As defenders of the public sector, we Labour members understand that we must also be public sector reformers. That is why we embrace and have led the arguments for a single police force and a single fire and rescue service. That must be about plans that will genuinely provide more efficiency, reinvest savings in the front line and protect local accountability. If the plans involve cuts to front-line services or reducing local accountability, we will of course hold the Government to account. However, we believe that the proposals can protect the front line in these difficult times for our economy. We have more debates on the economy to come. The legislative programme addresses some but not all of our concerns. The Government seeks new powers, but we still do not believe that it is doing all that it can to boost our economy with the powers that it has.

That is the priority of the people of Scotland and it should be the Parliament’s priority, too.

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement and welcome the scale of the Scottish Government’s ambition for our country to be a world leader in renewables. Having set that ambitious target, ministers face the key question of how they will achieve it and how they will show in this session of Parliament that they are on course to deliver on the 2020 pledge on renewables generation, which changed rapidly from a target of meeting 80 per cent of demand to one of meeting 100 per cent of demand. The road map, too, is welcome, but the projections for renewable electricity generation show the steep increase required in the years ahead to meet the target, particularly between 2015 and 2020. How often will the minister provide updates on the progress that is being made? What interim targets will he set in this session to show that the Scottish Government is on course for the overall 2020 target? The road map refers to the £70 million national renewables infrastructure fund, which is welcome, but it is likely to be a fraction of the investment required. How will the Scottish Government ensure that improvements in the infrastructure of our ports and other facilities—improvements that are necessary to realise the targets—are delivered? We still require more detail from ministers on how they will ensure that Scotland’s economy benefits from increasing manufacturing in the renewables sector. Will the minister bring further plans on that to Parliament, as it is vital if we are to reap all the rewards that we should reap from Scotland’s natural advantages in what is a vital industry for the future?

10. To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to support sports development across Scotland. (S4O-00101)

Does the minister share my concern that gross expenditure on sports development by Aberdeenshire Council is due to fall from nearly £1 million in 2009-10 to zero from 2012-13? Does she agree that investment in sports development throughout Scotland is vital as we look ahead to the Commonwealth games, and that Aberdeenshire Council’s decision is concerning, as such activities will apparently need to be self-funded in future? Will she discuss the matter with Aberdeenshire Council to ensure that there is appropriate investment in sports development in the future?

First, I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement. He has made a virtue of securing an underspend of only £12 million and, of course, if the UK Government is going to restrict the potential to use underspend in future years, that is sensible. However, is the key issue not that the Scottish Government should be able to use underspends—underspends that have been sensibly achieved—as it wishes? Indeed, in the past such underspends gave important flexibility in the budget—the cabinet secretary himself has planned to carry over some £130 million of underspend to next year. Can he confirm whether those funds are still to be carried over? Is it not therefore vital that the Treasury revisits its unilateral decision to retain the remaining balances from last year and that the Scottish Government is granted the flexibility that it should have to spend such funds in the future? The cabinet secretary also referred to the impending spending review. Given that he chose to delay its publication until after the election, will he publish his future plans at the earliest opportunity? Will he also tell us when the Scottish Government will provide a detailed response to the Christie commission’s important proposals for greater efficiency in the public sector, given their significance for public spending in the future and the urgency of these issues?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the copy of his statement and assure him that we will join him in opposing the approach that the UK Government has taken on public sector pensions and in calling for a change in its proposals. No one is saying that pensions should not be reviewed, but it is a fact that the huge hikes in contributions would mean that public sector workers, who already face a pay freeze and job cuts, would once again pay the price of the coalition’s cuts, which are too deep and too fast. It is the cabinet secretary’s responsibility to find a different way in Scotland. That is what the Scottish Parliament is for, and the cabinet secretary can find a different way in a number of areas. Simply passing the pain from Westminster when he can act to avoid the same mistakes here will not wash. Will the cabinet secretary therefore reassure me that he will enter into further negotiations with the trade unions before he makes any changes, and that he will not repeat the mistakes that the UK Government has made in failing to consult properly? In particular, is it not the case that there would be no reduction in funding through the Barnett formula for the Scottish Government if he decided not to make the changes for employees in the local government scheme? Indeed, is there not a risk that increasing contributions in that way might cause financial problems for that scheme if employees left it as a result? Given that we agree entirely that the UK Government is taking the wrong approach on the issue, surely the cabinet secretary will also agree that we should not simply follow its lead.

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will review its changes to the fuel poverty budget in light of the announcement of price increases by Scottish Power. (S4F-00051)

Does the First Minister agree that the most substantial contribution that energy companies can make to tackling fuel poverty is through exercising restraint on prices, particularly given that the increases hit poorest households the hardest? Given the reduction in fuel poverty spending in the Scottish Government’s most recent budget, does he agree that the next budget should include appropriate investment in tackling fuel poverty and making more homes energy efficient?

Will the cabinet secretary ensure that his directorates enable greater scrutiny of Government spending by Parliament by publishing figures at level 4 detail in his draft budget this September?

I congratulate Mark McDonald on securing this important members’ business debate on the changes in taxation for North Sea production that were announced at the last budget. The issue is crucial to north-east members and the decision is detrimental to the vital work of securing Aberdeen’s position as the energy capital of Europe and, as such, a key driver of Scotland’s national economy. There can be no doubt that the decision that was announced in the budget to increase tax on production and reduce tax relief for decommissioning, which Maureen Watt talked about, has already had a negative impact on the industry. Other members and representatives of the industry have talked about how the announcement came as a bolt from the blue, which furthers the changes’ destabilising effect by not allowing companies the time to at least factor them into their future plans. Many members from the north-east benefited from the briefing from Oil & Gas UK on these issues, as Lewis Macdonald said. It told us that a survey that it conducted showed that 60 projects—one new investment in four—were sufficiently affected by the budget that the probability that they will proceed has been reduced. We should not talk the industry down but we cannot hide from the scale of the problem that has been presented to us. Economists have estimated that £15 billion to £20 billion of tax revenue will be lost, with projects cancelled and platforms decommissioned, leaving the UK’s reserves in the ground and 15,000 fewer people in employment in the industry over the next decade. The tax changes clearly threaten the potential to maximise production from the North Sea and they threaten the potential to extend the future of production, and we should be deeply concerned about their impact on employment and on the north-east’s economy. There are those who will argue that taxing oil and gas production is the right thing to do as we move to greater production from renewable sources. That fails to recognise the extent of the involvement of major companies that, through their success in the oil and gas business, are able to diversify their investment into renewables projects. The workers who are in that industry now will diversify their skills into the growing renewables industry. We have also heard the argument about fuel prices. On fuel costs, the mistake was to put VAT up, which should not have been necessary. We welcome the First Minister’s submission to the Treasury, which was informed by the work of Alex Kemp, and which makes the case for the Treasury to change its approach. We hope that the submission will be given serious consideration. The UK Government should carefully consider all three proposals that are made in the submission, because there is still time to at least alleviate the impact of this damaging decision if the changes are made. The Scottish Government’s clear preference is for an investment rate of return allowance or an investment uplift allowance. However, the proposals for an extended field allowance could also be of benefit, as such schemes have already been shown to be successful. If an extended field allowance were coupled with further relief at the end of a field’s life, that would help to ensure that maximum reserves are extracted, as would not proceeding with the cap on tax relief on decommissioning. The change will be of extremely limited consequence to the UK budget during the next few years when budgets are going to be tight, but it will have far-reaching implications for the future of development, as it will make a material difference to decisions on whether projects will be affordable throughout their lifetime. I welcome the efforts that industry and the Scottish Government have made to engage in constructive dialogue with UK ministers on the issue. I hope that the discussions are fruitful because, if no amendment is made to the budget change, it will damage North Sea production, which is important for the economy not just of the north-east but of the whole of Scotland.

We believe that the question that requires to be answered when we debate whether the Parliament should have new powers is this: will the devolution of the powers in question benefit Scotland and, in particular, help us to grow our economy? It is not about getting new powers for their own sake. We believe that the case for additional borrowing powers for the Scottish Government certainly has been made, and it is right that that initiative should be supported across the chamber. It was the Calman commission that made the case for the Scottish Government to have further borrowing powers. In the previous session, the Scotland Bill Committee made the case for those powers to be introduced more quickly and, indeed, for an extension in their scope. Therefore, when the Scottish Government makes the case for them to aid economic growth, it is right that we should support it, and we will support its motion. I noticed that, as the First Minister walked along Downing Street in the rain yesterday, he did not deign to share the shelter of his umbrella with the cabinet secretary and Mr Crawford, who were left to brave the elements. I am happy to report that the cabinet secretary has taken a far more collegiate approach with his motion, and I welcome the fact that, even with a Government majority, he has worked hard over the past few days to ensure that the motion receives the widest possible support in the debate. We welcome that approach. I hope that a clear message from the chamber today will aid fruitful negotiations between the cabinet secretary and his UK counterparts. The meeting of the devolved heads of Government with the Prime Minister yesterday seems to have been reasonably cordial in tone at least, even if the tone has not been that in today’s press. However, we hope that the dialogue on the issue that we are discussing at least will be productive. Indeed, it seems that we have good news on the timescale for introducing the borrowing powers and their establishment this year. Getting good news from Nick Clegg is a welcome change. We look forward to hearing further details of the announcement that he indicated. The cabinet secretary has made it clear that his goal in seeking additional borrowing powers is to protect investment in our economy, particularly at a time when the capital budget has been cut to such an extent by the UK Government. There is a clear need for the Scottish Government to be able to use borrowing powers to take the required action. The GDP figures in the last quarter of 2010 may well have been better for Scotland than for the rest of the UK, but they still showed that while the UK economy contracted by 0.5 per cent, our economy contracted by 0.4 per cent. Therefore, there can be no room for complacency in tackling the economic challenges that Scotland faces. Business organisations are still reporting a lack of confidence in the economic outlook, and the International Monetary Fund has revised downwards its economic growth forecast for the UK. It is clear that that presents us with significant challenges in Scotland. We have argued that preserving Government investment in our economy and infrastructure should be a key part of the strategy to strengthen growth in Scotland. We do not want to see key infrastructure projects being stalled and more jobs being threatened because of the cut to the capital budget. Four years ago, we took issue with the Scottish Government on its decision to delay new school buildings and new transport projects while it established the Scottish Futures Trust, because we believed that that was damaging for important sectors such as our construction industry, in which jobs were lost at that time.

It certainly made no sense to delay those projects at that time. I make it clear that I am happy that we can instead endorse a strategy on borrowing powers from the Scottish Government that is all about avoiding delay in establishing new infrastructure and, I hope, preserving and encouraging employment in these challenging times. With additional flexibility being given to ministers, it will be for them to ensure that crucial projects go ahead, from the sick kids hospital in Edinburgh to the transport projects in Aberdeen that are close to my heart and to the heart of Lewis Macdonald. I am sure that Lewis Macdonald will refer to a number of key projects in his closing remarks. We support bringing forward the use of the powers in question and hope that the UK Government has now accepted that point as well. The point of gaining borrowing powers is to be able to pump-prime the economy and create jobs and wealth. We cannot afford to wait for too long, as every delay can mean the difference between new jobs and no jobs. We have previously suggested that the powers should be available earlier so, if they are to be introduced in the current financial year, that is welcome. Given that that is within the same spending review period as under the previous plan to introduce the powers in 2014, we believe that it is eminently achievable. So, in one sense, there should be no surprise at the announcement from the Deputy Prime Minister earlier today. The Scottish Government is facing a cut in its capital budget of £790 million in this financial year, which is why there is urgency in the debate about how ministers can access additional borrowing. We believe that the case has been made for increasing the amount that the Scottish Government should be able to borrow for capital beyond the £2.2 billion cap that is proposed in the Scotland Bill and the limit of 10 per cent of the Scottish capital budget in any one year. As the cabinet secretary mentioned, the Scotland Bill Committee did not believe that there was a “principled basis” for those limits, and several witnesses made the point to the committee that the levels that are proposed in relation to the Scottish budget and future tax revenue are modest. We believe that ministers should be given more flexibility. It has been helpful to hear from the cabinet secretary his current thinking on what an appropriate extent of borrowing might be. He referred to the £5 billion figure that the committee discussed. We think that those are sensible directions in which to travel. On short-term borrowing, we agree with the Scotland Bill Committee that the currently proposed limits should be increased, not least because of the penalties that the Scottish Government would face under the bill if the revenue that the Government received in tax was lower than forecast. However, we believe that that issue also needs to be reconsidered and that, as the committee said, those provisions should be removed from the bill. Professor Anton Muscatelli said: “doubling that limit would not be exaggerated in terms of prudence and in terms of giving the Scottish Parliament a bit more room for manoeuvre”. We also agree with the committee that the four-year timescale to repay short-term borrowing is unnecessarily short and should be extended. The Government’s motion calls for the Scottish Government to have access to wider sources of borrowing. The Scotland Bill already provides for the Scottish Government to borrow from the national loans fund to attract favourable interest rates, as well as to borrow finance commercially. The motion raises the issue of the potential for the Scottish Government to issue bonds. We believe that that should also be on the table for discussion between the Scottish and UK ministers, particularly given the Scotland Bill Committee’s view that there is no reason why there should be an impediment in statute to their use by the Scottish Government. We believe that the extent of the powers can be increased in those ways while remaining entirely in line with a responsible approach to borrowing. Our amendment seeks to reinforce the point about the need for a sustainable approach and refers to the principle that was outlined in the Scotland Bill Committee report that the limit of borrowing should be set with reference to the level of debt that can be prudently serviced through tax revenue. The key issue is that borrowing levels should be affordable, and the cabinet secretary has made it clear that he agrees with the importance of that approach.

We are discussing what can be achieved in the current negotiations and through proposed legislation that is in process. From that point of view, I am trying to be helpful to the Scottish Government. In relation to ensuring that the right levels of borrowing are set, that should be done in agreement between the UK Government and the Scottish ministers. That is the appropriate way in which to proceed. On other additional powers, we believe that the Scottish Government has yet to make a compelling case. For example, it has not made such a case on how devolving corporation tax will benefit our economy, particularly given that we do not know what the rate would be. When we have a nationalist Government seeking a range of new powers, of course we will cast a sceptical eye over the case that is made. We will not hesitate to object if the Scottish Government asks for more powers when there is no justification for that and if we believe that the result might destabilise our economy. However, we will support the Scottish Government if the evidence exists that a proposed change will benefit our country and economy. On borrowing powers, the case has been made by the Scottish Government, as it has been made by members across the chamber and as it was made by the Calman commission. The economic situation that Scotland faces makes additional borrowing powers not simply desirable but necessary—and soon. That is why, on borrowing, we support the action that the cabinet secretary is taking to secure agreement from UK ministers to go substantially beyond what is proposed in the Scotland Bill, and that is why we will support the Government motion today. I move amendment S4M-235.1, to insert after “bonds”: “; recommends that the total limit should be set by reference to the capacity of the Scottish Government to finance debt prudently from devolved tax revenue”.

Unlike Mr Harvie, we still believe in a United Kingdom economy. The borrowing from the Scottish Government will be part of UK national borrowing. That is why we believe that it is sensible for the Scottish ministers and UK ministers to agree limits.

This has been a good debate, and it is right that we should be debating ambitious targets for renewable energy production, because it is an opportunity that Scotland must seize for the future, and we should all embrace that ambition. Like Alex Johnstone, I congratulate all those members who have made their maiden speeches today. From the Labour Party, we had excellent first speeches from Claudia Beamish and Mark Griffin, and we also heard excellent maiden speeches from members of the governing party. Having been fortunate enough to contribute in all the debates that have been held in Parliament since our return, I can say that in each one we have heard excellent maiden speeches from members of all parties, which bodes well for the quality of debate. Of course, we have also enjoyed the contributions of our more experienced members. Fellow old-stagers have included Duncan McNeil and his well-argued girn for Inverclyde, which ministers will ignore at their peril. I also welcome Mr Ewing to his new brief. We did not always see eye to eye on justice matters in the previous session, but he always had an open door and was ready to discuss with me why, in his opinion, I was wrong. We welcome that open door and his willingness to work with members from other parties. The rewards for Scotland in becoming a world leader in renewable energy are clear, in terms of creating a sustainable and successful economy, cutting carbon emissions and reaping the rewards of our involvement in a fast-growing industry. We are keen to support ministers in achieving that goal. As a member for North East Scotland, I am well aware of Scotland’s potential to be the green powerhouse of Europe through our natural resources and the skills of our people. We are already the energy powerhouse of Europe through our successful oil and gas sector. The skills and technology that have been developed through our key role in that industry are being deployed in the renewables sector. I agree with what Dennis Robertson said about the skills of our people in Scotland and how they give us a significant advantage for the future. We can agree with and support much of what the minister said, such as the ambition for 130,000 jobs in the renewables sector by 2020. We look forward to the publication of the renewables road map and hope that the minister will take on board some of the points that Duncan McNeil and Mary Scanlon made, such as on ensuring that we benefit from constructing the infrastructure. We hope that a range of the points that members have made will be taken on board. We applaud the ambition to develop marine renewables. I visited EMEC in 2005 after it first received Government support. We welcome the plans for offshore wind farms across Scotland, including those that will be off the coast of my region. There is tremendous potential there, and, as Rob Gibson said, we should not underestimate the scale of our potential to succeed in the renewables industry and to have ambitious targets for the future. We believe that we should be looking to make the maximum possible contribution to the UK’s and Europe’s renewable energy targets. We look forward to working with the Scottish Government on all those areas. As Sarah Boyack said, we hope that the minister will follow through on his offer to take seriously other parties’ ideas, and we are keen to discuss with him the plans that we have put forward for a green new deal to create new jobs and to provide low-carbon electricity for 10,000 homes, which Sarah Boyack mentioned. We are also keen for there to be greater co-operation between Government and local authorities to make best use of the feed-in tariff and the renewable heat incentive—which, I point out to Kevin Stewart, were initiated by Ed Miliband—and to look at supporting other initiatives around the country, including the work that is being done on combined heat and power in Aberdeen, to which Lewis Macdonald referred. A number of members mentioned other important goals. We need further and speedier action on energy efficiency, not least to tackle fuel poverty—Nigel Don, Mark Griffin and Mark McDonald all talked about the importance of that. As Claudia Beamish said, we should be investing in a sustainable schools infrastructure and in the ability of our young people to contribute in future to making Scotland a leader in renewable energy. We think that those are all important ambitions. We recognise that, when it comes to renewable energy, the Administration has shown no shortage of ambition, but given that, at the end of 2010, around 25 per cent of our electricity was generated from renewables, ministers must be clear not just to MSPs but to the wider public, businesses and taxpayers about how its plans will be delivered. Jackson Carlaw asked whether that would depend on the Government having new powers, but the understanding must be that the commitment was made under the powers that are in place, and we expect ministers to provide details of how they will achieve it under the existing settlement. As I said in yesterday’s debate, when ministers put forward the case for new powers, it is reasonable for us to ask what they will be used for and how they will benefit Scotland: other members agreed with me on that. Jackson Carlaw identified a general thread in the Government’s motion, which is as much about giving powers to ministers as it is about power for the grid. All we ask is that, on the areas that are outlined in the motion, ministers provide further details on the scope of the new powers that they want, as well as on how they will be used. We need a fair deal for Scottish renewables, a fair price for the electricity that we will want to import and, of course, the best deal for Scottish consumers, communities and businesses. As Sarah Boyack said, we support moves to ensure that there is a fair resolution to the issue of the fossil fuel levy moneys. We believe that it is fair to ask that Parliament can see the results of the Scottish Government’s consultation on the Crown estate so that we can consider the best way forward. We agree that we want the green investment bank to come to Edinburgh, as that would benefit Scotland; indeed, I am sure that that is an issue on which all parties agree and will be able to collaborate. We stand ready to work with the Scottish Government to develop our renewables industry for the good of our economy and our environment, and we welcome the scale of ministers’ ambition, but we want to see details of how that ambition will be achieved. The targets for 2020 are impressive but, if they are to be realistic, ministers need to be clear about what they will achieve in the current session of Parliament, so that we seize the opportunity that we have to ensure that Scotland becomes Europe’s green energy powerhouse. We all share that goal, but it is for ministers to set out a clear strategy for how they will achieve it.

I welcome this early opportunity to debate the Government’s strategy on finance, employment and sustainable growth. We want the Government to take our economy forward to greater prosperity, but we are all aware that we still face significant challenges to achieving that. It is therefore crucial that Parliament sets out the right strategy. We welcome the greater focus that has been placed on job creation in the cabinet secretary’s brief, because it is central to encouraging growth. I congratulate the cabinet secretary on being reappointed to his crucial role in Cabinet. When he was reappointed, it was said that his brief would be slimmed down to allow him to spend more time with his family. When I was appointed to shadow the cabinet secretary, I read through the 25 major policy areas for which he has responsibility and I was left wondering exactly how much extra time he will have to spend with his family and how much time I, in opposition, will have left to spend with mine. There is no doubt that the cabinet secretary has a huge task ahead of him and I wish him well with it. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s offer to have constructive dialogue with other parties in the Parliament, even though his is a majority Administration. I also welcome his good wishes for my predecessor, Andy Kerr, who made an extraordinary contribution to our group. As long as I am in the role, the cabinet secretary can be assured that my approach will, as always, be one of constructive and positive opposition. We are keen to work with the Scottish Government to create jobs and growth, and when we can endorse the actions of the Government in those areas, we will. At the same time, we cannot shirk our responsibilities to scrutinise and hold ministers to account. In the weeks since the election, in discussing how to take Scotland and our economy forward, a great deal of the ministers’ focus has been on financial powers. We recognise that those are important issues and there will be many more debates on them. However, the task in hand is for us to focus on what we can do now with the significant powers that we already have to create jobs and growth. To be fair, the cabinet secretary had that focus in his speech. Thousands of Scots are worried about what the economic situation means for them, for their employment prospects and for the key services on which they and their families depend, and we in Parliament must put their interests first. In areas such as the future jobs fund, the importance of modern apprenticeships and the living wage, there are already significant areas of agreement between ourselves and ministers. Although it is for ministers to implement their manifesto commitments and we do not have the opportunity to implement ours, I ask them to consider some of the policies that we proposed at the election and which I still believe could have an impact on making Scotland more prosperous. For example, ministers could consider our proposal for a first foot scheme to help first-time buyers; our plans for a green new deal to create new jobs and provide low-carbon electricity for 10,000 homes; and the measures that we proposed for using procurement processes to encourage innovation and SMEs and to support local businesses. Those are important proposals and I hope that the cabinet secretary can agree that there is merit in them and common ground between us. We stand ready to work with him on making progress on those important policy areas. All parties recognise that the Parliament’s powers are an issue of crucial importance. We are keen to enter into the debate that we will have about what is best for the future economic security and prosperity of our country, not least on the issue of independence. However, in arguing for new powers, the Scottish Government must be clear about what it would use them for and why they would be in Scotland’s interests. The Government has embraced proposals on fiscal autonomy that have often been advanced by those who wish to see Scotland as a low-tax economy with lower spending on public services, but it should not pretend that it can deliver a left-of-centre approach to investing in social provision while adhering to a right-wing economic analysis and strategy. When the cabinet secretary argues for the devolution of powers on corporation tax, I ask him to tell us the rate that he would set in Scotland and to show us the evidence that he has and can provide that we would benefit from such a move. I understand that UK ministers have asked the First Minister to provide such evidence, but it has not yet been forthcoming. Indeed, the First Minister seems to have had little success in convincing his fellow leaders of the devolved Administrations of the merits of his case. Carwyn Jones warned of a race to the bottom on corporation tax, and Peter Robinson made an important point about what it could mean for the Scottish Government’s budget. There could be a reduction of £1 billion when there are already huge pressures on budgets and major spending commitments. Thus far, the cabinet secretary has not produced evidence to show that the budget reduction would be compensated by additional tax receipts. Indeed, from what I have seen of international evidence, there seems to be little correlation between a country’s level of corporation tax and the success of its economy. We are therefore ready to enter into the debate, but the Scottish Government has not yet produced evidence that a reduction in corporation tax would be a beneficial change. The Scottish Government is right to be ambitious in what it hopes to achieve, but it faces a stiff challenge in dealing with reduced budgets in the year ahead while meeting its commitments to the electorate. We will require more clarity from ministers in that area. The Centre for Public Policy for Regions asked tough questions of all the party manifestos, but it made it clear that the SNP was the most dependent on efficiency savings to balance its budget and fulfil its commitments. Our manifesto, too, provided for 2 per cent efficiencies, but it was not dependent on that to fulfil our spending commitments. It will be important for the cabinet secretary to outline how those savings will be made, how he will ensure that efficiencies are genuine and are not cuts in service and how they will affect his stated intention—made clear again in his speech—that there should be no compulsory redundancies. Indeed, I would welcome any further information that he can give us about his dialogue with local authorities in particular on that issue. The question arises not only in the context of efficiencies, but with regard to the commitment on the five-year council tax freeze. According to Professor David Bell, that is likely to cost £535 million, which is £250 million more than the estimate in the SNP manifesto. The Scottish Parliament information centre has put the price tag for the council tax freeze commitment at £3 billion. It will be vital for the cabinet secretary to come forward with further detail on how he will fund the Scottish Government’s commitments, and he will need to ensure that he outlines at his next budget his spending plans through to 2014-15. We argued that he should have done that before the election and we questioned why he did not announce his detailed plans in the same way that such plans were announced in Wales prior to the election there. In any event, he must do that now. We will look forward to that in the autumn. We did not agree with the cabinet secretary that the work of the Christie commission required the postponement of the spending review, but we recognise the importance of the commission’s work and we have supported a bold approach for reforms, such as a single police service and a single fire and rescue service, to achieve savings that can protect front-line services at times of budget cuts. We believe that in making such changes, structures must be established to improve local accountability for decisions on local priorities in key services. If the cabinet secretary takes such an approach in moving forward with reforms, we will be keen to work with him to promote them. We will work with the Scottish Government where we can support its strategy to promote economic growth in Scotland and where it makes the right choices to invest in taking Scotland forward. However, we are the Opposition in the Parliament, so we will ask the questions that need to be asked about how the Government will keep its substantial promises to the people and how it will, in these straitened times for public finances, provide the necessary funding for them while maintaining investment in the key services locally and nationally on which our people depend. We will have the debate about the powers of the Parliament and the debate about the future of our country. However, the Government has the powers now to sustain and grow employment in our economy and to protect the services that the country needs to take us forward. That is the job in hand for the Government that it should be getting on with. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s focus on the strategy that the Scottish Government wishes to pursue. We hope that the strategy will result in economic growth in Scotland and a more prosperous nation. In wishing the cabinet secretary well in his role, I urge him to ensure that that is the Government’s clear focus in the months and years ahead.

Does Mr McMillan accept that processes have been introduced in other parts of the country—Wales, for example—that have been within current EU rules but which have enabled procurement to be directed to local businesses? [Interruption.]

I am pleased to have my first opportunity to contribute to a debate in a Parliament that is very different from its predecessors. Of course, we must congratulate the SNP on its election win; it is obviously not what we hoped for, but the party’s clear victory is an achievement that is worthy of recognition. A new majority Scottish Government places a new onus on the Parliament to hold the Executive to account and I in no way underestimate the scale of the challenge to which we must rise. Labour members must reflect on the changes that we should make in our party in the light of the election result. As Iain Gray made clear, when we can endorse the Government’s actions, we should and will do so. However, we cannot shirk our responsibilities to scrutinise and to hold ministers to account, and nor should we accept that the Government has a mandate to do all that it wants to do simply because it has a majority. The Scottish Government has spent the first few weeks since the election arguing for the new powers that it wants. Of course, all parties recognise that the Parliament’s powers are a crucial issue. That is why we initiated and supported the work of the Calman commission, which resulted in the Scotland Bill. Such issues will be even more to the fore as we approach an independence referendum. What concerns me most, however, is what the Scottish Government can do now with the significant powers that it already has to ensure that we meet the economic challenges that our country faces today. Thousands of Scots are worried about what the economic situation means for them, for their employment prospects and for the key services on which they and their families depend. One area of clear common ground between Labour members and ministers is the need to make creating jobs the Administration’s priority. I very much welcome the new focus on employment that has been brought to Mr Swinney’s brief. In his speech yesterday, the First Minister acknowledged that the thinking behind that reflected Iain Gray’s call for increasing employment to be at the heart of the new Government’s work. I join those who have welcomed the recent good news about new jobs—the announcement of the new customer service centre that Amazon will establish in Edinburgh, which will create 900 jobs. However, there is no room for complacency about employment. Recent figures have shown an overall improvement, but there are still 200,000 Scots out of work and youth unemployment levels are still too high. Our ambition to abolish youth unemployment is still worthy and should be pursued by the Parliament across parties. We share the concerns that have been expressed about the tax changes that George Osborne announced recently for the oil and gas industry. We worry about their impact on an industry that is crucial to Scotland—particularly to my region, which is North East Scotland. Such issues make it all the more important that bold measures be taken during the parliamentary session to tackle unemployment. There are significant areas of agreement on how we might achieve that.

I say to Margo MacDonald that what concerns me is what we can achieve right now. Right now, we must make the case clearly that the proposed tax changes for the oil and gas sector are wrong and would damage Scotland and our industry in the North Sea.

I am trying to build an agreement between us and the First Minister for a change. I had hoped that he might, in the new spirit of the Parliament, work with me on that, but that mood seems to be changing even more quickly than I had expected. We stand ready to make the argument with him, so I hope that he takes that offer in the spirit in which it is made. If the First Minister will allow me to do so, I will describe other significant areas of agreement. We have said that we want to drive down youth unemployment by expanding the use of modern apprenticeships, creating a future jobs fund, ensuring fairer pay through a living wage and working with businesses and trade unions to inform an economic strategy that promotes growth and job creation. We may not agree on every detail of each measure, but we are keen to work with the Scottish Government to make the measures as successful as possible. We can be under no illusion about the challenging nature of the Scottish Government’s finances. This year’s budget cuts total £1.3 billion, which makes efficiency in the public sector all the more crucial. The issues around public sector reform to which Iain Gray referred will be important to ensure that we can protect investment in front-line services while also—crucially—protecting local accountability for the important decisions that are made in those services in our communities. It will be important for the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth to be able to reassure Parliament that the £1 billion of efficiency savings that he is seeking to make will be savings, rather than cuts and reductions to the quality of services. Ministers will also need to be clear about how they will fund their commitments—not least their plans for infrastructure—at a time of huge pressures on capital spending. We did not have a three-year spending review prior to the election, but we need one now. If the Parliament is to do its job and to hold the Scottish Government to account, we need to have full transparency on the Government’s budget. The Scottish Government now has huge power and responsibility to change this country—for the better, all of us hope. Where we believe that it is failing to do that, it will be our duty to hold it to account, but where we can work together with it for a better and more prosperous country, we will do so to achieve that goal.

As we enter the final hours before the dissolution of Parliament, I have no doubt that justice issues will be some of the most hotly debated in the weeks ahead. It is an area in which there are significant disagreements between parties. Where we cannot agree, we should be clear about that and debate the issues fully. It is good that on the last day of this session of Parliament, our final justice debate—indeed, our final debate—should be an opportunity to reflect on an important area of agreement, which is the decision to reform our outdated laws on double jeopardy. Considering that we are talking about a change to 800 years of Scots law, I admit to having some reservations about the fact that the debate is only a short one. However, I concede that the stage 2 consideration of the bill was notable for its high degree of consensus, to which the cabinet secretary referred. The Labour Party, too, was keen that the law should be changed before the end of this parliamentary session. We believe that victims and families who have not seen justice served should not face further uncertainty or wait longer for a change in the law. We welcome our being able to pass this law today. The change that is represented by the bill maintains the correct balance between the rights of an accused and those of a victim of crime. The bill reconfirms the principle of double jeopardy in statute, while ensuring that in future there can be new proceedings against the accused in exceptional cases in which there are clear reasons for believing that justice was not done in the original trial. Exceptional cases and cases involving serious crimes are the right parameters. On that basis, we supported the approach of the Scottish Government at stage 2 that the changes should be restricted to High Court decisions. Notwithstanding the concerns that were expressed by Robert Brown at stage 2 about the issue of admissions, we appreciate that the Government’s intention is extremely clear: that in this area, too, the application of the new provisions should be with regard to serious cases. We should not expect a high number of cases to be affected by the bill, but those that are affected will be serious. We all know that there are people in this country who, with good reason, believe that they have not received justice for great wrongs committed against them and their loved ones. People who are guilty of serious crimes have evaded justice in Scotland. If we can properly rectify injustices in which killers have walked free from court or people who are guilty of serious offences have bragged of their culpability after acquittal, we should do so. That is why we were persuaded of the case for the legislation to have retrospective effect. Prosecutors now have access to new technologies such as DNA evidence that can show proof of criminality even in cases that are many years old. That offers hope in cases where victims and families are still waiting to see justice done for the crimes committed against them and where the Crown has the appropriate evidence to seek new proceedings. I am sure that in cases where the Crown believes that it is appropriate to do so, it will work diligently with the families and the victims involved. The experience of the reforms that were made to the law in England and Wales in 2003 can give us confidence that the changes that we propose are as proportionate as they are important. The reforms to the law on double jeopardy in England and Wales have not created a situation in which accused persons are routinely retried for the same offence. Although those laws were reformed in 2003, it was not until last year that Mark Weston became the first person to face a second murder trial in England, following the discovery of new forensic evidence. He was convicted of the murder of Vikki Thompson in 1995. The provisions have been used sparingly, but where they have been used, serious injustices have been rectified and they have doubtless been of huge importance to all those affected. This is our last justice debate in this session of Parliament. None of us can be certain of our return in the next session, although I notice that the cabinet secretary is standing on a list as well as for a constituency, which I would say is a sensible precaution on his part. However, we know that Bill Aitken is leaving us. We owe Bill a great debt of gratitude for his contribution to this Parliament, particularly as convener of the Justice Committee, and I wish him very well for the future. Not through his own doing but because of the spectacular unpopularity of the Deputy Prime Minister, we might not be joined by Robert Brown in the next session. Robert and I have not always seen eye to eye, but we should all recognise his hugely important and informed contribution to our consideration of justice policy in this Parliament. I for one—I am sure that I speak for our whole group—would very much like to thank him for that and to wish him well should he not be here next session. [Applause.] Of course, Deputy Presiding Officer, in the next session we shall also miss you and your now-famous catchphrase, “The member’s time is up. Please turn off their microphone.” I am moving speedily to a conclusion.

Oh, really? Such largesse, Deputy Presiding Officer—you are obviously demob happy. We wish you well. I for one very much valued your convenership of the Enterprise and Culture Committee in the previous session of Parliament—it was a very important contribution, as was your contribution in the chamber. I am pleased to join Bill Aitken, Robert Brown and ministers in supporting the bill. In the next session we want to see more support for victims, so I am pleased that we can conclude this session by passing a bill that makes an important but correct change to Scots law, which is very much in the interests of getting justice for victims of crime in our country.

Bill Aitken.

I join all those who have commended Rhoda Grant for bringing before Parliament this important legislation to tackle domestic abuse. She can be proud of her work not just on the bill but throughout her time in Parliament to highlight the need for concerted action to reduce the still unacceptably high levels of domestic abuse in Scotland. As the minister just said, in the past few weeks there has been a particular focus on levels of domestic abuse in the Glasgow area, but it is clear that, unfortunately, there is no quick fix to deal with this stubborn and serious problem in our society and that it will take a whole range of measures by our police and our justice system to reduce levels of offending. The fact that over the Christmas period there were nearly 3,000 incidents of domestic abuse in Strathclyde alone shows just how much more needs to be done to ensure that fewer women and children have to live in fear of abuse at home. As I said, we need to do more, and the bill provides new protections and new remedies for victims of domestic abuse. I am glad that through the scrutiny of the Justice Committee, which has as always conducted its business with admirable efficiency, we now have a bill that commands support across the Parliament. Anxieties over the definition of domestic abuse were resolved at stage 2 and we have made progress in defining what a partner is in such circumstances. Although the committee did not support the bill’s original proposals for the provision of legal aid to domestic abuse victims, I am sure that we agree that the principle advanced by Rhoda Grant—that no victim of domestic abuse be excluded from taking action in the courts on the basis of financial capability—should, in practice, be met through our legal aid arrangements. I welcome the fact that the bill’s two crucial elements on civil non-harassment orders and breach of interdict have won support. In the debate on the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, we supported the Scottish Government’s proposals to remove for criminal non-harassment orders the requirement to show a “course of conduct which amounts to harassment”, as we believed that such a move would benefit the victims of such offences. Although we did not support the bill in the final vote, because of our concerns over the presumption against three-month custodial sentences—not least for perpetrators of domestic abuse—we nevertheless supported the Scottish Government’s measure on criminal non-harassment orders for the reasons that I have just outlined. The Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill removes the same requirement for the granting of a non-harassment order in civil proceedings that involve domestic abuse. That, too, will benefit victims of abuse, who will not now have to suffer a series of offences before they can obtain such an order. Likewise, provisions that make it a criminal offence to breach an interdict with a power of arrest in domestic abuse cases also give further protection to victims and provide further penalties for offenders. Again, such moves should be very much welcomed. To look forward, in tackling domestic abuse, the bill can, of course, be only one part of on-going work to ensure that we have in place a legal framework that does all that it can to help the victims of domestic abuse and prevent them from suffering further crimes against them in the future. I agree with the minister: the Scottish Government should always keep such matters under review to ensure that we are doing the best job that we can in serving the victims of domestic abuse. I believe that the bill is an important part of that work, and that today is a good day. We are seeking to redouble our efforts to tackle domestic abuse. I congratulate Rhoda Grant again on all her work in bringing such an important bill before members.

I welcome this opportunity to debate the important issue of the reform of our public services. As Labour’s justice spokesman, I take a particular interest in the current consultation on the future of our police and fire and rescue services. Other Labour members will cover in greater detail other aspects of the motion that is before us. We have departed from the motion’s position, which fundamentally argues for the status quo. We have made clear our support for a single police force and a single fire and rescue service, and we have two reasons for that. We believe that it will mean better delivery of those services. It is not the case that the proposals have been on the table for a matter of months; they have been being discussed for years. The Fire Brigades Union has, for a considerable time, questioned the need for eight services, eight sets of expensive equipment and eight different approaches to health and safety. We agree that a single approach taken across the country will be better for firefighters and for fire prevention and community safety. Likewise, a single police force will better enable us to tackle crime on a national basis. Crime knows no boundaries, whether it be drug-dealing, organised crime gangs or terrorism. Tackling criminals by working on a national basis will pay dividends in the fight against crime.

As the cabinet secretary said—on this rare occasion, I agree with him—some evidence has been presented, revised and clarified. The fact is that the evidence is already there. We might disagree on the issue but it was being discussed for a long time before the consultation. For example, people such as Graeme Pearson, who has great respect on these issues, have been discussing it for several years. We think that the proposal will result in better services, but we also believe that making the changes will realise savings. They will be offset at first by the costs of the change, but they will come in future. I accept that the first figures and savings have been disputed, but I know that more robust figures are being researched as we speak. When they are produced, I expect that they will show real opportunities for savings. Let us not underestimate the importance of that. We have a challenge to protect key services for communities across Scotland in the face of the substantial cuts that are coming from the coalition Government at Westminster. Those cuts are too deep and too fast, but we have to deal with them. We can debate what the savings will be but I, for one, do not accept any assertion that moving to a single police force will mean losing hundreds of police officers and having fewer police on our streets. That fear is far more likely to be realised if we do not move to a single force and realise savings that can be reinvested in the front line. We cannot hide from the fact that, as things stand, we are looking at substantial cuts in the budgets of all police boards and all fire and rescue authorities. My fear is that, in that context, preserving the status quo would mean making substantial cuts to police and police staff numbers, and more cuts to firefighter numbers. We do not want to see a similar situation occurring here to the one in England and Wales, where budget cuts mean that police chiefs are predicting that there will be cuts in police and police staff numbers that could be as high as 28,000.

All the evidence that I have seen on moving towards a single force shows that while there will be implementation costs that will offset first-year savings, there will be very substantial savings in the future that will be about protecting the front line. The challenge for those who oppose the measure is to say what they would do to protect those key front-line services in the context of the deep cuts coming from elsewhere, which we must deal with. The savings are all about protecting police numbers and ensuring that we do not take police off the beat to do jobs that should be done by police staff. Robert Brown was right to raise that issue: I say to him that this measure is about protecting those key police staff too, which will help to keep police on the beat. This proposal is all about keeping police on the beat in our communities. I believe that people throughout Scotland are far more concerned about having visible policing on their streets than about which badge is on the uniform. We agree that local accountability is important, but we contend that we can improve the structures of accountability for decisions on local priorities for policing and fire and rescue within a single service structure. In policing, the example is close to home: Northern Ireland has exactly that structure of local accountability, but within a single force. Indeed, we can look for strengthened local accountability, as too often the arrangements to hold police forces and fire and rescue authorities accountable through the boards are not as effective as they should be. Too often, boards are not adequately resourced to do the job that they need to do in scrutinising the decisions that local forces make. I believe that we can have a better model for community involvement. I agree with Robert Brown’s comments in that regard. We believe that such involvement can be strengthened, whether at local authority or community level. That will ensure that local people have a stronger voice in the decisions that are made on those key services that are so important to them. The key issues in the debate are community safety and policing, and providing the best services for our communities. I simply do not believe that those interests are best served by organisational boundaries that are based on the old regional councils. They are served by ensuring that we have the right investment in police and firefighters where we need them: not in eight headquarters, but in the city communities and the towns and villages where we live.

First, I do not accept the premise that it is inevitable that such a person should be based in Glasgow or Edinburgh. Secondly, the key to ensuring that we have the best structure for making the right decisions locally is to have strengthened local accountability and consultation. Whatever the management structure is—we know that it will be reduced and less costly—it will be informed by decisions that are made on the ground. That is the important thing. I do not agree with the Liberal Democrats’ position on the important issue of the future of our police and fire and rescue services, but we know where they—and the Tories—stand on it. We must consult on the detail of implementation, but it is vital that we should be clear with the electorate on where we stand on this important issue before we go into an election for what may be a five-year session of Parliament. That is why it is important for the SNP to say where it stands on the issue before we take our respective policies to the people. The question for those who oppose change must be what they will do to protect front-line services. Where will they find the funds to protect police on the beat and firefighters in our communities? We must always put before structural boundaries the need to have the police, the firefighters and the people in place locally to deliver those services on which we depend. For that, the status quo is not an option. I move amendment S3M-8120.1, to leave out from “is concerned” to end and insert: “believes that the case for reform and innovation in Scotland’s public services is unanswerable and that meeting the needs of the public is more important than preserving structures; recognises that the need to protect frontline services in the face of UK Government cuts requires the status quo in public services to be reassessed; believes that moving to a single fire and rescue service, a single police service and the creation of a national care service offers the best opportunity for improving delivery of these services in Scotland, and believes that these new structures will allow the reinvestment of savings to maintain frontline staff while ensuring that there are improved mechanisms for local democratic accountability and delivery on local priorities.”

I begin by paying tribute to Bill Butler for bringing the bill before the Parliament. Without his intervention, the bill, following the excellent work by the Scottish Law Commission, would not have proceeded in the Parliament. That would not have been right, as someone who is facing death because of the actions or negligence of others or someone who is seeking damages for the loss of a loved one should not have to endure an unnecessarily protracted and demanding legal process in order to obtain damages to which they are entitled. It is right to recognise the work that the Justice Committee did on the bill, and I entirely associate myself with the minister’s words in relation to the former convener. I also congratulate Thompsons Solicitors, which worked with Bill Butler in providing advice throughout the process. That dialogue has been all about securing legislation that will be effective and which can be passed today with cross-party support. Once again, the Scottish Parliament can take action to protect the rights of people seeking damages. We must recognise two difficult issues that the minister spoke about. The first concerns the proposal for the standard 25 per cent deduction for living expenses. In the Labour Party, we were eager for that proposal to be adopted as it appeared in the bill as introduced. In particular, we believed that it would help to address undercompensation in instances in which, for example, a dying victim is unwilling or unable to extend negotiations or take the matter to court—in effect, when they are forced by circumstances to accept a larger deduction for living expenses than is fair or appropriate. Given that most fatal damages claims involve people suffering from mesothelioma, such situations are not, unfortunately, uncommon. The Scottish Government was concerned that applying a rigid standard 25 per cent reduction might not produce an accurate or fair result in absolutely every case, and that it could result in undercompensation—in what I feel would be rare circumstances. However, that concern resulted in dialogue on the issue, from which came the proposal that the 25 per cent reduction should apply, but with an exception for cases where it would be “manifestly and materially unfair”. We previously expressed concerns that such an exception could open the door to further delay in court, due to routine challenges to the 25 per cent figure, but we have been reassured by the minister that the term “manifestly and materially unfair” sets a high enough bar, ensuring that such cases will be exceptional. The great majority of cases will benefit from speedier progress through the courts with the application of a 25 per cent deduction. We are comforted on that point, which we believe is crucial for the victims in such cases. The second key issue is that of disregarding spousal income when determining compensation. As we have discussed, concerns were expressed at committee that stage 2 amendments have made the provisions not quite as explicit as we might have hoped. For the avoidance of doubt, the minister has made it clear today that, in the vast majority of circumstances, spousal income will indeed be disregarded. We can be confident that we have been properly reassured on that point, too. I hope that we can also be confident that, although the bill might have changed, the central ambition behind it remains intact. I hope that we will pass into law today provisions that ensure not only fairer damages for what victims have suffered due to the negligence of others, but an easier and less protracted legal process by which damages are awarded. Those who seek such damages deserve no less, and I congratulate Bill Butler once again on fighting their corner in our Parliament.

I congratulate Mike Rumbles on securing the debate. Members’ business debates are traditionally more consensual affairs, but we could always rely on Mike to ensure that what is likely to be our final North East Scotland members’ business debate would be a somewhat more testing event for us. It is welcome that we have the chance to debate the idea of a single police force and policing in Grampian, as that is an important issue. I would be the first to recognise that Mike Rumbles has always been a doughty campaigner for his constituents and for the north-east, which is what has motivated his lodging the motion for debate tonight. I hope that he recognises that achieving the best for our constituents in the north-east is also what motivates those of us who support change, however much we disagree on the way forward. Our motivation is not the detriment of community policing; it is the protection of it and the desire for a better police service for Grampian and the whole of Scotland. We cannot hide from the fact that, as things stand, we are looking at substantial cuts in the budgets of all police boards. My fear is that the status quo makes such cuts inevitable for a number of years to come. That would lead to reductions in the number of police officers and key police civilian staff, meaning that more police officers would have to come off the beat. Yes, we can debate what the savings would be—Mike Rumbles is correct in saying that the published figures have been hotly debated—but I, for one, do not accept any assertion that moving to a single police force would mean our losing hundreds of police officers or having to reduce police numbers in Grampian. However, I argue that that fear will be realised if we do not move to a single force. There is no doubt that moving to a single force would realise savings that could be reinvested in the front line to keep police officers on the beat. Let us not pretend that the current arrangements for funding forces benefit Grampian. In the previous session, under the Labour-Liberal coalition, we secured extra funding for Grampian Police by revising the formula. However, whereas local authorities in other parts of Scotland were able to invest in extra police officers for their forces earlier in this session, local authorities in Grampian simply were not able to do the same for our force. We are disadvantaged by the current situation and, despite the famous concordat agreement, Grampian Police faces losing 50 police officers and 100 police staff. I believe that people in Grampian—like people everywhere in Scotland—are concerned more about having visible policing in their community than about what badge is on the uniform. It is the same in Northfield, Kincorth, Peterhead and Stonehaven as it is anywhere else. To protect the number of police on the beat in those communities, we must make the proposed change.

With a single police force, there would be national resources and national parts of that force structure in the north and in Aberdeen. I am sure that Dave Thompson would make a strong case for that, and he can rest assured that I would make a strong case for that as well. Nonetheless, it is vital that, in making that change, we protect local accountability and local police priorities. The example of a single force working with strong local accountability can be found close to home: the police in Northern Ireland work within a similar structure. I believe that there are many circumstances in which having a single force would benefit the people of Scotland in tackling crime, and that having a single force would benefit the people of Grampian as well. Grampian Police has done a great job, but if we are to maintain the level of policing that we need in the Grampian area, we must change and be clear with people about our views on change. I do not agree with Mike Rumbles’s analysis of the situation, but he and I are clear about our respective positions. It is important that the Scottish Government is clear, at least before the election, and says what its preference is. I suspect strongly that, like me, the Government has been persuaded of the need for change, but it needs to be clear about that, as it is a really big decision, and a crucial one for the better policing of communities in the north-east and throughout Scotland. On that basis, I welcome this debate.

What assessment has the Scottish Government made of the budget cuts that are affecting large and small voluntary sector organisations that are involved in criminal justice services across Scotland? What impact will the significant cuts to funding for organisations such as Sacro, Apex Scotland and Includem have on preventing crime and tackling reoffending?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement. We are now beginning to have a clearer understanding of the impact of the Cadder judgment on hundreds of victims of crime. On 10 February, the Crown Office announced that 867 cases had been dropped, including nine High Court cases. However, we discovered on 20 February that dozens more cases have been jeopardised, with five test cases having been brought before the Supreme Court. When will the cabinet secretary be able to provide Parliament with a definitive number for the cases that have been affected? We believed that it was right to support the emergency legislation, given the circumstances that we faced; however, now is the right time to ask what lessons must be learned and what might have been done to avoid the situation. Why did the cabinet secretary not act on the letter that was sent directly to him by the Glasgow Bar Association stating that it was clear that Scotland was no longer in compliance with European law a full year before the interim guidance was published by the Lord Advocate? Is it not the case that, although this was prior to the High Court of Justiciary’s judgment in the McLean case, that case was not an impediment to making the required changes? Surely, a precautionary approach would have been sensible and would have meant, potentially, that a number of cases that have now been dropped could have proceeded. What action is the Scottish Government taking to ensure that Scots law, more broadly, is compliant with the European convention on human rights so that the situation is not repeated in the future?

I welcome the Equal Opportunities Committee’s inquiry into migration and trafficking, and the opportunity to debate the committee’s report. Issues that relate to migration in Scotland have at times been emotive and difficult, and this Parliament has had responsibilities to those who seek asylum in Scotland with regard to their welfare. I share the committee’s concerns about the UK Border Agency’s decision to terminate its contract with Glasgow City Council, and like others I worry about the impact on the families and individuals who will be affected. More broadly, I am sure that many of us will be concerned about the direction of the UK Government’s approach to immigration. We can reflect on the quite different approach that we have taken here in recognising the positive benefits that can result from people coming to Scotland to live and work—an approach that is exemplified in the fresh talent initiative. I will focus on two points, the first of which concerns employment and exploitative practices. We know that we have had problems in Scotland with the illegal activities of some gangmasters. Legislation has been pursued at Westminster to tackle the exploitation of migrant workers who are being paid a pittance and forced to live and work in dreadful circumstances, as Margaret Mitchell mentioned. However, more work must be done on enforcement, as the committee’s report identifies. As Citizens Advice Scotland told the committee, a minority of employers are still actively undermining the law in this area. Too few migrant workers are made aware of their employment rights or the worker registration scheme, and the Scottish Government must address that situation. The second point concerns trafficking and sexual exploitation. We must all be concerned that there are, today, victims of such abuses in our country. Like the committee and the Scottish Government, I am disappointed that the UK Government has decided not to opt into the European Union directive on trafficking, but we must focus on what we can achieve here. There is rightly concern, as Jim Hume said, that while there have been 100 convictions for trafficking in England and Wales following operation pentameter, there has been none in Scotland. Amnesty International, which produced the report “Scotland’s Slaves”, is right to argue that while we must acknowledge the Lord Advocate’s point—made in evidence to the committee—that there have been convictions in relation to lower-tariff crimes such as brothel keeping, there continue to be convictions for trafficking in addition to convictions for those lesser offences in England and Wales, and more must be done to understand the reasons for the disparity in conviction rates. The committee has highlighted the concern that Scotland should not be seen as a soft touch for traffickers, and members on all sides of the chamber have rightly highlighted the need to address the issue, particularly as the 2014 Commonwealth games in Glasgow may unfortunately be a focus for traffickers. As the committee identifies, the new measures on trafficking as a result of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 are welcome, but Parliament did not support the amendments that were lodged by Trish Godman and Marlyn Glen to criminalise the purchase of sex, or my own amendment, which was intended to criminalise the purchase of sex from those exploited by another for that purpose. I recognise that these are difficult issues, but the position under my amendment is the current law in England and Wales. There is a very real danger that the legal position in Scotland will be perceived as weaker, and indeed will be so. That will not help us to deter those who through their actions encourage traffickers, nor will it help us to hold to account those who are responsible for trafficking. I hope that Parliament will reflect on those issues again. The committee’s report reflects the determination of members across the chamber to ensure that we have a better-informed debate about migration in Scotland; that those who have come to our country are treated with the respect they deserve and have their rights protected; and that we recognise the positive contribution that such people can make to our society. I congratulate the committee once again on its excellent report.

Thank you. I will not dwell on the irony of this First Minister making allegations of hypocrisy.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. What support has been given to the victims affected by the dropping of cases as a result of the Cadder judgment? Is the First Minister aware that, a year before the judgment, practitioners in Scotland warned that his Government was in breach of the European convention on human rights on the matter? Does he agree that those events require the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to make an emergency statement to Parliament?

Scottish Labour welcomes the Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill, which will introduce important reforms to our laws on double jeopardy. It will reconfirm that important principle in statute while also ensuring that, in future, there can be new proceedings against the accused in exceptional cases where there are clear reasons for believing that justice was not done in the original trial. We believe that the Scottish Government has broadly taken the right approach on this important issue and we look forward to supporting the general principles of the bill at decision time. In our debate on the issue last year, we made it clear why the proposed change in the law is right. We all know that there are people in this country—victims of crime and their families—who believe that they have not received justice for very great wrongs that have been committed against them and their loved ones, and that there will be compelling evidence that they have indeed been denied justice thus far. We know that the change in the law will apply to only a small number of cases, as Bill Aitken confirmed in his speech as convener of the Justice Committee, but that does not diminish its importance. There can be no more sickening sight than that of a killer walking from a Scottish court free from punishment for the crime and even, as the cabinet secretary said, bragging that they have done so. We have to accept that people who are guilty of serious crimes have evaded justice in Scotland. If we can properly rectify such injustices, we should do so. Once again, we must thank the Justice Committee for its considered and informed scrutiny of the bill. As always, and as the convener summed up in his speech, the committee has drilled down into those areas of the bill where there will be a need for further consideration—for example, in determining the range of offences that the reform should cover. I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary has said that he is willing to give further thought to those issues. However, what comes through in the committee report is the great deal of consensus that exists around the bill as introduced. We made it clear in our ambitions for the legislation that it should be proportionate, that it should not result in an accused person being tried repeatedly for the same offence, and that there should be clear parameters for the situations in which it should apply. We believe that those things have been achieved in the bill through the provisions on trials that have been tainted or deemed null, the provisions on new evidence, and the fact that it will require special reasons not to accept pleas in bar of trial. Of course, the Parliament must take care in considering the reform of a principle that has been part of Scots law for generations but, in considering the legislation thoroughly and diligently, the committee found that the general approach that is taken in the bill is indeed robust in achieving the changes for which the Parliament expressed its support almost a year ago. A key debate following the publication of the Scottish Law Commission’s report on double jeopardy was on the issue of retrospective application and we are pleased that the bill will have retrospective effect. That is right because prosecutors now have access to new technologies and techniques, such as DNA evidence, that can show proof of criminality even in cases that are many years old. In the previous debate, a number of us mentioned the collapse of the trial for the World’s End murders, and there can be no doubt that the change in the law is important for the families of Helen Scott and Christine Eadie and for other families who face similarly tragic circumstances. While the Justice Committee was scrutinising the bill, as the cabinet secretary said, Mark Weston was convicted at Reading Crown Court for the murder of Vikki Thompson in 1995. Indeed, the committee asks in its report whether that conviction could have been secured under the provisions in the bill. I am aware that there are differences between the approach to new evidence in the bill and the exceptions to double jeopardy that have been introduced in English law, but I hope that it can be shown that it will be possible to secure a conviction in similar circumstances under the bill. I hope that the cabinet secretary will be able to do that, as it is important that that can be shown. The example of the changes that were made to the law in England and Wales in 2003 can give us confidence that the changes should work well here. In England and Wales, the opportunity now exists to seek prosecutions if there is clear evidence that justice has not been served, but it has evidently not created a situation in which accused persons are routinely retried for the same offence. At the time of our previous debate on the matter, of the six applications for retrial that had been determined in England and Wales, three had failed, and Mark Weston is the first person to face a second murder trial in England following the discovery of new forensic evidence. The provision has been used sparingly, but it has obviously been hugely important to the family of Vikki Thompson, as that case has now been concluded. We look forward to debating the bill further at stage 2, but I stress that, at this point, we see no reason to demur from the approach that the Scottish Government is taking. We are always ready to challenge Government policy when we believe that it does not serve the victims of crime—indeed, we had just such a debate on sentencing policy this week. If, however, the Government brings forward proposals that we believe do serve the interests of victims, we will support them, and we firmly believe that the bill does just that. It is not only an important matter of justice for the victims of crime and their families who will be affected by the change in the law, but it will also be an improvement to our justice system. We agreed with the Scottish Government’s response to the Scottish Law Commission and the consultation process that ministers engaged in was robust. The clear consensus that has been achieved at committee shows that the Parliament supports the bill and I am sure that it will support the general principles at decision time tonight. I am also pleased that we will be able to pass the bill in the current parliamentary session. We hope that the legislation will be required in only a small number of cases, but there are individuals and families in Scotland who have sought it in the hope that the great injustices that they have had to endure can finally be rectified in our courts. The bill at least offers that opportunity and I hope that it will see a number of past wrongs righted. I also believe that it will safeguard the interests of justice in the future, and that is why we will support it.

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on the violence reduction unit’s report that 4,783 domestic violence incidents were logged by police forces during December 2010. (S3F-2866)

Will the First Minister agree that those figures show the need for continued support for the groups that are doing excellent work to deal with the serious and stubborn problem of domestic abuse in Scotland? Given that sentencing for those offences is crucial to the overall approach, what consideration has been given to building on the success of the domestic abuse court in Glasgow that was established in the previous session of Parliament, and to developing approaches in other parts of the country?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, whatever the future structure of our police service—and particularly if there is to be a single force—it will still be vital for people in Angus in my region and elsewhere that there is local accountability for decisions on police priorities? Given the importance of the issue, will he state prior to the election, as we have done, whether he supports a single police force?

I commend Rhoda Grant for introducing the bill. There is no doubt that rates of domestic abuse in Scotland remain unacceptably high and that further action needs to be taken to protect the victims of that crime. Too many people in our country, particularly women and children, live in fear of domestic abuse. That needs to change. There has been progress through the domestic abuse courts, which were established during the previous session of the Parliament, and through the actions of the police and procurators fiscal in their approach to prosecuting the people who are responsible for domestic abuse. However, we need to do more. The bill will institute new measures, which will make a difference for victims of domestic abuse. That is recognised in the report from the Justice Committee, which once again has provided a fair and informed evaluation of a bill that it was asked to scrutinise. It strikes me as important to remove financial impediments from people who would seek civil remedies against the activities of people who engage in domestic abuse, and it strikes me that victims of domestic abuse are worthy recipients of legal aid. Those principles have driven Rhoda Grant’s proposal to remove means testing for legal aid from domestic abuse victims who are applying to a civil court for an interdict with power of arrest or for a non-harassment order. That approach did not win favour with the committee, although Rhoda Grant made it clear that in her view the bill would not create difficulties in the context of equality of arms between pursuer and defendant. I acknowledge the concerns of the committee and the Government about the legal aid budget in the current context of public sector spending, but I hope that progress can be made in subsequent stages of the bill, so that we can be reassured that no victim of domestic abuse will be excluded from taking action in the courts on the basis of financial capability. The Labour Party did not support the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010. An important aspect of that decision was the legislative presumption against custodial sentences of three months or less, and we remain concerned about the impact of that measure on the victims of domestic abuse. However, we supported the Scottish Government’s proposals to remove the requirement to show a course of conduct amounting to harassment for criminal non-harassment orders, as we believed that it would benefit victims of such offences. In the same way, the bill removes the same requirement for the granting of a non-harassment order in civil proceedings that involve domestic abuse. That, too, will benefit victims of abuse, who will not now have to suffer a series of offences before they can obtain such an order. The proposal in section 3 to make it a criminal offence to breach an interdict with a power of arrest in domestic abuse cases also gives further protection to victims, provides further penalties for offenders and should receive support. Both those proposals require a definition of domestic abuse or the approach that Rhoda Grant described in her opening speech. However, I appreciate that there is further dialogue to be had between her and the minister on that, and I hope that matters can be clarified at stage 2. I welcome their continuing dialogue on the bill. Although the committee does not agree with the legal aid provisions, the stage 1 report shows that we can achieve parliamentary consensus on other important measures that are proposed in the bill. I hope that we will do so and that the bill will proceed. If it does, it will represent another important step forward as we seek to do more to tackle domestic abuse and offer better protection in the law for domestic abuse victims in Scotland.

We believe that change is essential in our police and fire services to ensure that they are fit for Scotland in the 21st century and to maximise investment in front-line services in every part of Scotland. That is why Iain Gray announced in October our support for a single national police service and a single fire and rescue service. Why are we still waiting for the same clarity from the cabinet secretary on the issue? We know that he and his officials have researched and discussed the matter for months. Consultation is needed on the detail of how we move forward, but surely our police and fire services need more clarity now on their future structure, given the budget pressures to which the cabinet secretary referred and the urgent need to protect investment in the front line. Today, the cabinet secretary has—rightly—made clear his preference for a single fire and rescue service. Why cannot he do the same for our police service? He appears to be consulting on continuing with eight forces while ruling out that option. When will the consultation process end? Will the cabinet secretary make clear before the election in May whether he supports a single police force for Scotland? Surely to fail to make clear his position would be to fail to provide the leadership that we need on this crucial issue for our communities' safety.

To ask the Scottish Executive what dialogue it has had with Aberdeen City Council on its education budget and teacher numbers. (S3O-12491)

I may be at risk of ending the Christmas truce. The cabinet secretary is keen on talking about which councils are reducing teacher numbers, but in Aberdeen, where there is a Scottish National Party council, teacher numbers have been cut by 250. That is the second highest cut in Scotland. What dialogue has the cabinet secretary had with Aberdeen City Council about its plans, given that teachers in the city are threatening to strike for the first time in two decades over the prospect of hundreds more jobs going as a result of cuts of £120 million?

Day in, day out in our country, workers who deal with the public face assault and intimidation, and it is time for the Parliament to act. Hugh Henry is to be congratulated not only on raising this crucial issue in Parliament, but on how he has taken it forward and the way in which he has made a powerful case based on evidence. In my view, rejecting this change in the law will fail the workers who have in such great numbers expressed to Parliament their concerns about the kinds of behaviour and offences that they all too often have to endure. Yes, there is scope to debate the definition of a worker and, yes, we could at later stages consider the inclusion in the bill of hindrance and obstruction of workers, but by rejecting the bill now, although we acted on the evidence of the problem that faced emergency workers, we will have decided not to respond to the others who have to face very similar—indeed, sometimes exactly the same—circumstances. The Parliament will not just have ignored what those workers told us about their experiences, or the arguments that have been set out by USDAW, Unite, Unison and the other union; it will have ignored the statistical evidence. The data exist. Indeed, research from Retailers Against Crime shows a 78 per cent increase in violence against and abuse of Scottish shop workers in just the past three years, and Hugh Henry himself referred to a wide range of supporting evidence. We have just heard about the Scottish Government's position from the cabinet secretary. That position is inconsistent. The Scottish Government not only supported the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005, but it has extended its scope so that doctors, nurses and midwives are covered whenever they are on duty. It was right to do that. In presenting the case for that measure to the Justice Committee in 2008, the Minister for Public Health pointed to the success of the 2005 act, under which there has been a 75 per cent conviction rate. As Hugh Henry said, the act is being used increasingly, and it may be helping to address the issue of underreporting of such offences. It is not just about deterrence when we look at the statistics. There have also been big issues to do with underreporting.  In many ways, the Scottish Government has made the argument for the bill, but it will not support it. It is doing that at a time when we have placed additional burdens on staff in their dealings with the public. The cabinet secretary talked about the impact of alcohol on crime. This situation makes the case itself. Quite rightly, we have tougher licensing laws and challenge 25 schemes to prevent alcohol from being sold to people who are under age but, as Hugh Henry said, that is likely to result in more aggrieved customers and more intimidating situations for staff, who already have to deal with such situations. It is not enough to say that that can simply be dealt with by the common law. Dave Watson of Unison pointed out that there are areas in the bill, particularly regarding low-level offences, that are not well covered by the common law.

I do not have time. I have only 45 seconds left. The committee report rightly highlights other work that employers and the Scottish Government should do to tackle the issue, but passing the bill is fundamental to the success of any wider strategy. On-going work on the protection of workers is being done. Rob Gibson referred to that work, and we welcome it, but it is self-evident that we are not making the progress that we want to see on the problem with the application of the current laws. If the previous Government had simply accepted the case that the existing law was adequate, we would not have passed the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005. Let us ensure that we make the lives of workers better by passing the bill. The Government is wrong to accept the status quo. Many workers who serve the public live in fear of violence from a tiny minority who can create a lot of harm. I hope that the Government will see sense in the debate and will back Hugh Henry's excellent bill so that those workers can finally be free from fear and be properly protected in their workplaces.

This has been a good debate. I warmed to Bill Aitken's contribution towards the end. However, I would say to him that the powers for ASBOs were brought in because, all too often, communities and individuals were being told that the police could not act against the kinds of antisocial behaviour being exhibited. That is what people were telling us, and the legislation was our response. We  believe that those powers are not being used enough and that more needs to be done to tackle the problem as it exists today. I acknowledge that, on this occasion, the Labour Party is taking a different approach from other parties, and I also acknowledge that the minister has sought to discuss the issues with other parties' justice spokespeople in an effort to seek broad agreement. However, it does not serve the interests of debate in the Parliament or of wider engagement to pretend that there is a consensus where there is not one. One point of agreement is on the importance of community policing in dealing with a wide range of antisocial behaviour and crime. I hope that Robert Brown will accept that, although we might disagree with some of the analysis and there will need to be further debate on how the structure should be changed—we have a view on a single police force, and there will need to be a wider debate on the mechanisms that might form that—the intention of examining the structure of policing is to protect police on the beat and community policing. In producing the framework, the minister has quite correctly sought to engage with local authorities and the agencies that are involved in dealing with antisocial behaviour, so that, at the end of the process, we have a document that they have endorsed. However, although it is important to give due consideration to the views of those important stakeholders, it is incumbent on us to take seriously the views of the wider community as well. Labour members have sought to give voice to the experiences of that community, as we hear these problems day after day. We are finding that people are still frustrated by problems of noise, selfish behaviour that intimidates and the actions of individuals that make their lives a misery. We all know of such instances. I know that all of us have to deal with those complaints, but what separates us in the chamber today is our analysis of the action that is required. It is right that the framework document highlights many projects that engage in prevention and diversionary activities, and we commend those. I note from the document that the Scottish Government has stepped back from introducing a requirement that, at the time of applying for an antisocial behaviour order, local authorities and registered social landlords must demonstrate that an adequate support package has been offered to the offender. We did not believe that that was realistic—it is not undesirable, but it is unrealistic—because, although we should seek to introduce support packages, they can be extremely costly. The challenge in this financial climate will be to maintain investment in some of the excellent projects to which the report refers and in schemes  such as the Greenock initiative that Duncan McNeil mentioned in his intervention. The report focuses on activities for young people, but I agree with Mike Pringle, Bill Aitken and the minister that the vast, overwhelming majority of young people play a hugely important and constructive role in our society. We are talking about tiny minorities in any event, and we should not focus excessively on young people in these strategies. The legislation is often described as targeting young people's antisocial behaviour but, in my experience, there have been far more instances in which complaints have been about adults. It is those types of issues that the legislation was designed to address.

The evidence on that is very mixed, to say the least. The emphasis must always be on protecting the community either from antisocial behaviour or from crime. I welcome Stewart Stevenson in making his first contribution from the back benches during this session of Parliament, and doing so in a positive spirit; I hope that he accepts my welcome in the way that it is intended. We look forward to hearing interesting contributions from him on a range of issues, with which I will not always agree. On this point, we are, unfortunately, not entirely in agreement. In response to the points that Stewart Stevenson made in his speech, I point out that the figures that we seek to highlight show that there have been an increasing number of complaints about antisocial behaviour, and a declining number of instances in which the orders have been used. That signals a trend, which we are very concerned about. We believe that it fails those communities from which those rising numbers of complaints are coming if we do not respond with the increased use of the powers that are there to be used. Those whom I meet who are suffering from antisocial behaviour do not want the powers to be used less frequently; they want them to be used more often. That is certainly true of the constituents whom I meet in Aberdeen. Too often I hear from residents—particularly those in the city's high rises, where there was once a peaceful environment—who are finding that their lives are blighted by just a few new tenants who are coming in and behaving antisocially. More needs to be done with those problem tenants. It is true that, sometimes, problems will have arisen because those people have simply been given a tenancy  with no support, and without some of the root causes of their antisocial behaviour being addressed, so that needs to be changed. However, we need to change a situation in which local authorities are not taking action where they should. That is not just something that we are saying—we are hearing it from people in the community. In Aberdeen, complaints about antisocial behaviour increased last year by more than 30 per cent to nearly 4,000, but Aberdeen City Council has no record of how many antisocial behaviour orders have been implemented. That is simply not good enough for people suffering from such problems. We believe that there needs to be more transparency and more accountability for local authorities in respect of how they deal with complaints of antisocial behaviour. That is why we want a new, formal process to give community councils and formally constituted residents groups the right to apply to local authorities for an ASBO—not simply a meeting or a letter from an MSP or someone else. They should have the right to make a formal request and therefore to receive a clear explanation from the local authority, as part of a formal structure, if it decides not to pursue the request. That is why we make that proposal. We need to build on the success of the programmes that help to prevent and divert but, important as they are, they can be only part of the approach. We need to use all the tools in the toolbox and, at the moment, we are not doing so. Rather than the current situation, in which authorities are not seeking to use the powers that are there to be used, we need to go further and take more action on antisocial behaviour, because that is what the communities of Scotland need and want in order to improve their lives.

Does Nigel Don not agree that, if a mechanism has not been applied for or put to the test, we cannot decide whether it is successful? It must be used before we can make that judgment.

Will Robert Brown take an intervention?

I do not need an Alka-Seltzer right now—perhaps a bit later, or next week. If we are unnecessarily investing in structures, which we believe to be the case at the moment, investment is not going to front-line policing or to protection of the models of community policing that the member is right to discuss. Surely that should be a priority for investment—not maintaining unnecessary structures.

Will the member give way?

I am pleased to be able to contribute to today's brief debate, which touches on issues of complexity and great importance. Someone who is facing death because of the actions or negligence of others, or those who are seeking damages for the loss of a loved one, should not have to endure an unnecessarily protracted and demanding legal process to obtain the damages to which they are entitled. Today, too many individuals and families in Scotland face those difficulties. Bill Butler seeks to change all that through his bill, and he is to be congratulated on his work on the issue. I thank the Justice Committee for its stage 1 report, which reflects the fact that there are still points to be debated and room for amendment. Indeed, on issues such as the exclusion of  damages for mental disorder from the process and the definition of relatives who are entitled to claim, I have an open mind ahead of stage 2. The report also highlights points of agreement on important issues. I believe that the case against disregarding the income of the surviving relative is weak. The current approach does not reflect today's reality: most often, both partners are employed. Lord Drummond Young put it very well when he said: "In effect, to maintain the household at the existing level"— of income— "the survivor needs his or her own income as well as the deceased's income".—[ Official Report, Justice Committee , 14 September 2010; c 3443.] I do not accept the argument from the Forum of Scottish Claim Managers that that would result in "gross overcompensation", particularly as we start from the position that bereaved families are being undercompensated. That is the inescapable truth that lies at the heart of the Scottish Law Commission's proposed reforms. The most vexed question, to which the minister referred, is the standard 25 per cent deduction for living expenses. That measure offers the most hope for simplifying and curtailing the legal process. The figure has been debated, but it was reached after due consideration by the Scottish Law Commission. It might well result in more generous compensation in some instances, but not in excessive compensation. The crucial point is that it will counter current arrangements that undercompensate pursuers. That argument was well put by solicitor advocate Frank Maguire in his evidence. He made the point that most fatal damages claims involve people who suffer from mesothelioma. A dying victim is likely to be unwilling or unable to extend negotiations or to take the matter to court; in effect, they are forced by circumstances to accept a larger deduction for living expenses than is fair or appropriate. The current situation makes undercompensation far more likely. A 25 per cent deduction opens the possibility for lower legal expenses to be incurred in determining the level of damages and for less time to be spent in court. That must be beneficial for all parties, and particularly for victims at what is a distressing time. On the introduction of a rebuttable presumption in relation to a 25 per cent deduction, the fear is that that would take us back to a protracted legal process. I am not attracted to that proposal, unlike the minister, but I am pleased that he is prepared to discuss the matter with Bill Butler. It is important that we make progress on the bill. It is two years since the Law Commission reported  and I believe that more individuals and families in such sad situations should benefit from new legislation that is passed in the Parliament. I hope that we will proceed with changes that will make significantly easier a process that is stressful for people who have suffered great wrongs and who are entitled to damages.

I thank the cabinet secretary for making a statement to the Parliament, as we requested. However, his announcement leaves us with significant concerns about the future of the forensic services that both the Aberdeen and the Edinburgh labs provide. I remind him that option 2 in the SPSA consultation paper would have not only retained an excellent network of labs in Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow but saved £2 million a year. Given that that is the case, why has he departed from the clearly stated will of the Parliament in favour of option 2 and instead chosen to remove key services, including volume drug analysis, from the labs in Edinburgh and Aberdeen? We need resolution and a clear, sustainable plan for the future of the labs and their staff, who have endured so much anxiety and uncertainty during this process, so why has the cabinet secretary decided that there should be a review of his decision in 18 months' time? I am afraid that that gives rise to concerns among Labour members that the labs are receiving a stay of execution for the convenience of elections, rather than being saved. Can he guarantee that, after the review, the labs in Edinburgh and Aberdeen will definitely remain open and that the services that have been removed from them today will be returned if it is shown that that has been detrimental to solving crimes in the areas that they  serve—communities that are safer today thanks to the efforts of staff who, under the plans, will no longer be based in Aberdeen or Edinburgh?

Does the First Minister agree that a single national police force for Scotland, structured correctly, could improve on the current arrangements for local accountability for policing decisions and better deliver sustainable community policing—police on the beat—at a local level? [ Interruption .]

Given that the court case is frustrating the development of the western peripheral route, is it not time for the Scottish Government to decide not to delay work on the Haudagain roundabout until after the completion of the WPR and to start work on that transport problem for Aberdeen before beginning work on the WPR?

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the number of firefighters in Scotland. (S3O-12174)

Does the minister agree that, in structuring our fire and rescue services, we must always ensure that we have in place the front-line firefighters whom the public need? What progress will be made through the publication of a new fire and rescue framework document in ensuring that there is a robust assessment of the number of firefighters required in local areas to ensure community safety?

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government's reaction is to the recent report by PricewaterhouseCoopers that states that the number of front-line police officers will drop by 2,000. (S3F-2735)

I note that the Daily Record leader to which the First Minister referred earlier was actually headlined "SNP guilty as charged". Given the First Minister's confidence on police numbers, despite the fact that forces are being asked to maintain numbers while having their Government grant cut by £31 million and are cutting thousands of civilian staff posts, can I  assume that he will have no difficulty in agreeing to my request that a new independent police numbers projection study be published, to allow effective planning for forces beyond the end of the next financial year? Will he agree to that request?

Will the cabinet secretary clarify how much money has been allocated to local authorities for that purpose? I presume that it is an amount far greater than the £31 million that is being cut from the Government grant for police forces.

In June 2007, we heard a statement on the strategic spending review. Praise has been in short supply for the cabinet secretary in recent days but, in the debate then, I congratulated him on continuing the practice of indicating a three-year funding settlement to local authorities and asked him whether he agreed that that practice should be extended to the voluntary sector. He indicated that he supported that ambition and, indeed, that he would take forward the matter with local authorities. He said: "it gives organisations sustainability, continuity and clarity about where they are going."— [ Official Report , 28 June 2007; c 1220.]  It is therefore bewildering that, with the opportunity to set spending for three years now—I would argue that there is a much greater need to do that now—the cabinet secretary has decided to set a one-year budget instead. In response to a point that Mr Purvis made at the beginning of the debate, Mr Swinney said that he would reflect on the outcome of today's debate. I hope that, in the spirit of what Robert Brown said in his excellent speech, those were not just warm words and that he is ready to alter his position. If outlining spending for three years was important for sustainability and clarity in 2007, it is crucial now, when, as we all know, we are facing severe reductions in public expenditure in the years ahead. Of course we will debate the scale and pace of those cuts and why we have the deficit. Some people seem to believe that we should have let the Royal Bank of Scotland and HBOS collapse and let chaos ensue. We will debate how we should respond to the situation in the Parliament,  but we should be able to agree on the need for clarity going forward, and we should do all that we can here to provide greater certainty, not more uncertainty, about the future for public spending. That is crucial for our public services, but it is also hugely important for the private sector—not only for contracts but for the future of investment in capital projects and other areas. Indeed, it is crucial for our whole economy. Like Robert Brown, I believe that the one-year settlement fails local authorities in particular. As an MSP for North East Scotland, I am acutely aware of the consequences for our councils. Yet again, the Scottish Government is imposing a council tax freeze while failing to provide councils with anything like adequate resources to compensate. That means that Aberdeen City Council is already planning £127 million in cuts over five years while we do not know what funding the Scottish Government intends to provide to local authorities beyond the conclusion of the one-year budget period. Perhaps our police forces are affected more than anyone else by the irresponsible approach that has been taken to the budget. It is entirely understandable that, as Johann Lamont mentioned, the budget has been described as a "dereliction of duty" towards our police forces. The agreement with councils requires them to maintain police officers. Of course we should focus on maintaining police officers, but the Scottish Government is telling councils to maintain police numbers without giving them the money to do that; indeed, it is cutting the police central grant by £31 million. That is fundamentally dishonest on a number of levels.

I know that Stewart Maxwell is not a member of the Local Government and Communities Committee but, if he had been at that committee's meeting yesterday, he would have heard witnesses clearly stating that no moneys were ring fenced in the local government settlement to maintain police officer numbers. Money has not been awarded to local authorities to do that. Nevertheless, the Scottish Government is telling forces to end the recruitment freezes that they have had to put in place and to start to recruit officers whom they will be required to employ for some 30 years. However, the Government will not give them any clarity on funding for any more than a solitary year. In doing so, it is leaving a situation in which officers will start to be recruited again in  Strathclyde, for example, but the price of that in a single year, according to Unison's estimate, is that 1,300 civilian staff jobs will be lost. That price will be felt not only by those who face redundancy but more widely in communities, as police officers will be taken off the beat to do those jobs. Those police officers will not be doing what we want them to do and what they have been trained to do.

I am afraid that I do not have enough time to take an intervention. I know that I will not get much more than six minutes to speak. The Scottish Police Federation has said that the cuts that are already being planned by police boards are equivalent to losing 2,800 officers. That is the reality. PricewaterhouseCoopers has estimated that the number of front-line police officers in Scotland will drop by 2,000 over the next four years. Where does that leave the SNP's famous pledge? The fiction is that the Scottish Government is maintaining its police numbers promise; the reality is that it is leaving our police forces to make plans for cutting police activities, which will impact on the safety of our communities. Our police forces need clarity so that they can plan properly for the future. That is why it is incumbent on the Government to do what it has every opportunity to do: to set out a three-year budget so that members can make informed decisions about the future of our public services, and we can have clarity about what must be done in order that key, front-line services, such as those that our police forces provide, can be protected even in these daunting times for public finances.

Will the member take an intervention?

That statement was made in response to Bruce Crawford, who demanded that every vote in the chamber be binding on the Executive.

Given that police boards have already announced cuts that the Scottish Police Federation has said are equivalent to reducing police numbers by 2,800, and given that the cabinet secretary's budget outlines a £31 million cut to the police central Government grant, where is the money coming from to maintain police numbers? How will the cabinet secretary assure police boards that his plan will sustain the funding to maintain new recruits when he has refused to set out a three-year budget?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to prepare for potential flooding emergencies. (S3O-11885)

Following the floods in the north-east last year, I wrote to the minister to support a proposal from the Met Office and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency for an early flood warning system. I welcome the fact that the system has now been agreed and will start  operation next March, but what steps will be taken this winter to provide early warnings for communities that are at risk of flooding? In the light of the concerns that have been raised about the preparedness of the emergency response to the flooding in Stonehaven, particularly last year, what dialogue has taken place with the local authority and the emergency services to ensure that any lessons that need to be learned have been learned?

This has been a constrained but important  process, in which key issues for our justice system and Scots law were raised, the most important of which for us is that we act for the benefit of justice and our legal system. We heard the debate on the necessity for and quality of the bill, and I remain persuaded by the cabinet secretary's arguments on the need to support it, notwithstanding the efforts of some Scottish National Party backbenchers to persuade me otherwise during the stage 1 debate, when they tried to turn the matter into a debate on independence. Their arguments were odd, given their party's support for legislation on ECHR and enthusiasm for Scotland in Europe. We must be realistic, and it is not realistic to suggest that we should not be treated in the same way as Belgium, Ireland and the Netherlands, which face exactly the same situation, are treated. We heard the point that the First Minister made, but a hearing by the European Court of Human Rights would have only delayed matters, not changed them. All the evidence is that situations such as the one that we face are best addressed expeditiously, so we agree that it is right to move quickly to ensure that our provisions on access to legal representation during detention are compliant with European law, in statute as well as in practice. It is not evident that not moving to such a position would not carry a risk of further legal challenge. It is right to be cautious and accept what the cabinet secretary said. I agree that it is necessary that the SCCRC considers finality when it deals with applications. That could make a material difference in the number of cases that will be affected by the Cadder judgment. We had some sympathy with the idea of a sunset clause and with the idea that extensions to detention should be approved by sheriffs. If we had had more time, we might have come to different conclusions, particularly on the latter point, but due to the issues of practicality, which we are not currently in a position to gainsay, we supported the Government position. However, I remind members that the issues will be fully debated when we consider new legislation on all those matters, which should happen as soon as is practicable and sensible. Labour is committed to bringing forward legislation, if we are in a position to do so, on the most feasible, sensible and expeditious timescale. The problem with a sunset clause is that we do not know what is in the future. Any Parliament can face unforeseen circumstances and it is not acceptable that we should potentially again face a situation in which we mush rush through legislation or in which we are not compliant with European law.  That is why I stand by our position on amendment 27. The process will be informed by a much fuller debate on a bill, subsequent to Lord Carloway's important review, which we welcome. Even at this late hour, I want to inject optimism into the debate—as Ed Miliband said, "We are the optimists". We should not accept that it is inevitable that at the end of the process we will have a worse legal system. The process might ultimately provide an opportunity to seek improvement, as a consequence of Lord Carloway's review. We did not seek to review the arrangements, but we do so now and we might end up with better law and better legislation. We should at least look forward to that happening—it might not be inevitable but it is surely possible. The process has been somewhat traumatic, but today we did what needed to be done as an interim measure. The Government was right to introduce the bill on that basis. We look forward to further debate on and full legislative scrutiny of the matters in the fullness of time.

I have given particular consideration to the issue of a sunset clause, in light of the reasonable comments that Robert Brown has made and which Patrick Harvie made to me earlier. We would all hope that it is possible to ensure that full legislation is in place before mid-2012, but I have a concern that, if there is an unforeseen delay—or for unforeseen reasons—we could end up rushing through legislation again or, indeed, find ourselves in contravention of European Union law. I recognise that those circumstances are remote possibilities and I want to make it clear that it would be our intention to legislate within that timescale. However, we will not oppose the amendment; rather, we will abstain.

It is hard to see how that could be a possibility, and I concede that point to Patrick Harvie. What I am saying is that I do not think that it is entirely impossible that we could be in a situation in which we were rushing through legislation again, although perhaps not to this extent. I accept that that might be a remote possibility, but we have to take on board that important consideration when passing this statute today. Therefore, we have to take a cautious approach. I take on board the intention of what is being proposed, but I think that there are issues over practical implementation. However, the issues that Robert Brown raised earlier around the need for fuller scrutiny of certain issues, particularly that of the extension of detention periods, are a different matter, and  perhaps further measures can be introduced in that regard at stage 3.

In the stage 1 debate, we asked whether applications to extend the detention time should be agreed by sheriffs rather than by police officers of the rank of inspector or above, which Robert Brown has just discussed. We welcome his raising the issue for debate. We accept that, in England and Wales, senior police officers consider such applications. However, that will be a substantial change to our system, so we should consider the best checks and balances for us. We have sought to look further into the matter and we have met the Lord Advocate in doing so. It is regrettable that we have no evidence beyond the ACPOS advice, but we cannot obtain such evidence because of the strictures that we are under. We have been told that securing permissions from sheriffs would involve practical difficulties in rural areas. On the parliamentary timescale, we cannot gainsay that claim, so—most regrettably—we will not support amendment 8. However, we will have to return to the matter when Parliament properly scrutinises legislation on the issues later. In other circumstances, we might well have supported Robert Brown's amendment.

Our not taking action today might have unintended consequences. However, Mr Smith is right: the issue needs to be the subject of new legislation—probably from a new Government after the next election. When such legislation is introduced, we will be able to debate the points fully. That is the right way to proceed. We have sympathy with Robert Brown's amendment 9, which would give the Justice Committee new opportunities to debate the matters on a shorter timescale. However, agreeing to it would mean removing the bill's current provisions on extending detention times, and we are concerned about what would happen in the interim. The best way to proceed is for me to speak further with Robert Brown before stage 3 to consider whether there is any way to give effect to the proposed mechanism after the provisions in the bill are passed. I hope to have further dialogue with him on that before stage 3.

We on the Labour side of the chamber are keenly aware of the momentous nature of the United Kingdom Supreme Court ruling with regard to our justice system. Today we are debating the issues that require our urgent action and attention, but the wider ramifications for Scots law will need much greater deliberation in the Parliament at a later date. We can debate now whether the situation in which we find ourselves is fair to our legal system, of which we are rightly proud. We can debate how  we got here, and whether ministers should have done more at the time of the European Court ruling in the Salduz case. However, we agree that today we must deal with the actions that we must take urgently and rightly to minimise the judgment's effect on our courts and on the victims of crime. There is no doubt that the fact that the ruling is not, broadly speaking, retrospective in effect means that we will be dealing with fewer cases than may have been feared. However, there will still be cases that involve very serious offences, and that is why we recognise the need to act. We have seen the comments from the chair of the Equality and Human Rights Commission that counsel against emergency legislation, and the solicitor advocate John Scott has made the point that legislation that is made in haste is often repented at leisure. As members have said, this is not an easy issue; we agree. I do not believe that any member views as desirable the fact that we have to consider emergency legislation. However, while we are always ready to provide opposition to Government measures when it is the right thing to do, we believe that in this situation it is responsible to accept the cabinet secretary's argument for emergency legislation and the broader direction that he has decided to take as a result of the judgment. The more I examine the detail of the judgment, the more I accept the case that the cabinet secretary has made for the legislation. Although I understand the restrictions that emergency legislation necessarily places on debate, some of my concerns would have been afforded reassurance by more dialogue and more notice of the detail of some proposals. However, I understand that we are where we are.

I am simply aware of the advice that ACPOS has given. I would have liked us to have had more debate and dialogue on the issue, but there are practical considerations about the time for which people can be detained if they are to access legal representation. I am sure that we will debate some of those issues during today's debate. I am persuaded that we should act quickly to change our laws on access to legal representation  during detention and, as a consequence, the time limits for detention. I do not believe that we should continue with our laws if they have been deemed to be incompatible with European law. I also believe that it is important to act quickly to legislate to include the need for finality and certainty in the factors that the SCCRC must consider when it deals with applications, as I understand that that will have a material impact on how many appeals can go ahead. I accept the case that the cabinet secretary made in his response to Christine Grahame's question. However, that is not to say that we should not debate the issues in the limited time that is afforded to us today. Specifically, we question whether there should not be greater debate on whether it should be possible for an application to extend the period of detention from 12 hours to 24 hours to be determined by a police officer of the rank of inspector or above. If such extensions are to be made only in exceptional circumstances, perhaps the role would be more appropriately performed by a sheriff. I understand from the legislation team that we will be able to debate that proposal through an amendment from Robert Brown. I ask the cabinet secretary to give the matter serious consideration and provide a response during the debate. The financial memorandum suggests that the costs to the public purse might be higher than was previously indicated, not only because of the cost of legal aid but because the provision of the necessary police staff will cost the police some £20 million. My colleague James Kelly will raise more questions on that. I mentioned the concerns that many have understandably expressed about the emergency legislation. It is important that we allay some of those fears by ensuring that the Parliament has an opportunity in the near future to consider these important issues in the normal detail and timescale that we afford to legislation. There are, of course, far broader implications for Scots law, particularly with regard to our long-established laws on corroboration. In that context, we welcome the cabinet secretary's request for Lord Carloway to undertake his review. Many will argue that we should not be in a position where we have to review the operation of such key tenets of our well-established legal system. However, we must recognise that, although our own court of appeal made its view on the matter clear, the UK Supreme Court, including the Scottish senators, had to reflect on what the European court said on the matter. The ruling on Salduz is already affecting other European jurisdictions such as Belgium, France, the Netherlands and Ireland. In any circumstance, we cannot be immune to that. Unless people are  suggesting that we opt out of the ECHR, or out of Europe entirely, this is where we were always going to be. I do not dispute that it would be good to see an ECHR issue discussed that was not about the rights of the offender but more about the rights of victims, but the idea of having human rights guaranteed throughout Europe is important. Those broad debates are for the future. We have important issues to resolve today, and our approach is that the Parliament should work together to do that.

To ask the Scottish Executive on what date it estimates that work is likely to commence on the construction of the Aberdeen western peripheral route. (S3O-11578)

Does the minister agree that the delays to the commencement of construction of the western peripheral route have made it all the more important to address congestion in Aberdeen by not delaying other important transport improvements, including the  improvements at the Haudagain roundabout? The minister has said that that work should not begin before the western peripheral route is completed. Why is that approach necessary?

Mr Thompson makes the point that our firms here in Scotland will be able to compete with firms overseas on the same basis. What other country in Europe has the structure of legal services providers that is proposed in the bill? Where is it operating at present, as far as Mr Thompson knows? As I understand it, it does not operate anywhere else in Europe.

This has not been straightforward process. It has been a rather arduous one, and the reforms, while important, have been subject to much greater debate than we might have anticipated. Like the minister, I thank for their work the Justice Committee and all those who have worked on the bill or been involved in making representations on it. As the minister said, a great deal of effort has gone into the work to improve the bill and to try to forge a greater consensus between those with differing views on it, who see it as either a threat or an opportunity for the legal services industry in Scotland. As I stated earlier, the problem is that we are working on predictions of how we hope the reforms will work. The evidence does not exist at the moment because the long-anticipated movement to 100 per cent external ownership of legal services businesses south of the border will not now come into effect until the end of next year at the earliest. The key for us has been to try to move to allowing new investment into our legal services sector, which has been through challenging conditions due to the global recession, while assuaging some of the concerns that have been expressed about how the system can be effectively regulated and about potential negative impacts on access to justice for consumers. That is why we, like Robert Brown, have supported an incremental approach and sought to achieve a balance in setting in the bill a structure for legal services providers that allows for multidisciplinary firms and external investment and, in advance of potentially varying the percentages on ownership on the basis of evidence of the reforms' success, provisions that enable ministers to introduce regulations to do just that. Far from falling behind the situation in England and Wales, we have now moved to a position in which non-solicitors can own greater percentages of legal services firms than is currently the case south of the border. That was the case not only  with the position reached at stage 2, which as the minister rightly said was a concession from the Government's previous position, but in the amendments that Robert Brown and I pursued today. I could not take Dave Thompson's intervention because of a lack of time—nothing else, I assure him. Much as he may have thought that he was going to ask me a good question, I was not particularly troubled or intimidated. I say to him that it is important to acknowledge the Law Society's current position and welcome the input that we have had from it, but its position has been a moveable feast and a hotly debated issue. I am sure that the Law Society will be pleased that the bill has come to a resolution—we have all heard from Michael Clancy, who has worked hard on it—but I am sure that there will be a lot of debate on how it will be implemented. We have always said that, in reforming our legal services sector in Scotland, the first principle must be to maintain and improve access to justice. We must now be vigilant about whether that comes to pass with the new framework for the sector that will be implemented as a result of the bill. I am pleased that the minister supported my amendments on the number of regulators, which allayed my fears. Robert Brown and Bill Aitken did not share them, but they were fears for me so the minister's move was welcome and important. I concede again that the minister made concessions at stage 2. Although the bill is not in the form for which we have argued, I hope that it proves to be the case that access to legal advice and representation in small and rural communities is not disadvantaged. I hope that benefits from new capital in existing firms will accrue to the sector, and that there will be benefits for social enterprise. However, we must monitor developments carefully so that the issues about which concerns have been raised do not come to pass. In the final analysis, instead of objecting to the principle of the bill, we have sought a consensus position, whereby the reforms can be agreed to, but they will start at a more cautious level. On that basis, albeit with the reservations to which I have referred, we will support the passing of the bill at decision time. An issue that is crucial in giving us comfort in doing so is the potential that exists to vary the percentages of ownership through regulation, which was agreed to at stage 2. I make it clear that if we were to form the Administration after the election, we would look at the situation as it developed and would have one eye on developments in England and Wales. The fact that we will enable the bill to go through does not mean that we concede the argument on  majority ownership that we pursued through my amendment on the issue earlier today. We stand ready to bring regulations back to Parliament in the next session that would give effect to that proposal, should we conclude that the circumstances suggest that that is necessary. However, the important caveat, as I have said, is that we will allow the bill to be enacted. We can but hope that it will bring the benefits that the minister is bullish about. The consideration process has at times been difficult because of the technical and complicated nature of what is an important bill, but Parliament has undoubtedly devoted significant energy to its scrutiny, as the minister said. We may have different views on how best to reach the goal of ensuring access to justice and a thriving legal profession in this country, but that is what we all want, and we recognise that it is the intention behind the minister's approach to the bill. Despite the reservations that I have expressed, we hope that that will be achieved once the bill is passed.

It is important that disputes between the regulatory committee and the council of the Law Society can be resolved. Of course, ultimately the council is the accountable body of the society, including the regulatory committee. There must be clear provision for the council to resolve any dispute that it might have with the regulatory committee. We understand why the society has promoted amendments that would give the council a limited ability to intervene in the function of the regulatory committee but, ultimately, we do not agree with that approach. We have raised the issue that the Law Society is now to be a representative, disciplinary and regulatory body. We believe that the regulatory role should at least be clearly separate from the society's other functions. We lodged amendments at stage 2 that would have created even clearer delineations between the different functions and committees. We support the model for resolving disputes in the amendments in the name of the minister and we believe that he has proposed the right approach. However, we do not support the approach that is proposed in the amendments from Robert Brown and Bill Aitken. We heard Bill Aitken's argument about sub-committees and, like him, we will be interested to hear the minister's response on that issue.

The minister raises valid issues, but I am not quite convinced that they are impediments to making this change, which he says that they are. To be fair to the Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners, it raised the issues with members prior to stage 2 and stage 3, and they have been carefully considered. Once more, I will err on the side of caution when it comes to regulation. I think that the bill is a logical vehicle by which we can address the issues that the society has raised. I think that there is not a huge gulf between us in terms of getting to the right position, but the bill would be made more robust by the inclusion of the provisions, so I will press the amendment.

I lodged these amendments as a result of discussions with the Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners. It considers that, for the purposes of adequate consumer protection, the administration of an estate in its entirety should be a regulated activity. It argues that fraud and incompetence are most likely to occur during the administration of the estate when the deceased's funds are being handled and when the provisions of the will are being implemented. Those areas are currently unregulated in the bill and, as the bill is drafted, the regulation of confirmation agents would cover only the preparation and submission of the application for confirmation of the deceased person's estate. That is a significant but small part of the estate administration process. Significant issues regarding the administration of an estate will arise  in other aspects of estate administration—for example, in the administration of the correct division of assets among the beneficiaries. That activity is not currently within the scope of confirmation services as described in the bill; therefore, my amendments seek to broaden its scope to include the activities of estate administrators and to provide a definition of that term. The Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners has made strong arguments for expanding the provisions of the bill in that way, including providing examples of fraudulent activity that has occurred at points of the process that, as the bill stands, would not fall within the compass of its provisions for regulation. On that basis, I hope that my amendments will be supported by ministers and by Parliament. I move amendment 133.

The most important debate that we will have in these proceedings is on majority ownership of the new businesses that will be created through the establishment of alternative business structures. I understand that the minister has moved from his original position, whereby businesses could have been owned entirely by investors from outwith the legal profession or any other regulated profession, to the position  currently in the bill, whereby 51 per cent of the business must be owned by solicitors or members of other regulated professions.

I apologise to Mr Thompson, but I do not have time. The minister has lodged amendments to provide further definition of regulated professions, which is welcome. Despite the Law Society's current view, as outlined by the minister, anyone who has followed the passage of the bill will recognise that the issue has been bitterly contested in the society. It is also important to know that those with significant reservations about the bill have sought to make constructive proposals so that consensus can be reached. For our part, we have moved from our stage 2 position, where we advanced the proposal for no more than 25 per cent ownership by non-solicitors, to my amendments today, in which we propose that 49 per cent of a firm could be owned by other regulated professionals and up to 25 per cent could be owned by investors who are not from regulated professions. There are still those who have great concerns about what the reforms will mean for their profession. The bill brings with it a comprehensive new regulatory structure, but not the new Legal Services Board that we have seen in England and Wales and not the same level of investment in regulation either—the financial memorandum indicates that investment in regulation by the Scottish Government could amount to just £100,000. We understand that in the proposed structure there are a number of provisions on fit and proper persons to invest. Nevertheless, fear remains about possible attempts by those who are involved in criminal activities to invest in firms. Although we are told that the reforms will bring benefits to consumers, with one-stop shops for legal advice, accountancy advice and other services, concerns have been expressed about how that will affect small legal firms that serve small and rural communities. The problem that we come back to again and again is that the argument that this reform will be of clear benefit to our legal services industry, however well intentioned, is based on supposition. Indeed, my understanding is that, currently, external ownership of legal services providers in England is at no more than 20 per cent—a lower percentage than the percentage proposed in my amendment—and that proposals to move to 100 per cent external ownership south of the border are scheduled not to come in for a year. If the bill is passed, the structure for regulation will be in place and the opportunity will exist to  make changes to the percentages of ownership. We favour an incremental approach, which will allow for more evidence to be presented to show that the system will be beneficial to both the legal services industry and consumers. Our amendment 46A would allow that approach to be taken. At stage 2, an amendment was agreed to to allow ministers to vary by regulation the percentages of ownership. We are sure that that could be done expeditiously. I do not believe that requiring 51 per cent majority ownership for solicitors would prevent the one-stop-shop model, such as a small firm of one solicitor and an accountant, as the firm could be constructed to be in line with the provisions of our amendment 46A. I have received representations that some law firms that support the change might deregister in Scotland if other investors and regulated professionals are not allowed to have a majority ownership. However, we have to realise that in any event, the changes raise the potential for firms to be bought by businesses outwith Scotland. If amendment 46A is agreed to, it will introduce a provision that takes us to where England and Wales are, the new regulatory structure will be introduced and ministers will have the power to bring forward regulations to change the percentages, should that be shown to be desirable. I do not see what significant delay would be caused by agreeing to amendment 46A. Should my amendment not be agreed to, we will support amendment 123 in the name of Robert Brown, but we believe that our amendment 46A presents the most sensible and logical approach, and we will press it.

I will not need it, Presiding Officer. Suffice it to say that I welcome the minister's support for amendment 121. It will allay any potential concerns about the regulatory framework. I acknowledge the points that Bill Aitken and Robert Brown made, but I think that they are working on the basis of supposition. Amendment 121 gives certainty, and I am pleased with the minister's comment that we can proceed on that basis.

Regulation has been at the heart of the debate on the bill. We have considered how to ensure that there is a robust regulatory regime in order to enable the new alternative business structures to work effectively and to ensure that they are properly regulated. The need for robust regulation is clear if we are to ensure that the provisions on access to legal services and fit and proper persons in relation to investors work. Ministers did not support the idea of a legal services board such as has been established in England and Wales to oversee regulation, but suggested that it will be sufficient for there to be a small number of regulators. Indeed, they said that they expect only the Law Society of Scotland and the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland to apply. On that basis, I hope that amendments 121 and 152 will not cause difficulty for the minister. It is important to allay concern that the bill could allow for a multiplicity of regulators. If it transpired that a significantly larger number of regulators than two or three were to be appointed, there would be legitimate concerns about consistency and uniformity of regulation in all parts of the legal services industry. Some regulators might be less stringent than others, and the context would be one in which only limited funds were available to support regulation. To address the matter, I suggest that we limit the number of regulators to no more than three. However, I understand that the new approach to the legal services industry will develop all the time, so I have sought to give the Scottish ministers the ability to approve additional regulators by statutory instrument, should there be a good argument for their doing so. The approach would give the Parliament the ability to take a view on whether it would be appropriate to appoint a larger number of regulators. That is a more robust approach to developing the regulatory framework than an approach that simply works on the assumption that only two bodies will apply. On that basis, I hope that the minister and members will support amendments 121 and 152. I move amendment 121.

We welcome this opportunity to debate the system of administrative justice in Scotland, especially the future of our system of tribunals. As MSPs, we know how important tribunals can be for the lives of many of our constituents. Tribunals have been set up for important areas such as asylum and immigration, employment, mental health and social security. Of course, we have our cherished children's hearings system, the legislative reform of which the Parliament is considering and to which the cabinet secretary referred specifically in his speech. I agree with his comments about the relationship between the work of the children's hearings system and this process. Many members will have dealt with constituents who have had varying experiences of tribunals—from those who have won their case and feel that the system has worked for them, to those who have not been so successful or who, for whatever reason, have not been so satisfied with the process. However, it is beyond debate that tribunals in Scotland play a crucial role in resolving important issues and complaints. Given the significant developments that have taken place since the publication of the Franks report, which established important principles for the operation of tribunals throughout the UK, it is now right to review the operation of the tribunal system in Scotland, not least because a greater number of tribunals have been established here, both before and after devolution. The administrative justice steering group has been reviewing our tribunal system. Its report on the future administration and supervision of tribunals in Scotland was published in October 2008, when the group was under the chairmanship of Lord Philip. That was supplemented by the report "Administrative Justice in Scotland—The Way Forward", which the group published in June last year. After considering a number of potential options for the reform of the tribunal system, the group made clear that it saw a persuasive case for a  Scottish tribunals service to oversee all three categories of tribunal in Scotland: UK tribunals in Scotland, Scottish tribunals that existed before devolution and the new devolved Scottish tribunals. The group suggests that there is a strong argument in favour of such a solution from a purely legal perspective, because justice is almost entirely a devolved matter in Scotland. When I see a motion from this Government, with its stated nationalist aims of seeking ever greater devolution of power for its own sake, calling for further devolution, the cynic in me is immediately suspicious. However, it is right that we welcome the Lord Chancellor's invitation to consider proposals to devolve responsibility for tribunals operating in Scotland. Indeed, that direction of travel for our tribunal system was outlined in 2005, in a concordat between the UK Government and the then Scottish Executive that talked of "the possibility that at some future date the Scottish Ministers may wish to create a unified tribunal administration in Scotland embracing both central government and devolved tribunals." Lord Philip's report found that there were strong arguments for such an arrangement. In its report, the Calman commission did not demur from his findings that there are inconsistencies in the system of appointment to tribunals in Scotland and that we lack a co-ordinating body for Scottish tribunals, which may lead to a narrowness of outlook, inhibiting the development of substantive and procedural law and creating inefficiencies and a lack of value for money. When such findings are made about the system of tribunals in Scotland, the only responsible thing to do is look to improve matters significantly. We must also look at the wider context. We have not yet reformed our administration and governance of tribunals, whereas there has been significant reform in England and Wales through the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. The motivations for the reform of the system in England and Wales are identified by Lord Philip as motivations for the reform of the system in Scotland. Those motivations are: to ensure that processes are independent and impartial, that there is a coherent system and that it is one that benefits from an independent and skilled judiciary. Lord Philip identifies problems for the current system in Scotland in each of those areas. He points to evidence of a lack of independence in the operation of some tribunals. The administration of some devolved tribunals, although it is provided by an independent secretariat, is funded and sponsored by directorates within the Scottish Government. Most of those appointed to tribunals outwith the Tribunals Service are appointed by the Scottish ministers or by local authorities. Robert Brown's question to the cabinet secretary about  the new delivery unit raised the very good point, which needs to be addressed, of how the unit will be set up to be in tune with the issues outlined in Lord Philip's report. The report states that there is no consistent system for the appointment of tribunal members and chairs in Scotland. As the cabinet secretary said, the report points to fragmentation in our tribunal system, with tribunals working in isolation and not sharing IT systems, administration and training programmes. It outlines a number of disadvantages resulting from that, including the concern that such fragmentation and lack of consistency can inhibit the development of substantive and administrative law. There is a strong case to be considered for the establishment of a Scottish tribunals service with responsibility for all tribunals in Scotland. The report argues that that option should result in a much more joined-up system of administration than there is now, with all tribunals in Scotland being centrally administered by the same organisation, which would allow tribunals policy to be considered as a coherent aspect of devolved civil justice policy. However, the report points out that such reform could also create difficulties, as Scottish tribunals may no longer have the same access to shared resources, training and premises as UK tribunals. Such practical considerations require careful deliberation, which is why our amendment calls for a wide consultation on the reform of the tribunal system that should include those currently involved in the operation of tribunals as well as those who help to advise and represent people who take cases to tribunals, including Citizens Advice Scotland and, of course, trade unions. Trade unions advise that they are concerned about issues such as the report's proposal that any new central administration of tribunals could be located within the Scottish Court Service. Unions fear that that might impact on the way in which tribunals are conducted, which, for good reason, is often very different from the way in which courts are conducted. As Robert Brown said, a tribunal is—not in every case, but often—a more inquisitorial process. Trade unions are also concerned about the proposed timescale for implementing changes. As the cabinet secretary outlined, the single delivery unit for administering tribunals within the Scottish Government will be established by the end of the year. I understand that a second phase of work will begin in 2011 and a third in 2012. Those changes will have big impacts on our tribunal system, not least for the staff who currently work for tribunals. That is why proper consultation must be engaged in before changes are made. I accept that the first stage is some way down the line, but  that principle of consultation needs to be engaged with. After all, we are at the stage at which the Lord Chancellor has invited ministers to consider the devolution of responsibility for all tribunals in Scotland. We are discussing the issue at a point at which, although there has evidently been a great deal of thought and discussion, there is clearly some way to go. We do not dispute the direction of travel, which is to provide a more coherent and improved structure for the tribunal system in Scotland. As tribunals play an important role in Scottish society, however, it is all the more important to ensure that whatever changes are made, they are the right ones. Considering the practical issues that I raised and, indeed, the other issues to which the cabinet secretary referred, there are important questions that need to be given careful consideration to ensure that the changes are the right ones and that they are carried out in the most effective manner. On that basis, we will support the motion. I am pleased to hear that the Government will support our amendment. I move amendment S3M-7116.2, to insert at end: ", and, in doing so, recognises that any forthcoming proposals from the Scottish Government for reform of the tribunals system should be consulted on widely, including with those currently involved in the operation of tribunals, as well as trade unions, Citizens Advice Scotland and other organisations that support those taking cases to tribunals."

To ask the Scottish Executive what stage has been reached in its plans to construct HMP Grampian and close Craiginches prison in Aberdeen. (S3O-11483)

According to reports, 150 prisoners from Peterhead prison are being moved to Glenochil prison. Why is that happening now, when planning permission has not yet been granted for HMP Grampian, which—as the cabinet secretary said—is not due for completion until 2014? What consultation—not only with prison authorities, but with other interested parties, such as prison visiting committees—took place on that decision, particularly given that the plans include the flawed proposal to close Craiginches prison?

The previous Government resisted making the changes for exactly the reasons that the First Minister gave earlier. However, he might be aware that the current UK Government is reviewing the policy. Have any discussions taken place with the UK Government on what impact there might be on retrospective claims by prisoners who are now registered to vote, and what costs there might be to the Scottish Prison Service or the Scottish Government?

There is, of course, the cabinet secretary's duty to ensure that the Executive consults properly the Parliament on issues of this import. Advice could surely have been given on the SPSA recommendations. When he makes his decision, will he give a statement to the chamber so that members can question him on the matter?

Of course we should consider the issues in the round. Option two would retain the excellent new facilities at Dundee. We would also have a new facility at Gartcosh, while retaining the local lab in Edinburgh, which would mean winners all round.

Does the cabinet secretary not recognise that the option that we support—option two—would provide significant savings to the SPSA?

(Lab): Point taken, Presiding Officer. Members across the Parliament are keenly aware of the crucial role that our forensic services play throughout Scotland in detecting crime, convicting those who are guilty and thereby—we hope—reducing crime in the future. The progress in forensic services in recent years—in scene-of-crime examination, biology services, drugs and DNA analysis, fingerprinting and other specialist services—is a vital facet of modern policing. Those services are central to solving crimes that are as wide ranging as housebreaking, car theft, sexual assault and homicide.  We can be proud of the forensic scientists who work with enthusiasm and commitment in our four laboratories. Without them, fewer cases would be solved and fewer criminals would be held to account for their crimes. Recognition of the importance of forensic services to local policing has been the catalyst behind the great anxiety in the north and north-east and in Lothian and Borders about the threat to the future of the laboratories in Aberdeen and Edinburgh. A recommendation to the cabinet secretary by the Scottish Police Services Authority's board has been decided on, following consultation on its "Forensic Services Modernisation Options Paper". That recommendation has not been made public and—curiously—it does not appear to have reached the cabinet secretary in time for the debate, although we understand that the board decided on it more than a week ago. In any event, it is feared that the recommendation to the cabinet secretary is to close the laboratories in Aberdeen and Edinburgh or to remove from them key forensic services, which would begin to run them down.  The ultimate decision resides not with the SPSA but with the cabinet secretary. I hope that speeches from members of all parties will persuade him that the two labs should not be run down or closed and that the Parliament will express that view at decision time.

That is the key point—I agree entirely with Mike Rumbles. We should take seriously the views that Grampian Police's chief constable and others have expressed publicly. That should inform the decision, which should be to retain the two labs. Keeping the laboratories open in Aberdeen and Edinburgh has been the subject of cross-party campaigns and I hope that it will attract cross-party support today. From my experience of the situation in Aberdeen as a North East Scotland MSP, I know that my colleague Lewis Macdonald, as the constituency member for the Aberdeen laboratory, has been joined in the campaign by Nicol Stephen and Brian Adam—the two other city constituency MSPs—as well as Mike Rumbles in west Aberdeenshire. Several of us list members from all the parties have also been involved. In the previous debate on the subject, Mary Scanlon spoke from a Highlands and Islands perspective about concerns for the Aberdeen laboratory's future. The same has been true in Edinburgh. Of course, it has been a joint campaign with the staff and their trade union, Unison. I am pleased that staff from the laboratory at Howden Hall in Edinburgh are here and that Unison members from Aberdeen have come to Holyrood today, because they know the importance of the decision and of the debate. We can be sure of their commitment to providing excellent forensic services. It has been a long and trying process, particularly for the laboratory staff, to get to this stage. The first proposals were made in "Delivering forensic services to north and north-east Scotland", which was published in 2008. That was not a consultation document—rather, it gave 10 reasons why the SPSA wanted to close the lab in Aberdeen. Its flawed arguments, married to a total lack of consultation with staff, made for a counterproductive and inadequate process. At that time, as George Foulkes and Jeremy Purvis said in the chamber, fears emerged about the SPSA's intentions for the lab in Edinburgh. Since then, David McLetchie has joined those members in campaigns on that laboratory's future.  Given that, the cabinet secretary's announcement that that consultation should not proceed was welcome. Several north-east MSPs met Vic Emery, who had just become the convener of the SPSA's board as the SPSA's management emerged from a period of turmoil. We were assured that a new consultation would be embarked on to consider the service's future as a whole and that that consultation would be genuine. I concede that the second consultation was superior to the first, but a high bar had not been set. Like other MSPs, I made a submission to the process, as did Unison as the staff trade union, although I recognise that Unison has broader concerns about the new consultation process, too. The concern remains that the SPSA entered the new process with a clear determination to run down or close the two laboratories. That fear springs from the history of the process that I have outlined and from the new consultation document. It suggests four options for change. We do not ignore the need for efficiencies at times of great strictures in public sector finances. Option two would make savings, including those from post reductions. However, it would—crucially—retain the laboratories and introduce a new information-technology-based laboratory information management system, which would benefit the efficiency of the national service and of local services in the laboratories. The document goes into a full list of advantages and disadvantages for options three and four, but far less time is spent on scrutinising the first two options. That raises the concern that they are not being presented with the same priority. Option three would result in the closure of the laboratories in Aberdeen and Edinburgh—I will go into further detail about just how damaging that would be—while option four would mean that those two laboratories lost key services such as DNA processing, volume crime biology analysis, fingerprint examinations and drug analysis. Options three and four would not only result in greater reductions in staff but risk the loss of highly skilled staff to our forensic services in the process of relocation. Option three might present greater savings on paper, but it does not include the cost of a courier system to transfer evidence to the central labs from local forces, for example, let alone the wider costs of a reduced service in the affected areas. Option four would run down services significantly in Aberdeen and Edinburgh, but it would not save significantly more money—about £700,000 more in year three than option two would save. That is in the context that Scotland already spends about a third less per capita on forensic services than England does, according to the figures in the consultation document.  I will spend some time on what would be lost by closing or running down the laboratories. I had the chance to visit the local lab in Aberdeen with Lewis Macdonald and lain Gray and I was hugely impressed by the facilities and by the skills, expertise and commitment of the staff. Grampian Police's chief constable, Colin McKerracher, has said that the strong relationships between his officers and the staff at the Aberdeen lab have played a crucial role in murder inquiries. Grampian Police and Northern Constabulary have been prepared to invest significantly in the lab, because they recognise its importance to their work. The Aberdeen laboratory won an SPSA award for innovation in light of the role of staff in working on the tragic Super Puma helicopter crash. On a range of measures, both the Aberdeen and Edinburgh laboratories are performing excellently and efficiently in their delivery of forensic services. I have seen the drugs analysis service that is provided in the Aberdeen laboratory. It is working at full capacity. Presently, chemists at the laboratory provide the police with a 24-hour call-out drugs analysis service, specifically for custody cases in which a drugs analysis result using the instruments at the laboratory has to be secured within six hours of detention in order to secure custody. Without that system at the Aberdeen laboratory, such a call-out service would not be available—it would be only a retrograde service that was not sufficient for court use. That of course raises concerns about the prosecution of cases. As we know, the further away the scene of the crime is from the laboratory, the longer it takes to get results. The concern is that closing the laboratories would be damaging to local policing, and that it would not serve our justice system, with cases being delayed or evidence not being provided in time.

I certainly agree with Robert Brown, and that whole area will need to be examined. He will agree with me that it remains crucial to have as short a turnaround time as possible for drugs analysis evidence. That is another reason why the laboratories in Aberdeen and Edinburgh must be retained. There is concern that closing the laboratories can have only a detrimental effect on public safety and tackling crime in the areas of Scotland  concerned. No wonder the plans have provoked public comment from Grampian Police and Northern Constabulary. Colleagues will go into greater detail on their concerns about the local impact of closing laboratories. We understand that, nationally, there is a backlog of about 3,000 drugs analysis cases and more than 3,500 crime scene cases requiring DNA analysis.

Those were official figures that were in a press release. I stand by them and I will give them to the cabinet secretary immediately following the debate. The current situation is impacting on the prosecution of justice in this country now. I cannot see how the situation will be improved by the closure of two excellent forensic laboratories. We support the amendments from John Lamont and Robert Brown, which we believe make further important points in relation to the debate. I had hoped that we might see something of substance in the Scottish Government's amendment, and that it might have engaged properly in the debate. Unfortunately, that is not the case, and it rather seems that its amendment is an attempt to evade debate. It looks like the cabinet secretary saw our motion and reached for the panic button. The recommendation has been decided by the SPSA. It is a recommendation to the cabinet secretary, even if, curiously, it has not reached him, despite having been decided more than a week ago. He cannot avoid the fact that it is his decision to make. For the Parliament to support the Government's amendment would be to miss the opportunity to agree a motion that makes clear our view that we must retain excellence in forensic services for the whole of Scotland. I ask members of every party to affirm what so many of us have been saying to our constituents: that we support the retention of the laboratories in Aberdeen and Edinburgh. We should, therefore, support the motion. I move, That the Parliament recognises the importance of a national forensic service which is able to serve the needs of the whole country; acknowledges the key role of forensic services and speedy access to evidence for the detection of those responsible for crimes and the prevention of further offences; notes the consultation by the Scottish Police Services Authority (SPSA) on a number of options  for the future of forensic services in Scotland; believes that the recommendation for the future structure of the service which has now been made by the SPSA Board to the Cabinet Secretary for Justice should be made public immediately; further believes that Option 3, which would result in the closure of the laboratories in Aberdeen and Edinburgh, and that Option 4, which would see their services very significantly reduced, would be detrimental to very many communities in Scotland, and accordingly believes that Option 2 should be the basis on which services are developed.

I, too, welcome the opportunity that we have had to debate the drugs strategy and acknowledge that we have had a good debate with some considered speeches from members from all parties. We do not all agree on every point. There was a discordant note from Patrick Harvie. Although I did not agree with many points that he made in his interesting speech, I, too, will talk about treatment-based interventions in the justice system and about those for whom a sudden detox strategy of abstinence would not be right. As others have said, we must have treatment that meets, and is sensitive to, the needs of the individual. Although there is not agreement on every point, there are important areas of agreement because we are all focused on the common goal of reducing the appalling toll of drug misuse on our communities through crime, ill health, robbing children of their childhood and opportunities and—most distressing of all—the still-too-high toll of drug deaths in Scotland. As a member for North East Scotland, I know all too well the impact that drug misuse can have. Too many communities in the north-east—not just in Aberdeen or Dundee but in our rural areas, too—are blighted by drug misuse. Aberdeen has been targeted as a fertile market for drug dealers,  with the vast majority of problems involving crack cocaine being confined to Grampian. Despite the efforts of Grampian Police and successful initiatives such as operation Lochnagar, levels of drug crime are still far too high. When I was first elected as an MSP, I did not anticipate just how pervasive the problem was or how many cases would come to my office—be they related to crime, antisocial behaviour or problems resulting from family breakdown—with drug misuse as their root cause. However, we should also be clear that, as with so many problems with which we deal in this Parliament, there is no quick and easy solution and no silver bullet. Both Richard Simpson and Ian McKee outlined very persuasively the complexity of the problems. Therefore, we welcome both the progress that has been made in the strategy "The Road to Recovery" and the approach that the minister has taken to the issue and to today's debate. However, although it is right to focus on recovery rather than just on harm reduction, it was never the intention of previous strategies only to reduce harm. The ambition has always been to get drug misusers to end their addiction. No one wants drug misusers parked on methadone—we want them off drugs and playing productive roles in society—but we believe that methadone still has a role in stabilising chaotic lives. We must also acknowledge the difficulty of moving people along what is a long path to recovery, to which Angela Constance rightly referred.

The treatment needs to suit the individual, so we need to look at a whole range of treatments. A pilot programme of that approach—involving a very limited number of people with drug misuse problems in, I think, the north of England—has been evaluated and should be more carefully looked into. As Margo MacDonald might imagine, I would not want to go as far as others have suggested with some of the more radical approaches, but I think that there is very much merit in weighing up whether that approach, which has been piloted with a limited number of people, could be of use here in Scotland. Given all the options that are available, we need to acknowledge just how difficult the problem is to deal with. In my view, although progress has been made on some issues, concerns remain about a number of others. We have seen improvements in waiting times for treatment, which is crucial. As the minister said, when addicts want to turn their lives around, we must give them every opportunity to do so. Therefore, we must hope that NHS funding  issues will not lead to a deterioration in waiting times for treatment. Of course access to treatment in the NHS is critical, but some of the programmes that are provided by the voluntary sector are also crucial in helping drug misusers not only to stabilise their lives but to turn them around and to get into work. That is why we have expressed our concern that, if local organisations suffer cuts and need to reduce their activities, achieving the strategy's goals will be made all the more difficult. On the criminal justice approach, a real difference was made by some of the initiatives in the previous parliamentary session, such as the shop-a-dealer scheme and the introduction of drugs courts and drug treatment and testing orders. We would have liked to have seen greater use of those in the past few years, as we believe that such initiatives can be effective in reducing drug-related crime and in helping drug misusers who offend to deal with the root cause of their offending behaviour. It is also important to acknowledge, as Robert Brown did, the scheme in Lothian and Borders where a different version of DTTOs has been applied to a wider range of offences. That is very welcome. Where we have identified the greatest concerns and a need for much more effective intervention from the Scottish Government is on the issue of drugs in prisons, which Cathie Craigie and others have highlighted. The issue has also been highlighted by Brigadier Hugh Munro in his role as chief inspector of prisons. I am aware of the extraordinary lengths to which some people will go to get drugs into jail, so I do not pretend that the problem is easy, but we need more interventions to ensure that drugs are not brought into our prison estate and that more is done to detect them when attempts to do so are made.

I do not think that I have time—I apologise. A number of members have mentioned the still-too-high number of drug-related deaths in Scotland. We must welcome the fact that 2009 saw a reduction in that number, because every drug-related death is a waste of a life and a terrible bereavement for a family. I have met some families in that terrible situation. We must remember that the number of drug-related deaths is still significantly higher than in previous years and that, as others have said, it has increased in seven out of the past 10 years. That indicates the scale of the problem of drug misuse in this country and the severity of the challenges that we still face in tackling it. We have made real efforts in areas such as education and awareness over the years since devolution, and I believe that they will bear fruit in the future, but  right now we still face a problem that is intimidating in its scale and complexity. No one here has all the right answers and in terms of policy and approach, I do not feel that we are far removed from the Scottish Government. We welcome the progress that has been made but, as Bill Butler said, we must be aware that there is still a very long way to go. I caution against the idea that we can change things overnight through radical departures, but I think that there are many examples of people working with drug misusers to improve their lives and deal with their addiction that show us what works. We must back those initiatives but be under no illusion that it will require perseverance, continuing discussion of our approach and a relentless focus on tackling drug misuse to ensure that more individuals and communities will be free from the blight that drug misuse has too often been for far too many in our country.

Does Patrick Harvie agree that we should not underestimate the impact that a wrongful acquittal can have and that, in the age of forensic evidence and DNA that can be found 20 years later, reform of the law is required? Does he accept that the change in English law took place some years ago? Only eight cases have been involved and only half of those have resulted in new convictions, so we are talking about narrow circumstances and not a disproportionate change in the law.

This is a Scottish Government that has failed to provide Scotland with the Government that the country needs, and it is one that has the wrong agenda for Scotland in the future. Today, the First Minister has confirmed that the centrepiece of the SNP's election campaign will once again be its obsession with the constitution, as if with changes to it our problems will magically disappear. We will take to the country our obsession, which is for improving the lives and communities of the people of Scotland, and we will look forward to that debate in the months ahead. The limitations of the Government's legislative programme are clear from what the First Minister has presented today to Parliament. Other colleagues have already talked about broad areas in which the programme is deficient or there is an absence of necessary action. I want to touch on those themes as they apply in justice policy. The debate on the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill just before the recess reflected the difference of views that exists on justice policy. Along with the families of the victims of knife crime, we proposed the introduction of a mandatory minimum sentence for knife carrying. That proposal was rejected by the Scottish Government. We opposed a sentencing policy that intends that 7,000 offenders avoid jail on the arbitrary basis of a presumption against sentences of three months and under. It is now the Government's intention to extend that provision to sentences of six months and under, meaning that it will apply to 12,000 offenders—all of that without the necessary funds for community payback schemes. Although our police forces have made progress in tackling crime, despite what the First Minister said earlier, the Scottish Government has simply refused to intervene when police boards have been forced to make plans to slash police numbers, threatening our community safety in the future. Right now, we have a recruitment freeze in four of the eight forces. We believe that the Scottish Government's approach in those areas reflects the fact that it is not providing the relentless focus on the needs of victims of crime that we need to have.  It is disappointing that this legislative programme does not include a proposal for a victims commissioner. That is why it is so important that my colleague Dave Stewart is pursuing his member's bill. Other Labour members are pursuing proposals on victims' rights and reform of the law that the Scottish Government should have pursued but has not—Rhoda Grant on tackling domestic abuse; Trish Godman on reforming the laws on prostitution; Bill Butler on damages for wrongful death; and Hugh Henry on providing further protection in the law for workers who are assaulted in the course of their duties. Although the Scottish Government has not pursued those measures thus far, I still hope that it will act, in the end, to ensure that they become law.

It is crucial that we tackle reoffending, and we believe that that should take place in the community and in custody. That is an important part of the debate that has not been gone into enough. I agree with Mike Rumbles entirely on the key issue of tackling reoffending, to which we are very much committed. The Scottish Government has today outlined proposals for three bills that, to varying degrees, impact on justice matters. Unfortunately, they do not include further action on important issues such as tackling antisocial behaviour, giving new powers to communities to take action on antisocial behaviour in their areas and not letting the current laws wither on the vine. Although, for some years, we have had repeated assurances from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice that he will end automatic early release, no further indication has been given on progress or on when ministers propose to effect that measure. I am also somewhat surprised that legislation has not been proposed on the reform of sheriff and jury trials, as we joined the Scottish Government in welcoming the proposals in the excellent report from Sheriff Principal Bowen. However, we will engage constructively with the proposed reservoir safety bill and public records bill, which were referred to in the "making Scotland safer" section of the statement. When the Scottish Government produces proposals that we believe will help the victims of crime, we will support them notwithstanding our concerns over other aspects of its justice policy. For example, we will support the proposals to reform the laws on double jeopardy. It is intolerable when someone who is guilty of a crime  walks free from court. When new evidence of their guilt is produced, there should be an opportunity to try that individual again. Parliament should support reform of the law, and with retrospective action, so that families such as those of Helen Scott and Christine Eadie—the victims of the World's End murders—can finally see justice done. I think that ministers have taken the right approach in pursuing that legislation and it will receive our support. We also support legislation in the area of forced marriages, aware that changes to the laws on forced marriages were introduced in England and Wales in 2008. That, too, is a welcome measure. Nevertheless, we point out that, without adequate resources for Scottish Women's Aid and other agencies, the legislation will not have the effect that it needs to have. Of course, we will also conclude consideration of the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill, and will engage constructively to improve the proposals as they stand. The justice bills that have been announced today will generally attract our support but, as important as they are, they will not in themselves address our key concern that the Government has not taken the right approach to the reform of our justice system. We will continue to make our argument in Parliament for a more victim-centred approach to the administration of justice in our country, and we look forward to taking that case to the Scottish people.

I am sure that the minister will agree that, along with recovery, the key issue in tackling drugs misuse is, indeed, dealing effectively with drugs-related crime. What consideration has been given to making greater use of drug treatment and testing orders for those convicted of such offences and whether they might now be extended to apply to a wider range of drugs offences than is currently the case?

Is the cabinet secretary saying that, if the bill falls tonight, he will not introduce legislation that we could support and which could be passed in a matter of days, which would cover all the issues that he is talking about?

You did it for the budget.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Does Mr Maxwell acknowledge that I have already made it clear that, on those areas where there is consensus—there clearly are such areas—we support fast-track legislation? That would quite easily be done and there would be no need to go through all the normal process. Indeed, emergency legislation may well be required in the Parliament in October anyway.

Like the cabinet secretary, in the closing debate of the protracted consideration of the bill I pay tribute to those whose efforts have enabled the issues that the bill covers to be properly discussed and scrutinised over a period of well over a year. Labour members do not currently benefit from the advice of the civil service and rely on the extraordinary efforts of a small team. I thank Gordon Aikman in my office and Gavin Yates and Julia Braun in the Labour support unit, as well as the Scottish Parliament information centre, for its assistance. I congratulate the Justice Committee on its scrutiny of the bill, which would not have been possible without the diligence and patience of the clerks, who have been patient with a number of us. I am sure that members from all parties recognise the superb efforts of Andrew Mylne and his team. I congratulate the committee convener and members, especially the Labour members, Bill Butler, James Kelly and Cathie Craigie. The bill arrived in the chamber in a good condition, as legislation that we could support, with a sensible approach on sentencing and meaningful action on violent crime. However, the bill as it now stands is very different, with measures that we cannot support. Unlike Iain Gray with the Scottish National Party manifesto, I will not rip the bill in two, for obvious reasons, but I emphasise how much it has been eviscerated during today's proceedings. I must tell the cabinet secretary that what divides us on the bill is far more significant than what unites us. A bill that arrived in the chamber without the Scottish Government's flawed and reckless proposal for a legislative presumption against custodial sentences of six months and under now includes such a proposal for three-month sentences. It will apply not just to minor offending but to 28 per cent of those who are convicted of indecent assault, 68 per cent of those who are convicted of crimes of domestic abuse and almost a quarter of those who are convicted of knife crimes. The Liberal Democrats' amendments demonstrated that the measure is unworkable and unfunded, but they supported it anyway. The additional 7,000 community sentences that will follow the proposal will put an intolerable strain on an already stretched system. We support more and better community sentences; that is why we supported the plans for a pilot community court in Glasgow, which the Scottish Government opposed. That exposes the lack of consistency and credibility in its position. At the beginning of my speech, I congratulated many of those whose hard work has been crucial to the scrutiny of the bill. I also pay tribute to those  outside the chamber who have contributed to the bill's consideration. In particular, I thank John Muir, Kelly McGee and all of the families of the victims of knife crime, who have taken their campaign so passionately and—for some of us, at least—so persuasively to the Parliament. It is almost beyond belief that the Scottish Government and others have actively removed from the bill a robust and necessary measure to tackle knife crime, in the form of our proposal for mandatory minimum sentences for knife possession. That proposal has not succeeded today, but I assure the families of the victims of knife crime and the 30,000 Scots who signed their petition that this is not the end of the campaign. We will continue to work with them until we change the law in this country to take the action against knife crime that we need. In other areas, such as tackling prostitution, the bill is also inadequate or silent. There are proposals that we can support, such as the establishment of a sentencing council, and some measures that are beneficial. We particularly welcome the new provisions on stalking. I congratulate Rhoda Grant on her important work in the area, which was inspired by those who have been victims of such crimes. If the bill falls today, I know that she will employ her member's bill as an alternative legislative vehicle to make the changes. In that event, we make clear that we will support fast-track legislation to put in place the other measures in the bill on which there is clearly consensus. However, such measures are outweighed by the bill's failure to act on knife crime and the reckless proposals on sentencing. For more than a year, we have made clear that there are two lines in the sand for us that will determine our support or opposition to the bill. The need to reject the legislative presumption on sentencing and the need to take robust action on knife crime have always outweighed for us any other benefits of the bill. Those lines have been crossed today, so we will act as we have consistently advised the chamber that we would. Regrettably, we cannot support this flawed bill. Accordingly, we will vote that the Parliament should not pass it.

There has been extensive debate during the bill process about whether the Scottish Government's proposal to change the age of prosecution to 12 is the correct one, or whether the age of criminal responsibility itself should be changed. For our part, the crucial issue is to ensure that it should no longer be possible for children under 12 to be prosecuted in adult courts. I believe that the recent case in England in which two children who were accused of attempted rape were tried in an adult court highlighted the concern that that is not the appropriate forum for dealing  with such matters, particularly as we have a successful children's hearings system with access to the same disposals as the courts have for children who are convicted of such offences. It is therefore difficult to see what could be gained by having such offences dealt with in adult courts. There has been wider debate around changing the age of criminal responsibility. I believe that further debate on the issue is likely to focus on that point rather than on changing the age of criminal prosecution, as is suggested in Robert Brown's amendment 190. I also believe that his proposal to change the age of criminal prosecution, rather than the age of criminal responsibility, would require other changes to the children's hearings system and would need more extensive parliamentary consideration. Therefore, I cannot see what could be gained by dealing with the matter by changing the age of criminal prosecution by statutory instrument rather than through that fuller debate. As Robert Brown said, we need to reconsider the whole issue, for which the full parliamentary procedure for primary legislation will be required.

I believe that Parliament will return to these issues in the future. I concede that many of the age levels might be arbitrary, but I am not persuaded by the case that has been made by Robert Brown in amendment 190. There are likely to be further opportunities for fuller debate, to which we look forward.

At stage 2, we made clear our position that the best way of improving the law to deal with prostitution in Scotland is through the amendments that were originally lodged by Trish Godman and have been lodged for stage 3 consideration by Marlyn Glen. There is a persuasive argument that it is neither effective nor equitable to punish in law only those who sell sex, who are often vulnerable victims of abuse or self-abusers, when the behaviour of those who purchase sexual activity is not dealt with in the same way. We already know that women are being trafficked into Scotland for the purpose of sexual exploitation. John Watson of Amnesty International highlighted the challenge that we face when he pointed out that "there have been no prosecutions for trafficking offences in Scotland, although there have been well over 100 in England and Wales."—[ Official Report , Equal Opportunities Committee , 15 June 2010; c 1865.] I refer to the issue of trafficking because fears have been expressed across the chamber that there may be an increase in the number of women who are trafficked to Scotland for the purposes of prostitution as we approach the 2014 Commonwealth games. Parliament must set in place the right legislative framework to help us to deal best with the problem.  Although our preference is to change the law through the amendments in the name of Marlyn Glen, that proposal was rejected in committee and, I fear, will be rejected again today. I have lodged amendment 79 because not to include that proposal in the bill would be to leave Scotland with weaker laws to tackle prostitution than the rest of the UK. That would only provide encouragement to those who, right now, may be looking to the 2014 Commonwealth games as an opportunity to profit from the misery of trafficked women. Nigel Don lodged the same amendment at stage 2 but withdrew it because it introduces strict liability. That is necessary, or it will be far too difficult to secure a conviction under the proposal. The previous UK Government concluded that the measure was compatible with European law, and it has been enacted in England and Wales. It will be an effective way of ensuring that those who pay for sex are forced to consider the circumstances of the prostitute who will provide the sexual services, while protecting those who have not chosen to be involved in prostitution. Making those who would purchase sex consider that there may be consequences for them will reduce demand for the purchase of sex and, hopefully, reduce trafficking, too. We must challenge those who purchase sex to recognise the consequences and impact of their actions for the victims of prostitution and trafficking and, if they are convicted, for themselves. We cannot do that without changing the law. If Parliament does not do that today, it will not properly help those who find themselves in the appalling misery of being sexually exploited so that others can profit. There has been much talk about taking action on the issue—it is time to act by changing the law. We must not leave ourselves in a situation where our laws on this important and destructive area of crime are weaker than those in the rest of the UK. That is why I seek support for amendment 79, which I will move if the other amendments do not succeed.

Will the member give way?

Will Nigel Don give way?

We have mandatory sentences for firearms offences, and firearms offences are falling.

It is a bit rich hearing the Cabinet Secretary for Justice talk of leaving it to the judiciary given the law under the amendment that we have just agreed to. The reason why this Parliament needs to take new measures to tackle knife crime could not be more clear. Scotland suffers from rates of violent crime that are higher than anywhere else in the United Kingdom and probably Europe. Thirty per cent of crime in Scotland is violent whereas in England and Wales the figure is 20 per cent. For us, knife crime remains at persistently high levels.

I cannot take an intervention. No one took my interventions—[ Interruption .]—apart from the cabinet secretary, but that is the only thing that I will give him in the debate. There were 3,422 convictions for knife carrying in 2007-08 and more—3,529—last year. We have sought to do more in the Parliament to tackle knife crime. In the last session, we passed new laws, opposed bail for knife criminals, conducted knife amnesties, and doubled the maximum sentence for carrying a knife—it is still available to the judiciary. However, we cannot escape the fact that, despite all those actions, the chronic problem persists. It is our duty to respond and to take further action. That is why we proposed a minimum mandatory sentence of six months for possession of a knife except in exceptional circumstances. We are pleased that the Justice Committee backed our amendment at stage 2. Therefore, it is particularly disappointing that the cabinet secretary should seek to remove the provision at stage 3. I am stunned by his lack of basic understanding of it. We do not dispute that the provision represents a significant change in the law, but it is a necessary and practical one. The provision that we suggest is in line with that already in place for firearms offences. We already have a mandatory minimum sentence of five years for the possession of an illegal firearm, but there is no such provision for knife carrying despite the fact that knives account for far more murders in this country than guns do. Last year, 58 per cent of homicides in Scotland were committed with a knife, the highest percentage ever recorded. That is why we need to challenge more effectively the knife culture in this country. Every time that someone goes out  carrying a knife—every time that they engage in that culture—they dramatically increase the chance that someone will be killed or injured. In future, we need to ensure that they leave the knife at home. For us, that means that someone who gets caught carrying a blade needs to expect not to get a fine but to go to jail. Some have questioned the cost, saying that the provision will cost some £20 million. We do not believe that; we believe that it will act as a deterrent. Last year, 2,000 people were admitted to hospital with knife injuries. Knife crime costs our national health service in Scotland £500 million—half a billion pounds—and that is before we even look at the costs to the police and courts. However, we have to look beyond the statistics; we need to look at the people behind these cases. The human cost of these crimes cannot be counted. We can all point to comments from chief constables—I could refer to those from the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents—but what we really need to do is to listen to the victims of knife crime and their families. [ Applause .]

I take that on board, Presiding Officer, but they are here today to bear witness to the devastating impact that knife crime has had on their lives. I have met victims of knife crimes across the country, from Glasgow to Greenock and Cowdenbeath to Aberdeen. Also, 30,000 Scots have now backed the petition for minimum mandatory sentences for knife crime. They should not be ignored. Let us remember that the campaign was started not by a political party but by the father of a victim of knife crime. John Muir has given powerful testimony to the Parliament on the impact on knife crime. The loss of his son Damian in a random and senseless knife attack has been devastating for John and his family. He was not beaten by that; he is campaigning so that other families do not have to go through what his family had to face. He has worked with other families who have also been devastated by knife violence and his is one of a number of successful initiatives to tackle knife crime, including by way of educating young people. We all know that there is no single solution, but John Muir, Kelly McGee and members of other affected families have argued consistently that to achieve the kind of culture change that we need—to get those who carry knives to leave the blade at home—we need to make this change. They want that not out of a sense of retribution, but because they do not want others to go through what they have had to endure. That is by far the most  powerful case that has been put to the Parliament. The families are here today; I pay tribute to them and their campaigns. We should support them today and do all that we can to spare further innocent people the scourge of knife crime. I ask Parliament to listen to them and to reject the cabinet secretary's amendment. Unless we do that, we will have failed them and failed to take the action on knives that this country needs.

When the issue was discussed at stage 2, Robert Brown and the convener of the Justice Committee made the valid point that the judiciary do not consider voluntary intoxication to be a mitigating factor when deciding on appropriate sentences. We supported Robert Brown's amendment to delete the section that contained the provision, because it should be superfluous. We remain unconvinced that amendment 2 is necessary and we think that puddings are being a bit over-egged. However, we are mindful of the Lord Advocate' statement that "Day in, day out, notwithstanding the understanding that it does not mitigate, solicitors continue to put it before the courts in mitigation that their client would not have carried out the crime if sober. That is particularly prevalent as an excuse or as a form of mitigation in domestic abuse cases."—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 9 June 2009; c 2060.] We accept that it does not necessarily follow that such pleas for mitigation are successful, but we feel that the arguments for and against the provision are finely balanced. I do not believe, as some have argued, that agreeing to amendment 2 would mean that courts would not be aware when alcohol had played a part in an offence. I acknowledge that all members want effective action to tackle alcohol-related crime and to send a clear message that such crime will not be tolerated. I hope that amendments to come will send out a clear message on violence, too. Although we believe that amendment 2 is probably unnecessary, it is at worst superfluous and we will abstain in the vote on it.

It is clear that Mr MacAskill has not understood our previous amendment. He misrepresents our policy.

Section 24B imposes a mandatory minimum sentence. The courts would still be able to set sentences of four years, but they would have to give sentences of a minimum of six months. Under the Government's proposals, more of these guys will walk free.

We believe that the sentencing system in this country must focus on what best serves justice and public safety. The proposed presumption would not achieve those aims. It would not only apply to minor offences, as some members have sought to suggest, but would apply to 38 per cent of convictions for assault and to almost one quarter of convictions for carrying a knife. Today, we seek to ensure that more of those who offend with knives go to jail, but the SNP and the Liberals want fewer of them to do so. Of those who receive custodial sentences for domestic abuse, 68 per cent receive sentences of three months or less. In its evidence, Scottish Women's Aid highlighted that the presumption could have a negative impact on people who are experiencing domestic abuse, and that organisation has written to us today to ask us to demonstrate our support for women, children and young people who are experiencing domestic abuse by maintaining the present position for our courts. That window of opportunity, which might be a month or two, can be crucial in such situations. Of course, this time last week, the Scottish Government's policy was exactly the same as Patrick Harvie's, and he has had the integrity to bring that up. Today, we have a presumption for sentences of three months or less, with a provision to vary by statutory instrument. The Scottish Government had to revise the proposal the day before the close of lodging of amendments, which highlights its fundamental weakness, which is that it is unworkable, unfunded, and will put an intolerable burden on our community sentencing system. The Government has been forced to move to three months because that argument is overwhelming. Even in endorsing the presumption for three months, the Liberal Democrats have lodged an amendment that suggests that it should not be brought into force until a report is compiled on the expected increase in community sentences and the cost implications, and the views of an appropriate committee have been taken into account. Surely all that should have been done before the Government sought to change the law in this way? The Liberal Democrats are seeking to close the door after the horse has bolted. It gives the lie to what we all know: the proposal has not been properly funded, it will create 7,000 more community sentences in a system that already too often cannot cope. Unfortunately one third of  community sentences are already being breached at the moment. Far from increasing investment in organisations that have the expertise to ensure that community sentences are properly resourced, budgets right across the country are being cut. The cabinet secretary has talked about budgets and finance, but his officials have explained to the Finance Committee that the proposal will not produce savings in the prison estate because the infrastructure will need to be maintained. The argument has been made again today that those who go to jail are more likely to reoffend. The unfortunate reality, which none of us likes, is that by the time an offender receives a custodial sentence, they will normally have received numerous different disposals for other offences. They are, by definition, repeat offenders by the time they get to jail. Of course, we need to do more to drive down reoffending, whether it be by custodial or community sentencing. We should also look to have more robust community sentences. That is why the Parliament offered the opportunity for a pilot community court in Glasgow that would deliver fast and effective community justice. It was supported by everyone in the chamber, apart from the SNP, who now want 7,000 more community sentences. Where is the logic or consistency in that? Today the SNP tells us that it wants thousands more sentences to be given, not through the provision of community courts but through this legislative presumption. The proposal is not credible—it has unravelled before our eyes in the past week. Worse than that, it is not a responsible proposal. We are deeply concerned about its impact on our justice system and community safety, so we will oppose it.

The Labour Party recognises the concerns that have existed for some time over consistency in sentencing. We hope that consistency will be aided by the establishment of a sentencing council, although the key issue today will be about Parliament setting an appropriate framework for sentencing. There are important issues about the independence of the courts. If the sentencing council is to be effective, it is absolutely crucial that it has the confidence of the judiciary. It is essential to have balanced representation on the council if it is to improve public confidence in our system. That is why Stewart Maxwell's amendment 171 is not necessary. I am aware that, in the Justice  Committee, Mr Maxwell raised concerns about a possible imbalance on the council because of the existence of a judicial majority, but I do not see why that should weaken the council, particularly as the cabinet secretary has stated the clear intention that the council should act through consensus. The council will include lay membership and representatives of victims of crime, which is important. The judicial membership of the council is likely to benefit the council and help it work with the courts. On the same basis, I do not consider amendment 172, on the appointment of lay members, to be necessary either. Given that the Lord Justice General is responsible for matters such as appointment of the judicial members of the council, it seems logical that he should be consulted on the business plan. We therefore support Robert Brown's amendment 8.

I join the cabinet secretary in welcoming the "Independent Review of Sheriff and Jury Procedure" and in congratulating Sheriff Principal  Bowen and his team on the report. Sheriff Principal Bowen's recommendations are a natural progression from the changes that were made in the previous parliamentary session to criminal procedure in the High Court as a result of the review that Lord Bonomy chaired. We will always support changes in court procedures that not only improve our justice system's efficiency but do so with a clear focus on serving better the needs of victims of crime. Sheriff Principal Bowen has made it clear that the current procedures for sheriff and jury trials are too often unnecessarily traumatic, especially for victims. Too often, uncertainty is caused by frequent delays that result from the Crown or the defence needing additional time to assemble its case. Too often, a lack of communication between the Crown, the defence and the accused has resulted in witnesses having to attend trials when, if communication had been better, those who were guilty of the crimes could have entered a guilty plea much earlier. That is about different processes and a different culture, as Robert Brown said. Sheriff Principal Bowen articulated plainly the stresses on sheriff courts that the current situation has created. I am sure that we were all struck by the statement in the report that, in the past 20 years, the number of people who are indicted for proceedings in the sheriff court each year has increased by nearly 5,000. As members have said, that is partly because sheriffs can now sentence offenders to five years' imprisonment. Sheriff Principal Bowen states the case bluntly, but fairly, when he says: "A system which involves the citation of witnesses in respect of ... 6,000 indictments in the likelihood that approximately 1,000 will proceed to trial is not ... defensible." The key focus should be on sparing the victims of crime unnecessary anxiety and trauma, although improving the efficiency of procedures will have other benefits—for example, for police officers who should be on the beat but who are called to give evidence at a trial, although it transpires that they need not do so. John Lamont referred to the worrying statistics that Chief Constable Stephen House of Strathclyde Police released. Other witnesses are put to similar unnecessary inconvenience. The report also points out that witnesses' experiences vary. A range of legislation has, of course, made progress for vulnerable witnesses, but facilities and support for other witnesses still need to be improved. It is essential to impress on all witnesses the importance of their attendance at court. It is right that courts should take appropriate measures when people do not attend and have no  good reason for absence, as Sheriff Principal Bowen says in his report. Too often, the current circumstances unnecessarily inconvenience jurors. One juror said that, out of five days' attendance, he was required in the court and in deliberation in the jury room for a total of only three hours. The present situation puts pressure on the Crown and on procurator fiscal deputes, who must manage the sitting, negotiate pleas and liaise with defence solicitors while still having to start the trial, which should be their main focus. Much more of that could be done much earlier in the process. That is a key part of the practical, commonsense and well-researched proposals that the review has brought to Parliament. The compulsory business meeting is a sound proposal to establish better communication between the Crown and the defence, so that the first diet is seen as moving towards the conclusion of the process of discussion—at present, it is often seen as the beginning and so results too frequently in continuations and delay. Some accused people will—undoubtedly—still hold out until the last possible moment to admit their guilt, but others will now have a clearer idea of what faces them, through earlier and better communication between the Crown and their defence. That is likely to improve the current situation, in which there are more instances in which pleas are made at trial than in which evidence is heard. The proposal that the accused should be indicted only to the first diet strikes us as being sensible. It is not efficient to continue with the current situation of indicting to trial, with sittings being arranged and witnesses cited, despite the fact that, in 2008-09, pleas were tendered at the first diet or continued first diet in 46 per cent of cases. We must also ensure that there is flexibility in our courts, so that business can be managed expeditiously. It is right that programming of sheriff and jury business should be structured with an overview of available capacity in the sheriffdom as a whole; we must make full use of the courts' resources. Sheriff Principal Bowen was right to take into account in his recommendations the need to avoid extensive additional costs. There are areas where the question of costs is relevant. The legal aid system should not provide an incentive for the defence to drag out cases. It is important to ensure that all courts have proper facilities for the presentation of evidence digitally and for video links—to which Stewart Maxwell referred in his intervention during the cabinet secretary's speech—so that, where possible, such links can be used to eliminate unnecessary journeys to court. Cornton Vale  provides a prime example of the benefit that could be obtained from that approach. We must ensure that there is proper training and mentoring for procurator fiscal deputes. In a number of areas, the report flags up the necessity of ensuring that our Procurator Fiscal Service is adequately resourced. Robert Brown made good points on that and on training and mentoring of procurator fiscal deputes. Such points are also well made in the report. In all of the areas that I have mentioned, Sheriff Principal Bowen highlights the fact that good practice exists; those examples should be learned in courts across the country. The report is excellent and provides good recommendations that give us an opportunity to improve our sheriff and jury trial procedures. We will be part of a consensus in the Parliament that seeks to bring the changes into effect, in order better to serve our justice system and the victims of crime.

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government will inform the Parliament of any changes in police procedures for interviewing suspects. (S3F-2492)

The change in procedure will have implications for many aspects of the Scottish legal system. Does the First Minister have an initial estimate of how much additional funding will need to be made available through legal aid to achieve the change?

Does Maureen Watt accept that we have proposed a range of alternative measures, including alcohol treatment and testing orders and action on caffeinated alcohol? What consideration has she given to the potential for minimum unit pricing to increase the illicit sale of alcohol and, indeed, increase crime?

I congratulate the Health and Sport Committee on its scrutiny of the Alcohol Etc (Scotland) Bill, and Christine Grahame on the restraint and humour in her speech as convener. The report reflects the fact that while there is not consensus on every policy, the committee has diligently carried out its duty to scrutinise the legislation and its evidence base. It also makes it clear that all parties are troubled by the extent of alcohol misuse in Scotland and want effective action to tackle our heavy drinking culture. Obviously, that is important from a health perspective; however, it is also crucial from a law-and-order perspective. That was reflected in Chief Constable Stephen House's comments—which the cabinet secretary referred to—when earlier in the week he spoke of the number of assaults and murders in recent months that have been linked to alcohol misuse. Although it is right that he should highlight that link, we cannot get away from the fact that the coverage of those incidents in The Herald showed the prevalence of the use of knives in those offences. That is a matter to which we will return in the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill. To address the relationship between alcohol misuse and crime, we have called for the use of alcohol treatment and testing orders for offenders whose drink problem has contributed to their crimes. That has also lead us to seek action on caffeinated alcohol; indeed, the article in The Herald referred to a Buckfast bottle being used in an assault on a young man by his brother. We  believe that the amount of caffeine in alcoholic products should be limited. We have talked time and again about evidence, and on that issue, the evidence is clear. In January, Strathclyde Police told the BBC that between 2006 and 2009 Buckfast was mentioned in 5,638 crime reports in the region, equating to three a day on average.

The minister should look not only to evidence from here—from Glasgow Caledonian University, for example—but to evidence from abroad. The evidence on caffeinated alcohol is far stronger than the evidence for a minimum unit price. I have more statistics that minister may wish to hear. One in 10 of the offences to which Strathclyde Police referred were violent. A bottle was used as a weapon 114 times in that period. Bottles are now the second most common weapon of attack. There is yet more evidence. The need for action is clear, and I hope that we can persuade others to support us on the issue. I have never supported the proposal that the bill should include raising to 21 the age at which one can purchase alcohol in off-licences, but I very much welcome the proposal for a mandatory age verification scheme. For the past two years, we have supported a mandatory challenge 25 scheme as an effective way of tackling underage drinking. However, in order to tackle underage drinking and excessive drinking in general, it is vital that the current licensing laws are properly enforced. The cabinet secretary referred to that, but there are concerns that still not enough is being done. For example, in the past two years, only one person has been successfully prosecuted for selling alcohol to someone who was already drunk, and only three people were proceeded against. That issue requires far more action from the Government, beyond the bill. One of the concerns that we have raised about minimum pricing relates to the extent of the profits from which the drinks industry would benefit as a result of its introduction. We prefer measures that could result in funds being retained for investment in important alcohol misuse services. Of course, that can be achieved through taxation, and the previous Labour UK Government increased duty on alcohol, and wished to do so on cider in particular. A social responsibility levy offers a similar opportunity to ensure that those who profit from the sale of alcohol contribute to the provision of services and initiatives to deal with its misuse. I  welcome the fact that it has the potential to be something wider than simply a levy based on the polluter-pays principle—it is something in the bill that we can support. There is a range of measures on which there can be agreement, and I am sure that new, practical measures will be proposed through the alcohol commission that we have established, which will report back before stage 2. We need a wide range of measures because there is no silver bullet that will tackle alcohol misuse; certainly, a minimum unit price is not a panacea. The SNP proposition is to establish a consensus on tackling alcohol misuse. However, consensus means that everyone has to agree—in this case, to support a minimum unit price for alcohol—and I do not believe that that is helping the debate, particularly given the clear problems with the minimum unit price proposal. The issue of cross-border alcohol sales was flagged up in the committee report: I refer not only to Carlisle as the new Calais but to internet sales, which the committee recognises are increasing greatly. I worry about the potential for minimum unit pricing to lead to greater illicit sales of alcohol, thereby contributing to criminal activity. The issue has not been considered properly thus far. As the Law Society of Scotland pointed out in its evidence, there may be justification for the policy in terms of European law, but it requires to be tested. It is by no means evident that the policy will be successful. I am afraid that the cabinet secretary's failure to state what the minimum unit price will be not only weakens the general argument for it but raises the suspicion that there are deep concerns about its legality. I say that because the Scottish Government is unwilling to test the matter now. It is quite wrong to suggest that those who are unwilling to support one proposal are not serious about tackling alcohol misuse. There are important matters on which we can agree and new proposals that we and others will bring forward that we hope will attract support. That is what we should reflect on today. What is not in question is that we have to change our country's damaging relationship with alcohol. I think that there is a determination across the chamber to find the most effective policies to do so. That is why we have come forward with our policy proposals not only to change laws but to take action that works.

Why has the cabinet secretary lodged an amendment to delete the provisions for minimum mandatory sentences for knife crime that were passed by the Justice Committee at stage 2 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill? That is particularly puzzling, given that the president of the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents, Chief Superintendent David O'Connor, has said: "we find it increasingly difficult to oppose calls for the introduction of a minimum mandatory period of imprisonment of six months for any person carrying a knife ... in a public place."

Notwithstanding the legal action, will the minister tell us when he expects to invite companies to tender for contracts for constructing the route and when he will be able to tell us in more detail what funds the Scottish Government and the two local authorities will allocate to the project?

This has been a good debate on an extremely important issue. Many members have spoken about their own experiences of how workers who deal directly with the public can face challenging and even dangerous situations. In his excellent opening speech, Hugh Henry referred to the store worker in Portobello who suffered serious assault, and the cabinet secretary mentioned an assault on a taxi driver which led, happily, to a stiff sentence for the perpetrators. James Kelly referred to the incidence of violence against betting shop workers in his constituency, and Rhona Brankin spoke about the fears of shop workers that mean that they do not want to work after 5 o'clock at night. Bill Kidd spoke of his personal experiences, most recently an extraordinary incident on Byres Road. A number of members, including the Minister for Community Safety in his closing speech, referred to the appalling attack on Stephen Timms. I am sure that the whole Parliament will wish him a speedy recovery. For myself, in the past few weeks I have experienced two incidents. One involved someone who was refused the sale of cigarettes, while the other involved a person who came into a cafe carrying alcohol being asked to leave, which ended up in racist abuse. We all want to see a reduction in such incidents, which is why we have seen the concerted campaigns from a range of trade unions that want their members to be better protected in the workplace. A number of members, including Cathy Peattie and Karen Whitefield, pointed to the worrying statistics on attacks on workers.  Members have talked about identifying the need for legislation and the focus on the problem that new legislation might address. The available statistics show that the need and focus exist. The Scottish crime and justice survey for 2008-09 found that, of adults whose jobs involve contact with the general public, 35 per cent had experienced either verbal or physical abuse. According to Retailers Against Crime, there has been a 78 per cent increase in violence and abuse against Scottish shop workers over just the past three years. The need to do more is clear. That is why we have seen the introduction of USDAW's freedom from fear campaign, to which the cabinet secretary rightly referred. Members have spoken about the importance of USDAW's work on the issue, and there have been campaigns by other trade unions. The union Community has campaigned consistently for better protection for betting shop workers, while unions that represent people in the transport industry—Unite, ASLEF and others—have backed further measures. Robert Brown asked what more might be done to protect workers in those industries; the trade unions that represent those workers feel that new legislation is required. I remember that, not long after the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 was passed, there was a spate of attacks on bus drivers in Aberdeen. The question that struck me was whether there was not a case for further protection for those workers, too. Hugh Henry has led parliamentary activity on the issue, with his proposal for new legislation. His proposed bill has been backed by a great number of trade unions. It has received cross-party support among members, and there has been a strong campaign that has been widely backed by members of the public.

The experience of the 2005 act shows that new legislation can be an extremely important part of the process as well as being of benefit itself. Nigel Don's speech made that point thoughtfully and positively. The partnership working that Robert Brown spoke about is important, but it can be not only backed up, but facilitated and made a priority by new legislation. That is why I think that Hugh Henry has made a powerful case for the legislation that he proposes. The bill is not being put to the vote today, but we sought to concentrate Parliament's mind on the crucial need to reduce the number of attacks on workers. I acknowledge that there has been  scepticism from John Lamont and Robert Brown on the proposal, but there is a great deal of consensus that more needs to be done to tackle the problem. I hope that we can do more to persuade others to follow the route that Hugh Henry has proposed. I think that we can—there have been many positive contributions on that basis today—and I hope that, after due consideration of the bill proposal, there will be further cross-party support.

I do recognise the risk, and James Kelly will know that we have concerns about shoplifting and how that will be affected by the Scottish Government's wider proposals on sentencing policy. The experience of the 2005 act is a good argument for extending similar protections in the law to other workers. Hugh Henry referred to the evidence that was given by Shona Robison to the Justice Committee in 2008 to the effect that, at that point, almost 600 people had been convicted under the act and that the conviction rate was very high, at 75 per cent. The law was extended to cover other staff in the health service but not, as Unison pointed out at the time, all health workers. The Scottish Government said then that it had an open mind on further legislation; I hope that it retains at least an open mind on the issue today. I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary said that the Scottish Government is actively considering Hugh Henry's proposed bill. I am very encouraged by that and by the comment from the Minister for Community Safety in his closing speech that the Government will look carefully at the draft bill when it is published. Those were encouraging speeches, so the speech from Christina McKelvie was regrettable. I do not know how professionals would describe the mass of contradictions that was her contribution. Retail has been a big issue in this debate: Christina McKelvie's contribution was all over the shop. At least I can welcome the fact that she will keep an open mind on the proposal as a whole. We heard from both Nigel Don and Bill Kidd very good speeches, which are to be welcomed. I hope that we can keep driving towards consensus.  On the Scottish Government's amendment, we agree that alcohol misuse is too often a factor in assaults on workers. We do not agree with the Scottish Government on the proposal for minimum unit pricing, but we want action to tackle alcohol misuse and we want effective enforcement of the current laws. The Scottish Government's amendment talks about that, but we believe that the Government could do far more itself. For example, only one person has been convicted in two years for selling drink to someone who was already drunk. We need better enforcement of the current provisions, but we also need new measures.

I do, but the idea that there would be only one conviction in two years under the provision that I mentioned is not realistic or believable. I accept the point, but it does not mean that the current licensing provisions should not be enforced more effectively. A majority of retailers now run think 25 schemes for sale of alcohol, and we want those schemes to become mandatory for all retailers so that people know that they must be prepared to have proof of age wherever they wish to purchase alcohol. Greater understanding of that would lead to fewer incidents of friction with retail staff. There is nothing in the Liberal Democrat amendment with which we actively disagree. Of course evidence sharing and partnership working are important responses to the issue, but the implication of the amendment is that new legislation is not necessary. We do not agree with that. Robert Brown did not really answer Hugh Henry's question about why we should make a distinction between a community health worker and a social worker, both of whom work in highly charged situations. The arguments that he used could have been made on the 2005 act but, as I mentioned earlier when I referred to the evidence from the Minister for Public Health and Sport to the Justice Committee, all the evidence shows that the act has been hugely successful. The Conservative amendment is trying to tempt me into the more troubled waters of the Scottish Government's general approach to sentencing. I do not disagree for a moment with anything that is in it, but we want to have a consensual debate. Also, it would delete the point in the motion about the Parliament and the Scottish Government tackling protection for workers. Although I whole-heartedly support the text of the Conservative  party's amendment, the Conservatives would not find the same agreement with their new coalition partners at UK level. However, that is the new politics. Perhaps there are some troubled waters in that, too. I did not agree entirely with Bill Aitken's speech, but it was, nevertheless, good. I understand from recent press coverage that he is on a fast track to canonisation. We wish him well in the future. He is here for another year and I am sure that he will continue to do great work on the Justice Committee. Today, we have fought to forge consensus that more action should be taken to ensure that those who work directly with the public in Scotland should be able to do their jobs free from fear of intimidation or assault. Action is required on a range of fronts with, as Patricia Ferguson said, partnership working between all levels of Government, trade unions, employers and the police. There is clearly agreement on that, but I hope that we can also agree that the Parliament, having rightly taken legislative steps to protect emergency workers, should be prepared to take such action for other workers in the community. That is the case that trade unions have made; they are in the Parliament again today to make it. It is also the case that Hugh Henry has made and I hope that it is the case—it is a powerful one—that the Parliament will accept.

To clarify for the cabinet secretary, we do not oppose all the measures in the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill, and we will make other suggestions for dealing with alcohol misuse. We have not accepted the argument for a minimum  unit price, but that is only one measure and there are others that we believe will be more effective in tackling alcohol misuse and dealing with the situations to which he refers.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the statement. The fallout from the now infamous Scottish policing board meeting shows that Scottish National Party ministers have put senior police officers and civil servants in an impossible position. For over a year, our police forces have made it clear that they cannot maintain the SNP pledge to provide 1,000 extra police with the budgets that the Scottish Government has allocated to them. They have said that at a time  when the Scottish Government budget was increasing and before any spending review down south—[ Interruption .]

How does it help the situation for the Government to withhold funding from police forces, which the cabinet secretary has threatened again today, when forces are already struggling with their budgets? Is it now the cabinet secretary's position—[ Interruption .]

They have the wrong answers, too. Is it now the cabinet secretary's position that having 1,000 extra police in two different quarters of this session of Parliament means that the SNP's promise has been kept, even if numbers reduce after that? Surely that renders it meaningless. One thousand recruits have been funded, but in order to increase overall police numbers by 1,500 the previous Executive had to recruit some 4,000 officers. Does the cabinet secretary not recognise that the statement from ACPOS this morning confirmed the fears about the sustainability of police numbers? Instead of getting his excuses in early, will he now agree to publish a new projection of future police numbers to give an accurate independent forecast of what they will be? This sorry episode shows that the Scottish Government has been caught red-handed trying to fiddle the figures on police numbers. The Government has been brought to book by our most senior police officers.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to tackle knife crime in Grampian. (S3O-10368)

Grampian Police does a great job, but last year Aberdeen was second only to Glasgow for knife murders, of which there was an increase. What dialogue has the cabinet secretary had with the force on further action to tackle knife crime locally? Given that thousands of Scots support the moves for mandatory minimum sentences to help tackle knife crime, to which the Justice Committee agreed during its stage 2 consideration of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, is it really the cabinet secretary's intention to delete those provisions during stage 3 consideration of the bill?

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with Aberdeen city alcohol and drugs partnership on its current priorities. (S3O-10261)

Methadone can play a key role in stabilising the lives of drug addicts. Although ministers have said that they wish to reduce reliance on methadone in Grampian, the amount of it that is being given to drug misusers has risen sharply. How will the Scottish Government support Aberdeen city alcohol and drugs partnership—perhaps through the service redesign that the minister mentioned—to ensure that programmes are in place to help addicts turn their lives around and to help more of them to cease their dependence on methadone?

In reforming our legal services sector in Scotland, the  first principle must be access to justice—maintaining it and improving it. In changing the law with a view to extending the availability of legal services, we must not unintentionally restrict access to justice for some people in our society. There are important questions about how we strike the right balance in making the changes. The case for alternative business structures was first considered in the previous session. We acknowledge that the finding of the Office of Fair Trading requires a response from the Scottish Government and that changes be made in our legal services industry. There can be benefits to consumers if change brings more co-location of legal and related services—a one-stop shop model, as it is being called—but there are important questions about how, in opening up the potential for new business structures, we can maintain current valued legal services. We can use the legislative process to improve access to justice and give our law firms a competitive edge, but we are not persuaded that the bill will necessarily achieve that. There are big questions about the timing of the legislation and the scope of the changes. We do not argue that changes to legal services in England and Wales should simply be imported north of the border. Our system is part of an international legal services industry, but we must ensure that changes that are made in Scotland are right for our legal services here. The changes down south were made before the global banking crisis and it will take time to see what effect they will have. Let us acknowledge that, as both Bill Aitken and the minister said, there are genuinely and passionately held views within the Law Society on both sides of the debate, particularly about the independence of the profession. I note that the minister has sought to give reassurances on some of those points. Labour members have met people on both sides of the debate and we benefited throughout stage 1 from advice from some of those who have expressed their concerns about the proposed changes. We valued the input of Ian Smart, whom Bill Aitken mentioned, and the evidence that he gave to the committee represented the strongest case that was put in favour of the bill. The Law Society's referendum showed that there is great interest among its members on the issue and that views on it are divided. I hope that Parliament and, indeed, ministers will now play a role in moving the debate forward. I say in favour of the bill that we know that, in challenging economic times, new investment in legal services is welcome. We all want our law graduates to move on to practice in successful Scottish firms. However, concerns have been raised about how access to legal services that are  provided by small firms, often in rural areas, can be maintained if a move to alternative business structures threatens their survival. As Bill Aitken said, Frank Maguire of Thompsons and others have expressed their fear that, under the proposals, there is potential for organised crime to become involved in ownership of firms. The minister stated again that the regulatory regime around the reforms will be adequate to address that concern. That makes the issue of regulation vital, but the bill allows any number of regulators, even if the Law Society and ICAS are the two organisations that are expected to apply. No legal services board of the type that exists in England and Wales has been proposed. I still have concerns about how, in that context, there will be uniformity of regulation. Moreover, the financial memorandum's claim that regulation will cost less than £100,000 does not strike me as being realistic. At least we have stage 2 for proposing changes not only in that area but in others. I am, for example, disappointed that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice did not agree to regulation of no-win, no-fee companies, which has been introduced down south. We will lodge amendments on that and on the regulatory framework at stage 2. We must also look to make progress on the vexed question of external ownership or investment, so I am pleased that the minister has met people on both sides of the debate and that those who have expressed concerns have made constructive proposals. For example, members will have seen the proposal from Mike Dailly of the Govan Law Centre for a co-ownership model with a 75:25 per cent split. It is good that Parliament, the committee and the Scottish Government will have a range of proposals to decide on. These matters are not simple; they are technical and often complex, so I urge ministers to take adequate time to ensure that they are properly considered. The saying "More haste, less speed" might well apply here. As the convener said, anyone who thought that these matters were uncontroversial and merely technical will have been thoroughly disabused of that misconception. That is because our legal services industry and the principle of access to justice in a legal system that we rightly cherish and are proud of are important in Scotland, and that is why, in proceeding with the bill, we will need an extensive debate about the changes that must be made at stage 2.

I too congratulate Hugh Henry on securing tonight's debate on USDAW's freedom from fear campaign—and I pay tribute to USDAW for its great work in promoting such ideas. It is important to recognise the personal commitment that Hugh Henry has shown, particularly through his member's bill proposal to extend the application of the tougher penalties in the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 to other workers, to trying to ensure that workers are given better protection from assault and injury. As other members have said, that proposal is backed by Unite, USDAW and a wide range of other trade unions. It was right to create new specific offences for assaulting or obstructing emergency workers, and we are now seeing convictions under that act. As the freedom from fear campaign makes clear, we need to ensure that workers are similarly protected when they are employed in any profession that involves providing a face-to-face service to the public. Last year, the Scottish crime and justice survey found that, among adults whose jobs involve contact with the general public, 35 per cent have experienced verbal or physical abuse and 7 per cent have experienced physical abuse. When one considers the number of workers involved, that is a huge figure. In the case of retail workers, the greater demands that are being placed on how they interact with the public can lead to tense, and even threatening, situations. I guess that not many MSPs are often challenged for ID, but such challenges are having to be made more and more. In effect, we are asking shop workers to police licensing restrictions on the sale of alcohol and tobacco. Although that is necessary, shop workers are being presented with the challenge of having to refuse to sell goods to people who might well not be in a sober state—as Margo MacDonald pointed out—but are determined to obtain the goods that they want to purchase. I think that Hugh Henry is also right that when mistakes are  made in carrying out that policing responsibility, the responsibility for the mistake cannot rest simply with the shop worker in question. The new responsibilities can easily lead to verbal abuse. Like others, I have witnessed such situations—indeed, I have witnessed two in the past week alone. One involved someone being refused the sale of cigarettes; the other involved a person who had come into a cafe with alcohol being asked to leave, which ended up in racist abuse. Unfortunately, the new responsibilities can lead to violence as well, which is why tougher penalties need to be in place. The Scottish Government is not always in agreement with us on ensuring that there are adequate penalties for offending, but on this issue I hope that we can achieve consensus. New penalties are not always the answer; education must be involved, too, as the Community union showed in its campaign on protection for betting shop workers. In retail in particular, we must educate the public about the existence of the think 25 policy on the sale of alcohol, as the motion suggests, and ensure that staff receive appropriate training on how to deal with such situations. We have proposed the roll-out of a mandatory challenge 25 scheme for the purchase of alcohol, covering all retailers. We hope that that will help to change the culture of buying alcohol by making it the norm to prove one's age when alcohol is purchased. Along with education campaigns, that measure will, we hope, reduce the number of assaults on staff. Unfortunately, education on its own is unlikely to work. That was made clear to me a few years ago when there was a spate of attacks involving serious assaults on bus drivers in Aberdeen. Despite the great negative publicity that was created by coverage of those incidents, there were repeat offences. That is why we need education and enforcement, and a partnership approach on the part of everyone who is involved in dealing with such issues. We must give other workers the new protections that are rightly now afforded to emergency workers. That is the approach that Hugh Henry has adopted in the motion and in his proposed bill, and I hope that Parliament will show its commitment to dealing with such important issues by supporting not only the motion but the proposed bill.

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with Aberdeenshire Council on the development of flood prevention measures. (S3O-9964)

The minister will be aware that, in the aftermath of last November's flooding in Stonehaven, there were calls for an independent inquiry into how the emergency had been dealt with and the preparedness of local authorities and other agencies to deal with the situation. What progress has been made in establishing such an inquiry? How will it be demonstrated that lessons will be learned from the incident?

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government is doing to protect children from abuse. (S3F-2310)

It has been reported that at least 1,500 sex offences against children were reported last year. So that we can know the full scale of the problem, will the First Minister back the call from Anne Houston of Children 1st for police officers to ensure that there are accurate data on these offences, given that it is not always stated whether the complainant is a child? As one way of dealing with the problem, can he give us any further information on when he expects that the pilot sex offender notification scheme in Tayside will be operational in every police force area?

Will the member give way?

Mr McLetchie is, unhappily, sounding a note of discord in what has been a consensual debate until now. Surely it is right for parties, including the Liberal Democrats and ourselves, to reflect on cases that have come up recently, including the World's End case. For some years now, Labour has made the case for change; indeed, we made the change down south. Double jeopardy has been in place for the past 800 years. For a large part of that time, there was  a Tory Government and it did nothing about the issue.

I hope that this debate will be the start of a process in the Parliament that will result in significant modernisation of the law on double jeopardy. I am confident that such a move will receive broad support throughout the chamber. I very much agree with what the cabinet secretary said in his opening remarks. There may well be debate about the detail and parameters of the change, but it is right that we seek to forge a consensus for change on this important matter of justice. Although this reform of the law might directly affect only relatively few people, as the cabinet secretary pointed out, we all know that there are people in this country—victims of crime and their families—who believe that they have not received justice for very great wrongs that have been committed against them and their loved ones, and that there will be compelling evidence that they have thus far been denied justice. There can be no more sickening sight than that of a killer walking from a Scottish court free from punishment for the crime. We have to accept that that has happened in Scotland. If we can properly rectify such an injustice, we should do so. We must thank the Scottish Law Commission for its deliberations: there can be no doubt that in considering the case for reform of this 800-year-old part of Scots law it took on a significant task. However, it is disappointing that although the commission accepted the case for retrials in instances of confession and tainted trials, it made no recommendation to allow retrials in cases for which there is new evidence. It suggested a legislative framework, should Parliament ultimately choose to go down that route—I hope that it shall—but that framework does not allow for retrospective application. The commission did not accept that there is evidence that there are current situations in which this change of law would lead to retrials if new evidence were to be made available. I find that to be an odd conclusion—one which I believe will be proved to be incorrect. However, I am pleased that the Scottish Government has taken a different view and has embarked on the process. I inform Parliament that, rather unusually, we will support the Scottish Government motion unamended. It is right that the motion does not restrict the areas in which changing the law on double jeopardy may apply  after the consultation, as the Liberal Democrat amendment proposes, particularly given how early it is in the process. The change in the law in England and Wales, which has been in place for some five years now, applies to a wider range of crimes than murder and rape, as the cabinet secretary and Stewart Maxwell pointed out. That range includes manslaughter, kidnapping, armed robbery and serious drugs crimes. We think that the matter needs to be considered seriously. Of course, there will be the opportunity to consider it during the consultation process. Bill Aitken has done the right thing by withdrawing his amendment, which will now allow for the principle of retrospection to be maintained in the motion. However, I acknowledge the important issue that has he raised, which is that we must ensure that legislation on this is developed as soon as is practically possible. It is right that he brought that matter to the attention of the Parliament, because it needs to be dealt with carefully. We would support stand-alone legislation after a consultation. It is also right to say that the matter has been debated in the Parliament for some time. Of course, the Scottish Law Commission invested considerable time in preparing its own report. It is right that retrospective implementation is mentioned explicitly in the motion, in particular to inform the consultation process. Given the access that prosecutors now have to new techniques and technologies, such as DNA evidence, that can show proof of criminality even in cases that are many years old, it is right that the proposed new law should have a retrospective impact. We all remember the trauma that was caused by the collapse of the trial for the World's End murders, to which Mike Pringle referred. Indeed, we all remember the Lord Advocate's statement to Parliament on the matter. If the law is not changed retrospectively, the hopes of the families of Helen Scott and Christine Eadie will have no chance of being realised. I have heard it argued that double jeopardy is an important principle that should be maintained, because accused persons who have been acquitted should have the right not to have the prospect of a retrial hanging over them. I agree that changes to such an important principle must be dealt with very carefully and with appropriate safeguards. However, adhering too closely to that principle would not take account of the rights of victims and their families to achieve justice for horrors that have been committed against them if they have been failed by court processes. I hope that the consultation process ensures that the views of families and victims are properly taken on board.

Many people are confident that the outcome of the criminal trial that I mentioned will be that the allegations will be proved, but I take Robert Brown's general point. I accept that parameters and safeguards are needed. I do not argue that people should be tried again and again for the same crime, but I am assured that the need for safeguards will rightly be an important feature of the consultation. The legislation that was passed for England and Wales includes the safeguard that the Court of Appeal must agree to quash the original acquittal. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice has pointed to further safeguards, which we can imagine will be put in place in any legislation that might introduced in Scotland. The Scottish Law Commission report points out that the change in the law south of the border has not resulted in a raft of new convictions. Of the six applications for retrial that have been determined, three have failed. For me, far from being an argument against making the proposed change, that shows that the legislation in England and Wales is being applied carefully and proportionately and is working. Given that the legislation has been in place for some five years now, we surely have nothing to fear from such a change in the law. I hope, and am confident, that ministers will look at the experience in England and Wales when coming to a final view on whether the law should change in Scotland. I do not pretend that retrospective application would affect a huge number of cases in Scotland, but I believe that it would apply to some important cases, in which families have been devastated because in their fights, justice in the name of their loved ones has not been realised. The proposed change in the law should not be taken lightly. We will need to consider carefully how exactly the law should be changed—that is what the consultation process will be about—but there must be a change. As well as providing an important reform of the law for the future, the change should ensure that, wherever possible, we can right past wrongs to ensure that those who should have received justice finally do so.

Serious and organised crime has had a devastating impact on communities and families throughout Scotland for too long. All members see the toll that has been taken on people whom we represent as a result of the intimidation, violence and misery that are associated with the drugs trade and the wide spectrum of offences that have been perpetrated by crime gangs and networks. People are tired of seeing in our newspapers day in, day out the same names of individuals and families who are known to be associated with such crimes. Those individuals and families are, apparently, too often able to continue their lives of crime without being brought to justice.  Members have a common cause. We need to do all that we can to take out those criminals and gangs, and we have seen progress on that since devolution. The previous Scottish Executive established the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, first used the proceeds of crime legislation, and established the programme to deliver the crime campus at Gartcosh. However, we must acknowledge the huge challenges that exist in dealing with criminals who are ever-more adept in their efforts to evade justice. That is why we must always look to do more to tackle such crimes and why we support the Scottish Government's motion, the goals of the serious organised crime task force and the areas of work that are highlighted in its strategy. "Letting our Communities Flourish" identifies the right aims, but we need to be reassured that the right measures are taken and that the right support is given to crime-fighting agencies to achieve what the document sets out to deliver. The mapping exercise to show the breadth of activity of the 367 serious organised crime groups that it identifies has taken place, and the cabinet secretary has highlighted additional work. He has repeatedly said that the gangsters will be hunted and taken down. That commitment is welcome, but questions remain. How many of those groups are still operating? How many of the most-wanted crooks have been caught? We must all accept that it is not enough only to express determination to catch and convict those crooks; the pledge must be delivered on. If that does not happen, criminals will simply be emboldened further. If we want people in communities that have been blighted by these crimes to report them, we need to show them that information will be successfully acted on. We should all be proud that moneys are being seized from criminals and that funds are being put into communities that have been affected by their crimes. That, rather than incentivisation schemes for police forces, must still be the focus of the recovered funds. However, we cannot wait for those funds to be recovered so that we can invest sufficiently in civil recovery. Investment has to be made up front, as the criminals will certainly employ expert legal advice to protect their ill-gotten gains from seizure. Such issues have been highlighted in the coverage of a number of cases, including that involving Michael Vidouri, who was convicted of a £3 million VAT fraud. Despite court orders, payments have continued to be resisted in high-profile cases. It is right to celebrate successes, but it is also important to focus on further work that needs to be done. The "Joint Thematic Report on the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002" by her Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland and the Inspectorate of Prosecution in Scotland contains very good proposals on mainstreaming that work in the  police and the prosecution service, appointing champions for it and developing a proceeds of crime strategy. All those steps can be taken now. I hope that the cabinet secretary can tell us whether they will be implemented. Whether we are talking about a Mr Vidouri or a Mr Rauf, we need to be able to seize such profits.

Of course we welcome such investment, but we must also acknowledge that resources to fight such cases are available to the serious and organised crime networks and the criminals who lead them. Such investment is welcome, but we must also consider the thematic report to which I referred. I welcome the conference, but would like to know exactly what progress will be made in implementing the reasonable proposals that have been made. If we need to debate the legislation further in order to make it work better, we must do that, too. The cabinet secretary has also made public commitments to intervene to ensure that there is no place for organised crime in what should be legitimate industries, including, notably, the taxi industry in both Edinburgh and Glasgow. The gap is again between the commitment—however laudable—and the delivery. We must ask what steps have been taken as a result of the concerns raised by legitimate taxi firms in Edinburgh, and we know about the concerns over the award of the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde taxi contract to Network Private Hire. That raises the question whether the right work is taking place across Government to ensure that decisions on procurement are acted on when there are clear concerns about the businesses involved. For example, what conversations took place between the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing on the situation involving NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde? I welcome the role that SOLACE is to play in new work on the issue, but we must reinforce the fact that the issue is one for the whole of Government. Of course, we want to see the Mr Bigs of the crime gangs put away for long sentences, but all too often more minor offending can be linked to serious and organised crime. In that regard, we have only to look at BBC Scotland's investigation  into the highly profitable activities of Scottish shoplifting gangs. The cabinet secretary's proposal for a presumption against custodial sentences of six months and under will apply to 95 per cent of those convicted of shoplifting offences. That will do nothing to deter those crime gangs. Serious and organised crime recognises no national boundaries. Tackling it must be a collaborative effort throughout the United Kingdom and, indeed, Europe and the world. [ Interruption. ] I hear ministers criticising, from a sedentary position, my comments on shoplifting, but I have outlined the reality of the situation. If ministers think that the proposals regarding custodial sentences of under six months will deter those criminals, they are sadly mistaken.

Of course I do, but that criminal would be operating with a gang and many people in the gang will be convicted on a number of occasions for more minor offences and will escape custody entirely under the cabinet secretary's proposals. If he cannot see that, we have a real problem. We also make no apology for pursuing the issue of the establishment of the crime campus at Gartcosh, which Elaine Smith has taken up as the constituency member. We do not want to see any further delay to the project, because the advantages of bringing together under one roof the key Scottish and UK agencies that are working to tackle serious and organised crime are clear. I pay tribute to the work of Graeme Pearson in pursuing that vision and I also emphasise the key role of Gordon Meldrum and his staff at the SCDEA, because that agency, with its focus and expertise, is vital to a strategic approach in Scotland to preventing and stopping serious and organised crime. In the previous session of Parliament, the Scottish Executive introduced provisions that would allow the SCDEA to employ officers directly, but, despite its crucial role, the agency is still reliant on secondments from police forces. We must reconsider that issue.

I could not agree more with Elaine Smith, whom I know has taken up the issues as the constituency member.  We will support both the Conservative and Liberal amendments. Robert Brown raises the very important issue of human trafficking and the lack of prosecutions that have taken place even when such crimes have been detected. Human trafficking requires particular attention ahead of the Commonwealth games. We will also support the Government's motion, because of course we must set out a clear intention to do all that we can to bring down crime bosses, return their ill-gotten gains to the communities that they have plagued and root out serious and organised crime, whatever mask of legitimacy it seeks to put on. However, the Scottish Government and the cabinet secretary must realise that expectations that have been raised must now be met and that promises must be turned into delivery. Communities living in fear of serious and organised crime do not need pledges; they need results. Effective action in dealing with those responsible for these heinous crimes will be welcomed throughout the chamber and the country. I move amendment S3M-5929.2, to insert at end: "; believes that the Scottish Government should ensure that there are no further delays in the construction of the Scottish Crime Campus at Gartcosh, which was originally due for completion this year but is now not expected to be fully operational until mid-2013; supports the crucial role played by the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency in ensuring that there is a co-ordinated strategy to tackling serious and organised crime in Scotland, and also believes that the Scottish Government must make progress in implementing the findings of the Joint Thematic Report on the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 , published by HM Inspectorate of Constabulary for Scotland and the Inspectorate of Prosecution in Scotland, to ensure that there is greater success in seizing and recovering the assets of those who profit from crime."

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the implementation of the change to the law on double jeopardy should be retrospective so that, whatever the timetable for new legislation, it covers those to whom it should apply? I have a great deal of sympathy with the cabinet secretary's points on the timescale for new provisions.

I find myself in the somewhat unusual position today of seeking to broker some consensus between the disparate views that we have heard so far in the debate. It is clear that the cabinet secretary's amendment states matters as they are, and is perfectly valid. However, Robert Brown's motion makes another valid point: the deployment of Tasers is an issue of great importance and they should not be deployed without any reference to those who have a wider role in policing policy in Scotland. Tasers have been made available to firearms officers in Scotland since 2004 but if Strathclyde Police, Scotland's largest force, decides to deploy Tasers across the whole force, we should acknowledge that that will be a significant move for the rest of the country, as other forces would be likely to follow suit.  I emphasise, as the Labour amendment does, that Strathclyde Police is embarking on the pilot for very good reasons. The pilot is about seeking to give police officers the tools that they need to do their job in the challenging circumstances—

The cabinet secretary's position on the matter is somewhat bizarre—I will come to that later. Bill Aitken was right to highlight—as the Labour amendment highlights—the fact that, on average, 4,000 Strathclyde Police officers are assaulted each year. The intention behind the pilot—it must be stressed that it is a pilot—is right. The question is what should happen before a final decision is reached. The concern has been raised that three days' training may not be adequate, and that is something that should be established through an evaluation of the pilot. One of the issues that Amnesty and other organisations have raised relates to the potential health risks of Tasers. The one-year trial in England and Wales resulted in no recorded incidents of serious adverse medical effects, but reported fatalities in the United States have been acknowledged. The health impacts need to be reviewed carefully at the end of the pilot: it does not matter that that has already been done in the trial down south. I support the pilot going ahead, but it would seem bizarre if, at its conclusion, the detailed findings were not shared with ministers and with the Strathclyde police authority, and if there was no opportunity for further discussion. However the decision is made in the final analysis, ministers will surely want to be reassured that the pilot has been properly evaluated, and that there has been proper dialogue between the police force and the police authority. That sums up the tripartite approach and what it should involve. There would be understandable concern if the use of Tasers was rolled out across the force without that type of dialogue.

I think that I am short of time—I will come back to the member if I have time. If the pilot is a success, and if that consultation has taken place, there will be a compelling case for more officers to have Tasers.  Nevertheless, even if the final decision is to be made by the police and not by ministers, it is inconceivable that the force would simply ignore the opinion of ministers on such an important issue. Patrick Harvie was right to point out a certain irony in the cabinet secretary's position, in that he wishes all firearms legislation to be devolved to the Parliament but will not express a view on the matter while that is not the case. In Westminster, ministers have reached a view on the basis of the results of a trial. That is the approach that we will take, and there is no reason why the cabinet secretary and the Scottish Government should not take that approach too. I move amendment 5808.1, to leave out from "is concerned" to end and insert: "notes the decision of the Chief Constable of Strathclyde Police to issue Taser guns to 30 specially selected frontline police officers after being trained over a three-day period on their proper use; recognises that this is a three-month pilot with the aim of reducing the number of assaults on officers and notes that an average of 4,000 Strathclyde Police officers have been assaulted in each of the last four years; recognises that a full evaluation of the pilot will take place at its conclusion and only then will a decision be made about rolling it out force-wide; believes that there must be a careful evaluation of the results of the pilot, including assessment of any risks, and transparency regarding those results before any decision is made on whether to extend the use of Tasers; further believes that there should be discussion not only between ministers and Strathclyde Police before a final decision is reached, but also with the Parliament and the Strathclyde Police Authority."

I welcome today's debate on female offenders in our justice system and congratulate the Equal Opportunities Committee on its scrutiny of the issue and its excellent report. The timing of the debate is opportune, as it follows the first report that has been published by Brigadier Hugh Monro, the chief inspector of prisons, on HMP Cornton Vale. The recommendations in his report echo a number of the concerns that the Equal Opportunities Committee has raised. The Parliament will debate the wider issues of approaches to sentencing, but both the committee's report and Brigadier Monro's inspection report present us with the key issues in dealing with female offenders. We must consider the particularly disruptive impact that there can be on the lives of families and the specific problems that female offenders have, which require specific approaches. The inspection of Cornton Vale highlighted the particular pressures on facilities there. It deals with a prison population that overwhelmingly has  significant substance misuse problems as well as other problems that have contributed to the women's offending behaviour. The inspection report concludes that prisoners should be assessed for programmes to address offending behaviour and then provided with relevant programmes. I am sure that we all endorse that. The committee's report concludes that more could and should be done to rehabilitate women in prison, particularly those who are serving short-term sentences and those who are on remand. I hope that the Scottish Government will make progress on that. It states in its response to the report that, in respect of a number of areas, it will look at some of the innovations at Hydebank Wood prison in Belfast, which the committee identified as examples of good practice. That is to be welcomed. However, I would like more information about the voluntary transfer of female prisoners to Inverness and Aberdeen. There will be a significant resource issue for the facility in Aberdeen because it does not have in place the provision and facilities to deal with that. On community-facing prisons, there are wider debates about the plans for HMP Grampian as well.

I am losing time here. The important point, though, is that the minister is looking to transfer prisoners to Craiginches in Aberdeen, which I know well. Female prisoners used to be accommodated there, but the accommodation is not adequate and has not been used for a long time. Unless there is investment in the transfer, it will not be adequate now. We need further information on that from the Scottish Government. The committee highlights the challenges of dealing with the problems of many female offenders in terms of mental health issues—which affect a disproportionate number, as I think we have clarified—substance misuse problems and illiteracy. On mental health issues, the committee rightly discussed the need to improve access to  appropriate services. It rightly acknowledges the challenges in dealing with addiction problems, but it also considers the need to look at new ways in which to help offenders to tackle their addictions, not only while they are in prison, but on their release and beyond. Again, those points are echoed in the inspection report. We have highlighted on other occasions the shocking illiteracy rates in our prison population, and the committee flags up a lack of literacy and numeracy as a particular problem among female offenders. Indeed, it calls for a speech and language therapy programme to be established at Cornton Vale. I have doubts about whether a similar scheme would be put in place for prisoners who would go to Aberdeen under the Government's plan. However, in all those areas, further action will contribute to tackling reoffending, as will action to ensure that offenders are on appropriate programmes and are engaged in activities while in custody. Another key issue with regard to rehabilitation must be female offenders' access to their families—particularly their children. There is a strong theme in the report that children must be allowed appropriate access to their mothers because they should not be penalised for their mother's offences, but the issue is also about maintaining relationships to enhance the chances that the mother will not reoffend. The committee is right to ask for an exploration of ways in which children can have longer visits to their mothers in prison. Although drug misuse in prison should not go unpenalised, the committee is right to suggest that the withdrawal of visiting rights is not the right penalty because it affects the children as well. Other penalties need to be explored. The committee also covers community sentences for female offenders. We want to see more use of drug treatment and testing orders and alcohol treatment and testing orders for appropriate offences. A further point, which Margaret Mitchell mentioned in her speech, is the need for female-oriented community sentences. A woman who has child care responsibilities might have a legitimate reason for being unable to be at a specified place at 8 in the morning to fulfil an order, yet she will be at a greater risk of breaching the order and ending up in jail. That should not be happening. The community sentencing system as a whole is throwing up huge challenges, but we must ensure that those women get a fair chance to ensure that they do not breach the terms of their orders and therefore end up in custody. The 218 centre, which was established in the previous parliamentary session, is an example of best practice that brings together all the agencies that can help female offenders to deal with problems such as addiction and to turn their lives  around. The committee is right to suggest that replicating such services throughout the country should be a priority for the Government. With such an approach and with many of the other measures that are set out in the report, we can improve the way in which we tackle the very difficult issues that are associated with female offenders. The fact that the report takes us forward in that respect is to the Equal Opportunities Committee's great credit.

Will the minister join me in praising the efforts of Tayside Police to educate young people in particular about the severe health dangers of so-called legal highs such as bubbles? Does he agree that, while it is absolutely right to move to ban such substances—consideration of mephedrone must be part of that—the interim action that police forces are taking to prosecute for reckless conduct those who distribute such substances must also be supported?

To ask the Scottish Executive what dialogue it has had with Aberdeen City Council on delivery of its single outcome agreements. (S3O-9358)

The Scottish Government's budget has gone up this year, but the funding settlement for our local authorities means that Aberdeen and all councils face great challenges in meeting their single outcome agreements. Will the cabinet secretary clarify his view on a vexed issue that affects the situation in Aberdeen? Is it now the Scottish Government's position, as stated by its spokesman, that it will review the funding formula for local authorities only if there are major changes in Scotland's constitutional relationship with the United Kingdom?

I have tried to seek consensus during the debate, but I think that Nigel Don should acknowledge, as Des McNulty did, that political will is needed if the important organisations that we are talking about are to be supported.

Scotland has a proud history of providing supported employment. Tonight's debate is about how we can ensure that supported employment has a bright future. If, in the 19 th century, we could offer employment opportunities to the blind and disabled, we must continue to do so today, in 21 st century Scotland. I welcome to the Scottish Parliament workers from Blindcraft in Edinburgh, Dovetail Enterprises in Dundee, Royal Strathclyde Blindcraft Industries, and Glencraft in Aberdeen. I thank them for being here and I thank their trade union, Community, which has done so much on their behalf—Joe Mann, the deputy general secretary, is also here tonight. [ Applause. ] Along with Lewis Macdonald and our local MPs Anne Begg and Frank Doran, I was with the workers at the Glencraft factory on 13 November when the doors were closed. It was a traumatic time after all the efforts that the workers had made to turn their business around and keep their jobs. There had been a workshop for the blind in Aberdeen since 1843, as a result of a bequest by two local women. The decision by the administration of Aberdeen City Council to  withdraw funding and precipitate the factory's closure dismayed not just the workers but everyone in the city and the north-east. Families and businesses had supported Glencraft over the years by buying their beds and mattresses there, given its excellent reputation for workmanship. They have backed the Glencraft workers: thousands have signed the petition calling for the factory to be saved. What has been particularly inspiring to me is how the Glencraft workers have responded and fought for their factory. They have had an agonising Christmas not knowing what the future holds, but they have campaigned hard to save Glencraft by coming to Parliament in December to bring their petition to the party leaders and to the First Minister. The issue has been politically contentious in Aberdeen, but I emphasise that members from across the political spectrum have supported the motion—for which I thank them—because we all want to move forward and to have sustainable supported workplaces. Despite the closure of Glencraft and the real challenges faced by Dovetail in Dundee and Blindcraft in Edinburgh, we must realise that there are great opportunities for supported workplaces. Local authorities in those areas must realise that, too. The intervention of the business community in Aberdeen in looking to create a new sustainable social enterprise from the old Glencraft justifies the confidence that there can be a successful future for such workplaces. There is still much to be done in taking forward the planned successor to Glencraft. We await clarity on how the business model will work, how local and national Government will support it, and how many of the Glencraft workers will be employed. However, there is an important ray of hope. I hope that the involvement of Bob Keiller and Duncan Skinner of Production Services Network will help make the venture a success, and that Aberdeen City Council backs their ambition by confirming a rent waiver for the new factory, as has been indicated. However, we cannot always ask business to step in, and there needs to be leadership from the Scottish Government to support supported workplaces. Iain Gray has called for a Scottish Government champion for disabled workers; I hope that the Scottish Government gives that proposal serious consideration. Community has campaigned for such a champion to ensure that officials involved in public procurement apply article 19 of the European Union public services directive.

I agree. Article 19 states clearly: "Member States may reserve the right to participate in public contract award procedures to sheltered workshops or provide for such contracts to be performed in the context of sheltered employment programmes where most of the employees concerned are" disabled persons. As David Stewart says, there is massive potential for use of that directive, which was implemented in Scottish law in 2006. There is not enough awareness among local authorities of that. When I wrote to Aberdeen City Council to ask whether it had ever made use of article 19 in procurement, it replied that it was not aware of the article having been used. It then stated that it had not been asked to use it. I am pretty sure that it has been asked to do that locally, but its reply shows the need for the Scottish Government to promote the use of article 19 by Scotland's public agencies and local authorities. That would not only help supported workplaces but be of great value to Remploy workplaces. My colleague Helen Eadie, in particular, has worked on Remploy issues. As David Stewart says, the ambition at supported workplaces is not simply to continue on the basis of subsidy but to be able to win contracts for work. There is evidence of the success that can be achieved in Scotland at Royal Strathclyde Blindcraft, which has been greatly supported by local agencies and businesses, and of course by local councils. When Glasgow City Council formed City Building from its former building services department, a link was established with Royal Strathclyde Blindcraft that sees major contracts for work going to the organisation. That enables it to employ 250 employees, more than half of whom are disabled, and to offer a wide range of furniture products. City Building's website highlights its reserved contracts and the use of article 19. Glencraft's experience is evidence that this has been—and indeed still is—a difficult time for our supported workplaces, but with the right support and through the promotion and use of article 19, in which I believe the Scottish Government can play a leading role, more organisations can benefit from the high-quality products of the factories and their workers can be given the opportunity that they seek to work. Every day, the workers overcome obstacles in their lives to achieve that  goal. They do not deserve to have further barriers put in their way. They richly deserve greater support from all of us. I look forward to hearing from the minister what the Scottish Government can do to help to ensure that supported workplaces in Scotland have not only a rich history but a confident future. [ Applause .]

To ask the Scottish Executive what its preferred option is for improvements at the Haudagain roundabout and when work on this will commence. (S3O-9269)

If there is no prospect of work on the Haudagain roundabout starting before the end of this parliamentary session and given that Aberdeen City Council's development plans for the Middlefield area are contingent on its preferred option for improving the roundabout being selected, will the minister tell us when the final decision on the preferred option will be taken? I understand that the council expected a decision before Christmas.

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will be aware of the offences that were committed by Ryan Yates, who sought to attack two children in Aberdeen just two days into a sexual offences prevention order. Does he agree that there should be an investigation into that shocking incident to see what more could have been done to restrict Mr Yates's behaviour and whether, in the light of the incident, there should be a review of procedures?

We have had a good debate and there has been broad consensus on an issue of great importance. We had a colourful contribution from Nigel Don in his great hat, and we heard many well-informed speeches. As Jamie McGrigor said, we all owe our emergency services a huge debt of gratitude for the risk at which they put themselves to make us safe and to do their best in water rescue incidents. The Government was right to bring a debate on the report and is right to try to make progress on the issues. In the debate on the fire and rescue framework in September, inshore water rescue was mentioned, in particular by Jamie McGrigor in relation to the tragic events on Loch Awe, to which John Farquhar Munro referred today. At that stage, we were looking forward to Paddy Tomkins's report. Now we have the report, which is an excellent piece of work and provides the necessary framework for action. I join all the members who congratulated Paddy Tomkins and his team on their work. The report highlights the need to ensure that we have properly co-ordinated responses to emergency situations over which we have largely no control, such as flooding emergencies, and other incidents on which we can make a real difference with more work to promote information to the public on how to ensure their safety in and near water. On the first of those issues, the minister and others have reflected that the past years have regrettably seen a number of serious flooding incidents. With such events becoming more prevalent through climate change, which James Kelly addressed in his speech, it is vital that our emergency services be best placed to respond. Stonehaven in my region, North East Scotland, fell victim to flooding at the end of last year. Although there were concerns about the overall preparedness for that emergency situation, the  response from the emergency services was widely praised. That was certainly true for the firefighters who responded to the event. When I talked to some of the people who were affected by the floods about their traumatic experiences, the contribution of firefighters was picked out. However, the Fire Brigades Union in particular has raised concerns about the availability of appropriate equipment to firefighters in such incidents. It has raised those concerns for a considerable time, and I agree with Elaine Smith's comments that the union must be given a key role in implementing the strategy. I also welcome the review's recommendation for an audit of fire and rescue equipment to establish a baseline for what is available. I also hope that it will ensure that appropriate investment is made so that the right equipment is readily available in the future. Those sentiments motivate our amendment. The review also picks out the crucial role that fire and rescue services have in responding to incidents. The emphasis in the report is on having, throughout Scotland, a teamwork approach from our emergency services and other relevant organisations. Of course, there is also a need for a national overview, and the argument has been well made for the water rescue working group and the water safety working group, but the crucial aspect that has been highlighted a number of times in the debate and is highlighted in the report is the need for a co-ordinated response at the local level. The work of the strategic co-ordinating groups is fundamental to the successful implementation of the report. That comes through again and again. The report rightly identifies the police as playing the co-ordinating role to ensure that the right people from all the agencies involved—fire and rescue, the ambulance services, the RNLI and other organisations that can play a role—respond in an emergency. It flags up particular successes in that "Team Type approach", as it describes it, but it is right that we provide greater consistency in such arrangements. It is also important that, in drawing up the register of assets for responding to emergencies, we take account of capacity not only in our emergency services but in the voluntary sector and ensure that voluntary organisations have the right training. The report also points out that there are already examples that can be followed in implementing models of team working. It highlights, for example, the multi-agency flood response exercise that was held in Tayside at the end of September. It is to be hoped that such exercises will be replicated in other parts of the country. However, beyond such individual exercises, the right training must be available for the members of the emergency  services who may be called on in the event of water rescue operations. The report picks out existing success in that area in the fire and rescue services and mentions the work of the Scottish Fire Services College at Gullane, which Elaine Smith flagged up. However, we must ensure that there is appropriate training for everyone who is involved in water rescue. Peter Peacock also made important points about training, which others picked up; the theme has come up repeatedly. The other aspect of the report on which I will focus is public awareness and accident prevention. The importance of preventing unnecessary deaths, accidents and rescue operations through public awareness was highlighted to me recently in the north-east when I met members of the Maritime and Coastguard Agency and the police to discuss tombstoning. That is the potentially lethal practice of jumping into bodies of water—often the sea, but also rivers and lochs—from a cliff or other high point. Sadly, tombstoning has cost lives in the north-east and in other parts of the country. It was an unfortunate feature of last summer at a number of points along the River Dee. It was very worrying to see the emergence of websites and videos online promoting the activity and often giving a false impression that tombstoning is risk free, which leads to copycat behaviour. However, tombstoning, like many other activities in and around water, not only puts the lives of those directly involved at risk but takes up the emergency services' time and can, crucially, put emergency workers' lives at risk in a rescue situation. As Bill Aitken pointed out, what can seem like an innocent sporting activity at one point can quickly become, because of unknown factors, a desperate and life-threatening situation. I was pleased to learn of the partnership approach in Arbroath to dealing with the tombstoning issue, which has resulted in local education campaigns in schools to warn of the dangers of tombstoning, a campaign leaflet focused on holidaymakers, and an appropriate enforcement strategy to penalise those involved. I note that the Tomkins report is sceptical about having new byelaws and further enforcement. The arguments on that are well made in the report, but I think that enforcement must play a role. The Arbroath team is an excellent example of agencies working effectively together, which is the approach that the report advocates, but it must be rolled out across Scotland rather than restricted to individual communities or circumstances. There must be far more instances of that approach. We are pleased that the minister has accepted our amendment and that there is consensus in the chamber on how to provide a better lead for water rescue services in Scotland, which we require.  That will be achieved by pursuing the recommendations in the report, which we all commend.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many new entrant farmers it has supported in North East Scotland since 2007. (S3O-9158)

What further work will the Scottish Government do to increase the number of new entrant farmers throughout Scotland and particularly in the north-east, given the figures there? Does he agree that the United Kingdom Government support for the appointment of an ombudsman to ensure fairness between producers and retailers is welcome and will help to encourage new entrant farmers into the industry as well as helping those who are already in the sector?

To ask the First Minister what progress has been made on implementing the recommendations in Professor Alec Spencer's report regarding the transfer of prisoners to the open prison estate, "Balancing Risk and Need". (S3F-2163)

Does the First Minister agree that, although police efforts in capturing Peter Duff are to be applauded, given the serious concerns about security in the open prison estate raised previously it is unacceptable that he was in Castle Huntly in the first place, as a violent offender only two years into a nine-year jail term with a record of absconding? Will the First Minister now do what his cabinet secretary has failed to do and agree that the Spencer report recommendations should now be implemented in full for the sake of community safety?

Will the minister give way?

I congratulate the Public Petitions Committee, David Wemyss and the prison visiting committee of Craiginches on their tenacity in bringing the issue before the Parliament. At the heart of the petition is the important principle that prisons need to be truly community facing if they are to give offenders the best chance of rehabilitation. The chance of that happening is increased the nearer offenders are located to the support agencies that can help them and, crucially, their families. On this side, we believe that we should not abandon the idea that prison is a place not only of incarceration but where prisoners confront their offending and are supported in turning around their lives. Those important principles are thrown into stark relief by the plans for the prison estate in the north-east. I refer to the closure of Craiginches prison and the building of the new HMP Grampian at Peterhead. Those plans will take prisoners further from their families, and the transport links between Aberdeen and Peterhead make that problematic. HMP Grampian will not be community facing for Aberdeen. It is telling that two important cross-party bodies—the prison visiting committee and the Public Petitions Committee—have advanced the concerns.

I do not think that I will have time, although I will if I have time later. There is anxiety about the proposal across the parties. I disagree with the cabinet secretary on major aspects of justice policy, but I do not doubt his desire for more offenders to turn their lives around. That is why I simply cannot understand his making the proposal and I hope that he will reconsider it. The previous Executive radically improved the overall prison estate. Dr McLellan recognised that but the cabinet secretary never does. I do not contest the fact that there is great need for improvements at Craiginches prison for it to be fit for purpose but, while HMP Grampian is awaited, no investment is being provided to improve Craiginches. In any case, the argument is simply that there should be a community prison in Aberdeen and alternative options nearer the city have not been examined properly.

I am sorry, but I have only four minutes. The cabinet secretary will talk about planning issues and say that our arguments would result in delay in improving the local prison estate but, given the lack of clarity that the Parliament has been given on the plans for progressing HMP Grampian, I am in no way convinced that the decision cannot be revisited. There are many other concerns, not least those that Grampian Police has expressed on prisoner transport and community safety, but I have time to close on only one. HMP Peterhead is currently a specialist unit for the treatment of sex offenders. That is not an uncontentious issue locally, but powerful arguments have been made for having a specialist unit that deals with the particularly difficult challenge of treating sex offenders. The new HMP Grampian will not be such a specialist centre; sex offenders and their treatment will be dispersed throughout the prison estate. There are arguments for making such a change, but others have expressed concerns about the plans. I have had the opportunity to discuss the issue with Professor Alec Spencer, who is a former governor of Peterhead and wrote a report on the matter for the previous Executive. I am in no way persuaded that closing the specialist unit at Peterhead is the right way to deal with sex offenders in our prison estate. Expertise has been built up there over the years, and closing the unit is more likely to be another weakness in the plans for our prisons in the north-east and, potentially, Scotland. The change needs far fuller debate. In my view and the view of the vast majority of people who have taken an interest in the issue, the case that has been made for community prisons—in particular, for a genuine community prison in Aberdeen—is beyond doubt. That is not what the current plans represent. I hope that the cabinet secretary will accept that case, which has been made across the Parliament today.

Much-needed action to tackle congestion at the Haudagain roundabout in Aberdeen has been linked by the Government to the completion of the peripheral route. How long after the peripheral route has been completed will work begin at the Haudagain? Will it be as soon as the route is finished, which was the previous commitment? Will it be by 2012?

Moving on from the £943 million increase in the  Scottish Government's budget, does the cabinet secretary accept that uncertainty of leadership in the SPSA does not help strategic planning for Scottish police forces? Can he provide an update on when a permanent chief executive will be appointed to the SPSA?

The cabinet secretary acknowledges a link between price of alcohol and consumption. Does he also acknowledge concerns that minimum pricing could lead to an increase in the illicit and unregulated sale of cheap alcohol that has been purchased across the border? Does the cabinet secretary accept the link between crime and the consumption of popular caffeinated alcoholic products, which would not be affected by minimum pricing? The link has been identified by Bill McKinlay and others.

I, too, congratulate George Foulkes on securing this debate. In my political life, I have always thought it a good idea to follow his sage advice; that certainly applies to his support for the barred campaign. I know that nowadays we generally encourage people to be abstemious when enjoying a night out—we may have strayed from that at times in this debate—but it does not follow that people should be unable to enjoy a sociable night in the some venue as others simply on account of their disability. I congratulate Mark Cooper on his campaigning work on the issue. George Foulkes and others have already paid him fulsome tribute for that, but of course we expect nothing less than determination and success from graduates of the great University of Aberdeen. I am sure that Robin Harper will agree with that.

I hear a St Andrews man complaining—he should recognise reality. It is also right that we congratulate Capability Scotland on its support for the campaign. I have met Mark Cooper to discuss the barred campaign. As Bill Aitken said, he has made a persuasive case for the measures that he proposes. When he described to me his experiences of trying to enjoy a night out with his friends but being frustrated by access issues, I recalled an exercise that Anne Begg, the MP for Aberdeen South, conducted some years previously. She went out in Aberdeen to see whether bars and clubs had considered access issues and whether she, as a wheelchair user, could get into them. She found that, in a number of instances, she could not. It is a shame that, some years later, that is still the case in a number of establishments. We really should be making better progress.  I do not underestimate the pressures to which the licensed trade is subject at the moment. Mark Cooper has highlighted them, but what he proposes should not be too onerous. The proposals involve a change to the law so that landlords must consider accessibility before being granted a licence; licensing standards officers carry out access surveys; and, crucially, access information is made available to disabled people so that, at the very least, they can make their plans around the places that have appropriate accessibility. As Bill Kidd said, the City of Edinburgh Council has already taken a lead on the last point. I do not think that Mark Cooper's ambitions are too much to ask. It is right that he seeks action not only from the licensed trade but from licensing authorities. Some are already making progress; we must hope that others will follow. He has said that he wants to work with the licensed trade to achieve the goals that he has set out. I agree with Mark Cooper that the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill may provide an appropriate legislative vehicle for progress on these matters. However, it is a controversial bill and the issue should be left for less consensual debates than tonight's. I am sure that there will be cross-party support for the campaign and look forward to hearing from the minister what support the Scottish Government will give it to enable it to achieve its laudable goals. As Jackie Baillie said, equality of access is a fundamental principle that applies to all areas of life, whether it be the workplace, public services or the provision of opportunities for recreation and enjoyment, which should be an important part of anyone's life—even if they are rarely part of mine, given that I am a father. The campaign raises an important issue of equality; that is why all of us should support it tonight.

It is in The Sun .

Why do lessons appear not to have been learned in NHS Grampian not only from experiences in other health boards but from its own experiences in Woodend hospital and Dr Gray's hospital? What continuing contact will the cabinet secretary have with NHS Grampian to ensure that the necessary changes are put in place, and how will the public be informed of that progress?

Mr Brown's accusation that we are seeking support from Rupert Murdoch is behind the times and gives the lie to the outrageous politicking of his statement, which is entirely wrong. Does he accept not only that we pioneered community sentences when we were in government with the Liberal Democrats but that we have looked for further alternatives to custody during this session, including alcohol treatment and testing orders, which we have pressed for in the context of the bill? The member's statement was extremely unfair and misrepresented our position.

I congratulate the Justice Committee on its stage 1 report on the bill and I congratulate the convener on his self-restraint in presenting it. Given the breadth of the bill, the committee has had a lot of ground to cover. The Scottish National Party's supposed flagship bill on law and order involves many exercises in consolidation and proposals  that are technical in nature. Like others, I will not have time this morning to cover all the issues in the bill. However, the proposal to legislate for a presumption against custodial sentences of six months or less is significant, because it is unworkable, unfunded and unjust. I am fulsome in my praise for the committee's report, because it was right to reject that proposal. It has often been said that the intention is that minor offenders should not be placed in custody—indeed, the cabinet secretary referred to that this morning. However, it is clear that that presumption will not apply simply to minor offenders but to all sentences of under six months, which would include 40 per cent of those convicted of indecent assault, 85 per cent of those convicted of assault and two thirds of those convicted of knife crime. That sends out entirely the wrong message on this key area of crime. It will not do anything to make our communities safer, which should be the focus of the bill—I am afraid that it is not. There is a false debate about whether the measure in itself will reduce reoffending. We, too, want to reduce reoffending and we believe that community sentences have an important role to play in that, but reoffending rates are higher for those who are sentenced to prison because—alas—by the time that somebody receives a prison sentence, they have normally already received several other disposals. Almost by definition, a person who is given a prison sentence is a repeat offender. Putting offenders who would otherwise be in custody back in the community will not make communities safer. We should be clear about the consequences that that might have. Scottish Women's Aid has said that the presumption could "have a negative impact on women, children and young people experiencing domestic abuse." The cabinet secretary's argument that offenders will be sentenced to robust community payback programmes is fantasy. It is on his watch and not ours that community sentences are—sadly—losing public confidence. He referred to a survey in which 84 per cent of respondents said that they wanted community sentences as alternatives, but the same surveys show that people are losing confidence in such disposals.

I certainly take on board Margo MacDonald's point. The Equal Opportunities Committee has reported on a range of issues in relation to women offenders and we will certainly consider that committee's proposals carefully.  I am afraid that the current state of community sentences cannot be ignored. One third are breached and a fraction start on time. Even those who agree with the cabinet secretary's proposal on six-month sentences say that it must be properly funded yet, in the next three years, a black hole of some £66 million to provide the additional community sentences would result from the proposal. We believe in the staff who deliver community sentences—they do a fantastic job—but the cabinet secretary is not resourcing them adequately. He says that he is increasing the available funding, but we know that the community justice budget is at best flatlining—as James Kelly said—and that the cabinet secretary has used unidentified underspend to say that he is supporting the funding in the financial memorandum. His calculations do not add up. That is a recipe for disaster that will push an overstretched community sentencing system to the point of collapse. All those who will be responsible for delivering the greatly increased number of sentences expressed concern to committees about funding. To be frank, the cabinet secretary has done no more than dismiss their concerns.

We oppose the presumption against short-term sentences in principle. We want more community sentences, but the resourcing issue cannot be escaped from—to be fair, Robert Brown does not try to do that. When the financial memorandum is scrutinised—Mr Purvis was good at doing that in committee, along with Labour members—the inescapable point is that the funding simply is not there. Everybody has said that, if the Government believes in the proposal, the investment should come first, but the investment has not been identified, even though the Scottish Government's budget is increasing—of course, the cabinet secretary failed to refer to that. We believe in robust and effective community sentences. That is why we pioneered drug treatment and testing orders, why we now propose the use of alcohol treatment and testing orders and why we first proposed the community court in Glasgow. In England and the USA, that model provides swift and effective community justice in which we can have confidence. Despite everything that the Government and the cabinet secretary have said about community sentences, the  Scottish Government prevented the pilot community court from proceeding, although the Parliament voted for the pilot. Nothing else demonstrates so well the muddled thinking behind the bill and behind the presumption against short-term sentences. If we are to look towards more and better community sentences, investment must come first. The cabinet secretary says that we cannot continue to spend money on prisons, but his officials told the Finance Committee that the proposals in the bill would not save a penny in the prison system. Front-loaded funding is needed, but the cabinet secretary is not providing that. We will not support the failure to act effectively to tackle violent crime. We have proposed and will pursue a policy of mandatory minimum sentencing for knife crime. We still have some 3,500 charges of possession of an offensive weapon each year and higher violent crime rates than England has. That is why it is time to send out the clear message that if someone carries a knife, they will go to jail. Communities want tougher action to improve their safety, but the bill proposes that fewer people should go to jail for carrying a knife and that two thirds of the people who are convicted of such offences should not go to jail. The lack of action on knife crime in the bill is another unacceptable failure. We support some measures in the bill. We do not oppose the sentencing council per se, but we have listened to the Lord President and others and believe that it should have a judicial majority, that a mechanism for it to report to the Justice Committee should exist and that it should have a narrower remit and reduced costs. The council should not have to take account of the prison population—it should have a clear and unadulterated focus on what is just in sentencing. We will not oppose the change to the age of prosecution for children, but the Lord Advocate might need to retain the right to pursue a prosecution in exceptional serious circumstances. We will listen to views on that point and consider the detail of changes in the children's hearings system, which we still await. We do not oppose the rebranding of community sentences, but rebranding is of course useless if the resources are not provided to make the sentences work and we are concerned about the detail of the proposed changes. For example, the Sheriffs Association's submission to the Justice Committee says that, under the proposals, no penalty would in effect be imposed for breaching supervised attendance orders. Normally, the penalty is additional hours, but as the bill sets an upper limit of 300 hours for orders, a subsequent breach would have no effect on those who have  been sentenced to such an order. That requires to be addressed. Scotland should not be left with weaker laws on DNA retention than the rest of the United Kingdom has. The report of a serious case only yesterday showed that DNA profiles can be an invaluable tool in detecting and preventing crime. The proposals on tackling serious and organised crime are positive, but I understand from the financial memorandum that they will apply only to some two cases a year. The reality is that—sadly—the positive proposals in the bill are far outweighed by the negative. Given the committee's rejection of the Government's proposed presumption against short custodial sentences, and to provide the opportunity for amendments to be lodged to make the bill effective in tackling violent crime, we will allow the bill to progress to stage 2. However, the reckless presumption against six-month custodial sentences and the Government's unwillingness to take action on knife crime are lines in the sand. If they are crossed in the final stages, we will not support the bill. Labour will always, always put the safety of our communities first.

When we talk about timeous community sentences, it is not the case that only a fraction of community sentences start within the seven-day target set by the cabinet secretary? When Victim Support Scotland gave evidence to the committee, it said that there should not be community sentences for, for example, serious offences, violent offences and assaults, yet the cabinet secretary's presumption against custodial sentences will apply to indecent assault, assault, and two thirds of convictions for knife crime.

I join all those who have acknowledged the work of Brian Sweeney and his team in drawing together their comprehensive study into fire deaths and injuries. The key question has been why there are significantly more fire deaths in Scotland than there are in the rest of the UK. The overall trends of fires and fire deaths are down, but they are still far too high and too many families in Scotland still suffer the devastating consequences of fire fatalities. That is why, as the motion states, there must be partnership working by all the agencies in our communities to prevent fire deaths, damage and injury. At the centre of the report is community involvement by our fire services. We should always look to see what more can be done to prevent fires, as well as ensuring that our firefighters are properly supported in the courageous work that they do in tackling fires when they occur. The debate has been good and there has been broad consensus. I share George Foulkes's angst about agreeing with Bill Aitken, which for some of us is an occupational hazard. Mr Aitken made a good speech again today. The debate follows other good debates that we have had on fire services. However, we should return to the issues that we have discussed today. The debate has come rather soon after the publication of the report and we still await the publication of the supporting evidence. I hope that the minister will agree that today's debate should be only the first debate on some of these issues. The key issue is how we make progress on the challenges that have been identified. There will be important work for the ministerial action group to do in overseeing that. I hope that the minister will return to Parliament to update us on the progress that we hope will be made—I am pleased that he  is confirming that he intends to do that—and give us another important opportunity to debate these issues. Other members have spoken in detail about the key recommendations in the report, and we have heard some well-informed speeches about the need for additional community safety initiatives to promote fire prevention awareness. I have discovered that we have such initiatives in schools and even in nurseries. The information is also available through home fire safety visits. We must ensure that that prevention work is properly targeted at those who are most at risk of being the victims of fires. Again and again in the debate, members have referred to the link between deprivation and the risk of fire accidents, with all the problems that are associated with smoking and alcohol misuse. Linda Fabiani and Karen Gillon spoke of the link between alcohol misuse and the causing of fires, as well as the issues around cigarettes. With James Kelly, I hope that progress can be made on RIP cigarettes through a collaborative approach by the minister and the UK Government. I think that there will be consensus that we want to see progress made on that issue. It is not just public sector and local government agencies that have a role to play in a collaborative approach; voluntary organisations have a key role to play. Bill Aitken mentioned that 47 per cent of accidental fire deaths involved people aged over 60. The Lightburn Elderly Association Project—LEAP—is a voluntary sector organisation whose hands-on project involves its staff who go into older people's homes also checking whether they have smoke detectors. That is one example of a programme that could be productive. Mike Pringle, too, spoke about the number of lives that could be saved through having proper smoke detection in homes. The issue has, quite rightly, been raised that more smoke alarms should be hard-wired. Nigel Don spoke about that. There is consensus on which I hope we can move forward. Stewart Maxwell and Michael Matheson spoke in detail about the need for sprinkler systems. The report identifies the importance of fire and rescue services working with the building standards division to improve fire detection in the home. The progress that can be made on the installation of low-cost sprinkler systems should be an important part of that collaborative work. Another theme that runs throughout the report is the need for improved training in community safety and home fire safety advice, and for the adoption of new common models for community safety initiatives. As John Farquhar Munro knows, we need to undertake more high-profile educational initiatives. We have often said in these debates that we want more integrated and common  approaches from fire and rescue services throughout Scotland, and that logic must hold with fire prevention, too. We must share best practice throughout the country, with local agencies working properly together and targeting effectively those people who are at most risk of being victims of fire. The report also goes into the sometimes thorny issue of common data collection methods in assessing success and creating new performance targets. It is important that we are able to assess performance, but it is also important that we have the right targets. Cross-party concern has been expressed previously in the chamber on the question of response time targets. I have no doubt that we will return to that issue. Karen Gillon was right to talk about the importance of response times in emergency situations. I met the FBU yesterday. I was told that it had wanted a greater emphasis in the report on firefighter safety. That must be a consideration in whatever work follows on from the report. In his excellent speech, George Foulkes spoke of the brave sacrifice of Ewan Williamson, whose bravery reminds us of the need to have firefighter safety at the heart of our fire and rescue services and whatever work we undertake on the structures and policies in these areas. I associate myself entirely with George Foulkes's request for Ewan Williamson to receive the Queen's gallantry medal. I am sure that that hope is echoed throughout the chamber. Whatever changes are made to the service, the goal of improved safety for our firefighters must always be central. The other key concern is about resources, which Karen Gillon touched on. The report does not shirk from pointing out that its recommendations will require to be properly resourced, and it is quite right to do so. We, too, want the recommendations to be properly resourced but, again and again, the report says that resourcing will come from the core budgets of our fire brigades and, in some cases, of partner agencies. We believe strongly that investment in the appropriate measures should not come at the expense of front-line firefighters but should be additional to investment in the crucial life-saving work that they carry out in emergency situations. I would welcome the minister's views on that and on how we can take forward the vital work that the report identifies. I hope that Parliament will have the opportunity to discuss the issue again. We have had an excellent debate, and it is clear that a broad determination exists among members to bring about a Scotland in which we are better at preventing fires and have far fewer fire deaths.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that funds that are recovered through proceeds of crime legislation should continue to be focused on cashback for communities schemes? What discussions have taken place with police forces on  the introduction of an incentivisation policy, whereby forces would be able to retain a proportion of such funds?

Is the First Minister aware that more than 1,500 people have signed a petition by the Community trade union to save the Glencraft factory following Aberdeen City Council's decision to cease its funding? When he met Glencraft's blind and disabled workforce this week, what proposals did he discuss to give the factory a future and so retain funding from the United Kingdom workstep programme for disabled people, which otherwise will be lost? Does he agree that article 19 of the  European Union procurement directive should be used throughout the public sector to procure from supported workplaces?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement, and join him in congratulating the police on their success in operation algebra. It is crucial to learn from such events, and in particular to learn where the monitoring of sex offenders must improve. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has now read the report on the multi-agency review of the case, but I question why that report is to remain confidential. The matter is of the greatest public concern. Neil Strachan should not have been in a position to abuse his victims. Surely it is not beyond the wit of the Scottish Government to ensure that the report is published in a suitable format. How can we know what lessons are being learned by local agencies if we do not know what those lessons are? There was nothing new in the cabinet secretary's statement about the approach to monitoring. What progress are ministers making in implementing the recommendations in the multi-agency report that was published in March? It asked ministers to amend MAPPA guidance quickly to ensure that there is always a full analysis of risk. I remain concerned about the impact on sex offender treatment of no longer having a national specialist unit for offenders at Peterhead. Is it not glaringly evident that any cuts in the budget for monitoring sex offenders would be entirely irresponsible? Given the success of the United Kingdom Government's child sex offender disclosure pilot, which resulted in at least 10 children being protected from potential abuse by sex offenders in the first six months of its operation, when can we expect evaluation of the pilot programme in Tayside? The cabinet secretary was right to say that that programme has cross-party support. We should all hope that it can be rolled out nationally as soon as possible as a key measure in protecting our children from abuse.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government's position is on the view of the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents that the draft budget will lead to cuts to front-line services and "an inability to respond appropriately to major civil or criminal contingencies". (S3F-1979)

Moving on from the £600 million increase in the Scottish Government's budget, is it not the case that the ASPS and Grampian Police have raised concerns about the impact of the draft budget and that Strathclyde Police still face a shortfall next year of some £12 million? Given the potential that that creates for compulsory redundancies among support staff, does the First Minister agree that forces must be able to recruit and retain new police officers and that they should be on the beat, not doing jobs that were previously carried out by civilian staff?

In February 2007, Cathy Jamieson wrote in the foreword to "Modern Laws For a Modern Scotland: A Report on Civil Justice in Scotland" of the need for reform in our civil justice system and for laws that provide accessible ways to sort out problems and protect rights. She announced then that Lord Gill would lead a review, and today we have a welcome opportunity to discuss its conclusions. It is important that Parliament recognises Lord Gill's and his colleagues' great contribution in producing the report. It has been the work of over two years and it does not disappoint in making bold proposals. They need to be debated and tested, but the report makes it clear that, while we are rightly proud of our justice system, it needs reform. Our amendment to the Scottish Government motion stresses the importance of two fundamental principles that inform our approach to these issues: access to justice and efficiency in our justice system. The key perspective must be that of the person who seeks access to the justice system. Justice for them must be dispensed fairly and speedily, and they should not be excluded from the justice system because of lack of means or any other barriers that they face. They have a right to have their case heard in the most appropriate setting and by a court with the appropriate expertise. There is clearly benefit in having a number of sheriffs designated as specialists in particular areas of practice, which is the case that family law practitioners made. In such cases, there are advantages for continuity and consistency in decision making in having sheriffs who specialise in family law. The argument is also well made in terms of cases becoming protracted because of the pressure of other court business, particularly criminal business. It is clearly undesirable when cases involving adoptions or referrals from children's hearings are affected, because such cases are sensitive and emotive, particularly for the child involved. A compelling case has therefore been made for sheriffs to specialise in one or more areas, and for the creation of the new judicial office of district judge to hear summary criminal business and civil claims of a modest value. It is to be hoped that that will make court procedures more efficient. Too often, we hear from constituents whose cases, which are often for relatively small claims, have taken far too long to resolve, and so long in some instances that they have not been able to continue them. That is clearly not fair or just. I welcome the report's emphasis on sheriffs taking a greater role  in managing cases and on the use of lay representation where that is appropriate—David Whitton referred to that in his earlier intervention. That will be of clear benefit to those who otherwise could not afford to be represented.

It was a slip of the tongue, and I am grateful to Margo MacDonald for her correction of that point. Another positive proposal that would enable people to have better support in their engagement with the justice system is that the Scottish Government should develop and extend in-court advice services as part of the improved provision of publicly funded civil legal assistance and advice. Clearly, that will require appropriate resource; even in these straitened times for public finances, that fact cannot be escaped. We cannot hope to reap the rewards of changing the structures if there is, for example, an agenda to close many sheriff courts. The system's costs are, of course, referred to in the report. The Scottish Trades Union Congress, the trade union Unite and others have highlighted their fears about the effect of steep rises in court fees. They are right to do so, because of the potential impact on access to justice. It is also right that the review should look at reform in the Court of Session and at how to ensure that that court can best play its crucial role in the delivery of civil justice in Scotland. The proposals that the Court of Session should deal with cases above a value of £150,000 with other cases going to sheriff courts, and that a specialist personal injury court with an all-Scotland jurisdiction should be established, will undoubtedly be the subject of debate. The proposal for a specialist personal injury court also raises important questions about resource, including how the Government will ensure that an adequate number of sheriffs are allocated to any new court. I am aware that the STUC, Unite, campaigners on asbestos-related disease and personal injury practitioners have serious concerns about how that proposal will affect their cases, which are currently heard in the Court of Session. We should ask not only whether the £150,000 limit is appropriate, but whether the monetary value of a case alone should determine in which court it is heard. I am aware that the report refers to the potential for the judge to consider at the case management hearing whether the case might have special features that would justify its retention in the Court of Session. That points to the potential for cases of relatively minor monetary  value to be nevertheless complex in points of law and potentially important in creating case law for not just Scotland but the United Kingdom. A case's monetary value should not be the only basis on which it might be considered appropriate for the Court of Session. The wider resource implications of the proposed changes will need to be properly considered, particularly given that the report makes it clear, as Robert Brown pointed out, that its recommendations should not be cherry picked. It should not be a case of the most affordable proposals being implemented first. In the time available for this debate it is impossible to cover all the crucial issues that are raised in what is an extensive review. It is clear that the review should be fully and carefully considered. There should be a wide consultation, as Bill Aitken's amendment mentions. I welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement that there will be public consultation. The motion refers to the forthcoming report on final appellate jurisdiction by Professor Walker. The Calman commission highlighted the potential for Scottish criminal justice cases to be taken to the UK Supreme Court if convention rights are involved. That issue should be resolved, as the judiciary from the Court of Session stated in their evidence to the Calman commission. I hope that that will be achieved without considerable upheaval. We will need to return to that matter as well as to the Scottish civil courts review. A major and substantial report that is of such importance to the future of our justice system must receive full parliamentary scrutiny. I welcome the opportunity to discuss matters with the cabinet secretary. I will certainly take up his invitation, but I believe that the reforms are too important to be conducted with undue haste. The priority must be for legislation to be considered and debated rather than for piecemeal implementation. We are indebted to Lord Gill and his colleagues for their excellent work in producing substantial proposals for major reform to modernise our civil justice system. The Parliament has a duty to give the report the full debate and consideration that it deserves. Today is a welcome beginning to that vital work as we look to reforms in civil justice that are founded on ensuring that cherished right of recourse to a justice system of which we can be proud. I move amendment S3M-4987.2, to insert at end: ", which is founded on the principle of ensuring access to justice and that reforms must be driven by this as well as by efficiency in the justice system."

Given the 4 per cent increase in drugs offences last year and the 3 per cent increase in the number of drug misusers in 2008, does the First Minister agree that ministers should give Parliament a further opportunity to debate the drugs strategy? That should include a debate on action on tackling drug offences, in which I am afraid the most recent statistics show that the Scottish Government is not succeeding.

I congratulate Mike Rumbles on securing the debate. We have debated Aberdeen crossrail several times in the Parliament and members have lodged a number of motions on it, but Mike Rumbles is right to give Parliament another opportunity to debate the proposal and to preserve that vision, which is vital to the transport infrastructure and economy of the north-east. We are all aware that rail services for the oil capital of Europe and the region as a whole must improve, which is what the Aberdeen crossrail scheme is all about. I do not share Maureen Watt's rose-tinted analysis of the current situation. It is deeply disappointing that the cross-party consensus in favour of the proposal that existed before the election has dissipated. Like Mike Rumbles, I am bewildered as to why, when we had the chance to vote on the issue in March, every member from the north-east could not vote for a straightforward motion calling for support for and progress on the scheme. When it was announced that the Scottish Government would not support the Glasgow airport rail link, I felt empathy with members from Glasgow—as, I am sure, did colleagues who had supported the Edinburgh airport rail link—because we in the north-east had already gone through the experience of having our major rail project dropped by the Scottish Government, despite SNP support for it locally before the elections. I believe that the minister has a personal commitment to developing public transport, but I am afraid that his Government is fast developing the reputation of being the inheritor of Dr Beeching. Mike Rumbles hits the nail on the head when he says in his motion: "passenger numbers at the reopened Laurencekirk station have exceeded estimations". In fact, passenger numbers have exceeded estimations substantially. In so many cases, the projections for the use of new stations and services significantly underestimate the actual use when those services are put in place. I am sure that that has been a factor in what has happened to the crossrail proposal, too. A recent cross-party meeting with the minister, at which the issue was discussed, was positive. I hope that we will receive more positive signals  from the minister today about the potential for a new station at Kintore and Scottish Government support for it.

I welcome that intervention. The models that are used should be more sensitive and should be correct for the Scottish situation. I hope that that will help the proposal for a new station at Kintore, which commands cross-party support. In Aberdeen and the north-east, the issue of commuter options into the city of Aberdeen is extremely pressing. We still do not know how the western peripheral route will be funded or when it will finally get the go-ahead. There is no progress on addressing congestion at the Haudagain roundabout. We need progress on road and rail services for the north-east. I am sure that there will be a great deal of consensus in the chamber tonight on the proposal for a new station at Kintore. I hope that we can re-establish a consensus for Aberdeen crossrail, and a focus on delivering it. As Mike Rumbles said, there should now at the very least be a commitment to that principle. This issue should continue to be raised until that ambition is realised. The project is of vital importance to the north-east, and to Scotland, given its potential contribution to the centre of our energy industry.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that when the act is implemented it must be backed by a package of measures that allow women to be more confident in reporting cases of rape, and also backed by concerted action to improve clear-up rates for crimes of rape and attempted rape, which have fallen?

Does the Deputy First Minister agree that any new measures to tackle alcohol misuse must be supported through better enforcement of current law, particularly a higher success rate in prosecuting cases of underage drinking—including the prosecution of those who are responsible for selling alcohol to children?

It has been a good, constructive and informed debate. The sunshine of the morning has brought at least some consensus even to the justice teams in the chamber, so let us cherish the moment. In that spirit, I am happy to say that we will support the Government motion and Robert Brown's amendment. We should look for consensus where it is possible because we are determining the future organisation and provision of a service in which, day in and day out, firefighters risk their lives to protect those of others. Today, we look forward to the future framework for fire and rescue services in Scotland, but many of us look back to earlier in the summer when we attended Ewan Williamson's memorial service. It was right that the minister paid tribute to him today and I associate myself with all his remarks. Indeed, there should be official recognition of Ewan Williamson's bravery and sacrifice. The memorial service was a deeply moving occasion that reminded us of the bravery of our firefighters and the debt that we as a nation owe them. It was very moving indeed to see firefighters from throughout Scotland and other parts of the UK come together to mark Ewan Williamson's sacrifice. There is much in the framework with which we agree and we broadly support the key priorities for fire and rescue services outlined in the introduction. However, after events such as the death of Ewan Williamson—in the context of an  increasing number of deaths in the line of duty, which Elaine Smith mentioned—it is right and necessary that the debate focuses on health and safety, to which a number of speakers referred. That matter was, quite rightly, brought to our attention by the Fire Brigades Union, whose members join us in the gallery today. The framework refers to an action plan, which is to emerge from the study on fire deaths and injury. That must happen. Once the investigation into the death of Ewan Williamson has been completed and its findings are produced, it will be vital to respond appropriately and to take any necessary action. Of course, it would be inappropriate to pre-empt the investigation, but an appropriate response will be required. In our amendment to the motion, we have said that health and safety should be prioritised in the framework, because we have heard concerns from the FBU about ensuring a rigorous and consistent approach to health and safety throughout Scotland. That was the driver behind our amendment. In all things to do with the fire and rescue service, a careful balance has to be struck between providing local flexibility and ensuring consistency in services throughout Scotland. Members returned to that issue again and again in the debate. Where appropriate, equipment and other resources should be shared between forces. I know that forces are already looking at collaborative approaches to delivering services in their area. Unnecessary replication of resources is a cause of frustration to which members have referred. The minister talked about the need to avoid unnecessary duplication in the service and to maximise efficiency in challenging financial times. We also believe that more progress can be made towards achieving best value. Initiatives and resources such as firelink are an important innovation for the service as a whole. The need to develop a joint approach to shared services is highlighted in the framework. I believe that significant progress on that can be made. The issue of taking a joint approach is at the heart of Robert Brown's amendment, which chimes with the points that we have made on health and safety. John Lamont rightly referred to "In the line of duty". I was happy to lodge a motion on that report and I was pleased that it received cross-party support. The sheer scope of the contribution that our firefighters make to our communities must be fully recognised. Paul Martin talked about that in the context of his experience in Springburn. Peter  Peacock referred to the service's recent crucial work in tackling flooding. The service's role in water rescue can be important, too, so it should be part of the framework. Jamie McGrigor was quite right to highlight that issue and to draw it to the attention of the Parliament. Progress in that area needs to be made following the report from Paddy Tomkins. I welcome the points that Alison McInnes and others made about the important role that retained firefighters play in remote, island and rural areas, which is recognised in the framework. I also welcome the framework's emphasis on the continued role for fire and rescue services in improving the lives of people in our communities through their contribution to community safety education and awareness strategies and to youth engagement and restorative justice schemes. That not only addresses the important issue of fire prevention more broadly but tackles antisocial behaviour. We believe that that role is important and we welcome the fact that it is emphasised in the framework. Paul Martin talked about the need to be vigilant against the tiny minority who, unbelievably, target and attack our firefighters. We need to make full use of the legislative provisions that the Parliament passed to take action on that issue. The work and contribution of firefighters must be central to the framework—indeed, it must be central to the service itself. That is why we have placed such an emphasis on health and safety in the debate. It is right that the framework refers to learning and development for firefighters and that there is a focus on training and the role of the Scottish Fire Services College. Cathie Craigie made important points about national standards in training, which need to be addressed. Of course, there is also the issue of workforce planning. I think that the minister said that, where budgets are tight, there are significant opportunities to share resources and infrastructure. However, the fact is that the number of firefighters has been falling. Priority has to be given to ensuring that there are enough firefighters to do the job safely. As Elaine Smith said, recruitment and retention of firefighters must always be at the heart of planning for the future of the service. The minister also touched briefly on the wider debates about the structure of the service and what shape it should take in future. I tend to agree that that is not a debate for today, but I am sure that we will return to it. I do not think that anyone here believes that the framework will be the last word on that crucial matter. If the minister takes on board the concerns that have been aired in a constructive way, progress  can be made through the framework. I note that the minister said that he had an open mind on governance, but we can deal only with the structures as they are. I would welcome further information from the minister on what he means when he says that he has an open mind. Does that mean that there is likely to be further change in governance sooner rather than later? We have to ensure that there is excellence in the service throughout Scotland and that there can be an expectation of the same high standard of service for communities wherever they are in Scotland. There is a need for ministers to ensure closer collaboration between the ministerial advisory group and the other relevant authorities, including the local joint boards, to ensure that there is a clear strategy. The framework talks about the famous goal of a joined-up approach, which must be taken even in post-concordat Scotland. We cannot have fragmentation, to which Bill Butler referred. Stewart Maxwell made pertinent points about nationally comparable standards and data. Angela Constance referred to consistency in response times. I hope that the minister will answer the questions on those issues in summing up. We all want to see much more progress being made to address Scotland's unenviable record on fire fatalities compared with other parts of the UK. We all hope that that can be achieved through the framework, which must be a step forward in the journey towards a structure and service that gives our firefighters the support that they require to do their jobs and to achieve the goal that we all share of having fewer fire fatalities in Scotland.

It is important to provide clarification that the point is not about firefighters enforcing the standards; it is about the services around them, and ensuring consistent health and safety standards throughout Scotland.

Scotland's justice system faces huge challenges. In the past few weeks, it has been in the international spotlight. It is vital that, during the rest of the current session of Parliament, we seek to ensure that any changes that are made to our justice system are focused on guaranteeing access to justice and serving the needs of the victims of crime. Scottish Labour has stated that the Scottish Government's direction of travel is not the right one, and nothing in the First Minister's statement leads me to change my opinion. Other speakers mentioned that what is important about the statement is not what is in it but what is missing. That certainly applies in the area of justice. I will comment briefly on the parts of the statement that relate to justice, but it is certainly legislation light in that portfolio. Perhaps there is a feeling that the justice secretary has done enough. The legal services reform bill has been much anticipated and delayed. It featured in last year's legislative programme announcement, and it is an important debate that has now been going on for some years. It is right for us to be open to new ideas for the framework of legal services in Scotland, and I welcome the fact that we will have an opportunity to discuss new legislation in the area. As the First Minister's statement mentioned, the legal profession is a key contributor to our economy, and given the challenging global economic circumstances, which have impacted on that sector as well as on others, it is right to look to its future success. As changes are made that affect the provision of legal services, Labour will seek to ensure that the key principle of preserving access to justice is maintained. At the current time and in the current financial climate, further proposals that help struggling families to stay in their homes will be important. My colleague Cathy Jamieson has worked hard with other parties to ensure further action on that, although I fear that the Government's proposals have appeared much later than they should have done. Further provisions on bankruptcy will, I hope, build sensibly on the major reforms that the Parliament has legislated for previously. The children's hearings system is a key part of our justice and welfare systems, and, given that  the system works and is valued, any reforms must be based on its founding principles. It was right to withdraw the original bill because any changes must improve the system, not be detrimental to it. Another key area of debate will be further action on tackling alcohol misuse. Given that we called for the move back in March, I welcome the fact that proposals on pricing and other measures on alcohol consumption will be set out in a separate bill. After all, such measures are too important either to be discussed in the context of the far wider Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill or, as the Scottish Government originally suggested, to be decided merely in regulation. We all acknowledge the toll that alcohol misuse is taking on Scotland—indeed, the issue causes genuine fear and concern in the chamber—and we know its impact on the nation's health and on crime and disorder. However, new legislation must go hand in hand with more effective enforcement of the current laws, and too often in too many communities in Scotland that is simply missing. Also missing from the programme is any proposal for a victims commissioner to ensure that our justice system takes a victim-centred approach. That said, I am pleased that my colleague David Stewart is about to introduce a bill on this matter. The Scottish Law Commission has also suggested a number of modest and, I am sure, consensual legislative proposals on time bars in personal injuries claims, and my colleague Bill Butler is introducing a bill on damages for wrongful death. Although such changes would be relatively minor, they would make a big difference to people who are rightly pursuing damages for injuries that they have suffered unjustly, and I am disappointed that they have not been included in the legislative programme. I ask the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to keep an open mind on these proposals, and I hope that the Scottish Government will see sense, support Bill Butler's bill proposal and ensure that it has a speedy passage through Parliament. I am sure that it will do so with cross-party consensus. Finally, the programme for government contains no real action on knife crime. Along with others in the chamber, we will continue to call for minimum sentences for such crime.

I do not agree with Patrick Harvie's analysis. We have to accept that in our country the chronic problem of knife crime is not getting any better. Given that such crime is still claiming a great number of lives every year, that the number of people being charged and convicted for knife carrying is still very high and that communities are still understandably concerned about the issue, we have to consider new measures that we can only hope will deal effectively with knife crime and deter people from carrying knives. It is time for people to know that if they go out with a knife they can expect to get a custodial sentence. Such measures are necessary. Mr Harvie might disagree with this campaign, but it is resonating in and being embraced by communities throughout Scotland that are suffering from the effects of knife crime. The programme for government does not contain the further action on antisocial behaviour that is needed and that we will continue to push for. We need to give more rights to communities to take action against the minority who cause misery for others. Moreover, there is no mention of the Government's flawed proposals to scrap custodial sentences for people who have been convicted of very serious crimes while it fails to provide a robust system of community sentencing in which Scotland's communities can have confidence. The programme is light on legislation for justice. The fact is that this Government's overall approach to crime and justice is wrong and will, I fear, greatly damage our communities. Our country needs safer communities, not an independence referendum, but this Government has simply got the wrong priorities.

Is it not vital that welcome additional police recruits can be retained in the future? Can we take it from the cabinet secretary's earlier answers that he will ensure that there will be no shortfall in the budget of Strathclyde Police, so that the promised officers are not just recruited but retained?

I did not know that the First Minister was such a fan of Cherie Booth. Does he not acknowledge that plans that will introduce a presumption against any custodial sentence for 65 per cent of those who are convicted of knife crime will not address reconviction rates and that they send entirely the wrong message on that key area of crime? If he is so committed to robust community sentences, why did his Government scupper plans for the Glasgow community court?

It is impossible for us in this chamber to comprehend the terror and suffering of those who died in the Lockerbie bombing, and it is difficult for us to imagine the extent of the trauma and grief of the families who were left behind. However, what we do know is that the decision that was faced by the cabinet secretary was a difficult one that could not be more important. That means that it was crucial that it was made using due process, that it was handled with sensitivity, and that it was informed not only by the important quality of compassion, but by the other words that are inscribed on the mace of our Parliament: "integrity", "wisdom" and "justice". The sad reality for us today is that, too often, those elements were missing from a chaotic decision-making process that was badly mishandled by the cabinet secretary, and which has reflected badly on Scotland. I believe that we should make clear the fact that there were fundamental errors in the management of this process and state that, therefore, the decision to release Mr al-Megrahi on compassionate grounds to Libya is one with which we cannot agree. We lodged our amendment with confidence. The First Minister might not like it, but his Government will be held to account for the decision that he and his ministers have made.

That is irrelevant, because the decision was for the First Minister and the cabinet secretary. Mr Rammell and everyone else have made it clear that the decision was for the First Minister and the cabinet secretary. They must be held accountable for it, which is what we will do today. They might want to deflect attention from themselves, but that only shows their lack of confidence in their decision.

I will not. We are dealing with a serious issue and we are trying to claw back some of our reputation, so I hope that members on the Government party's benches will raise their game and treat the debate with some dignity.  Yesterday, some of the documents that informed key aspects of the process were released. They raised more questions than they provided answers. Perhaps we will receive some answers from the cabinet secretary today. It becomes ever clearer that, well before he made the formal announcement of his decision, the cabinet secretary had already come to the conclusion that he would free al-Megrahi to go back to Libya, and that he then marshalled the evidence as best he could to justify that decision. That flies in the face of due process and is something that this Parliament should not accept. I wish to highlight a number of areas in which I believe that due process was not followed. A crucial example is the cabinet secretary's decision to meet al-Megrahi personally in Greenock prison. Did he not realise when he was driven into Greenock prison, past television cameras from around the world, to meet Mr al-Megrahi, that it would cause widespread misgivings about his management of this crucial process? He must have known that it was unprecedented for someone in his position to meet directly a person who had been convicted of such heinous crimes, not only while he was considering his application for compassionate release, but while his appeal was on-going.

The meeting between the cabinet secretary and Mr al-Megrahi took place while Mr al-Megrahi's appeal was on-going and was entirely unnecessary. That is quite a different situation from the one that Ian McKee describes. The cabinet secretary has said that he had to meet Mr al-Megrahi because of natural justice, but originally he said that he had to do so because Jack Straw implied that he should, although he had to withdraw that statement because it was clearly misleading to Parliament. The justice department letter of 7 July shows that, incredibly, the meeting was not the initiative of Mr al-Megrahi but was first suggested by the cabinet secretary. I find that incredible. Did no warning bells sound before that approach was made about how inappropriate it was?

I must make progress. At first, Mr MacAskill said that he had to have the meeting because he was following advice from Jack Straw, but that has been shown to be totally incorrect. Now we find from the minute of the  meeting that it was the cabinet secretary who raised the issue of al-Megrahi's appeal—as Mr Rumbles pointed out—and said that it would have to be dropped in order for the transfer request to go ahead. Of course, only a few days later, that appeal was dropped. That is quite a different account from the one that we had from Mr MacAskill in the chamber last week. I want to turn to a number of other flaws in the process on which questions remain. Mr MacAskill has referred to the view of the Parole Board, which said that al-Megrahi was a suitable candidate for release, largely on medical evidence that I shall deal with later. However, it is clear that that was simply advice to ministers and that the final decision lay with them. The board also noted that no victim representations had been presented for consideration. Surely that is an opportunity that should have been given to the families of those who died. I have said that I believe that the cabinet secretary had made his mind up a long time before he announced his decision: the papers show that, on 22 July, his officials discussed with Libyan officials the potential and timescale for compassionate release to Libya for al-Megrahi. However, it was only on 14 August that a meeting took place with Strathclyde Police to discuss the security implications of his being released on compassionate grounds but remaining in Scotland, where conditions on his license could obviously be more rigorously enforced. However, on that same date, officials advised that they had already prepared for the contingency that Megrahi would be supervised in Libya by East Renfrewshire Council. It seems that far more effort has gone into that than into considering alternatives in Scotland. Strathclyde Police—at least prior to the wholly inappropriate intervention in police matters by the First Minister's spokesman—stated: "If a decision had been made to release Mr al-Megrahi in Scotland, we would have provided whatever security was required." The cabinet secretary had a duty to examine all the options, but he simply was not interested in them. I am sure that other members will return to that point. There are other questions of process. Why was Mr Megrahi sending his belongings home weeks before the decision was apparently made, and who knew about that? In addition, important elements of the guidance on compassionate release do not appear to have been given much consideration. Crucially, the guidance states that the type of offence and the length of sentence that is outstanding form part of the criteria. Mr Megrahi had 19 years left to serve of a sentence that the Crown was appealing against as being unduly  lenient. Did the cabinet secretary really give that full consideration? I turn to the medical advice that the cabinet secretary received—or, as appears to be the case, did not receive—in relation to Mr al-Megrahi's health. The cabinet secretary received the views of five doctors: one general practitioner and four cancer specialists. How can we have any confidence in the decision that the cabinet secretary reached when four specialists were not willing—as Dr Fraser highlighted in his report—to say that Mr Megrahi had less than three months to live? A number of experts, including Professor Roger Kirby, the chairman of Prostate UK, have cast severe doubt on that assessment. Why was the caution that was expressed by four cancer specialists disregarded?

I ask the members to choose between themselves.

That question is not pertinent to the medical evidence to which I was referring. Frankly, it is a load of nonsense. Why was further medical opinion on such a crucial issue not sought? Why did the cabinet secretary choose to base his decision on the solitary opinion of a single GP? We cannot be certain of how long Megrahi has left to live, but there is huge doubt about the three-month prognosis to which the cabinet secretary and the guidance on the decision have referred.

After hearing the previous intervention, I would rather make some progress. Shortly after the meeting in Greenock prison, the BBC announced that Megrahi would be released back to Libya, in exactly the way in which events transpired a week later. It was not this Parliament that was told first, nor—more important—was it the families of those who died, but a broadcaster. That meant that, for a week, there was speculation and counterspeculation—often from the Scottish  Government—about the decision. Naturally, there were urgent representations and views on the matter from the United States and Libya. If the cabinet secretary is confident that he and his advisers were not responsible for that appalling breach of protocol, he should have no misgivings about calling a leak inquiry to examine the matter—but he has yet to do so. I urge the cabinet secretary to do so today, because that breach can only have made this a more difficult time for the families of the victims. It made the anger of the many people at home and abroad who opposed the decision all the more acute when the leaks were finally confirmed and we saw Mr Megrahi, who was convicted of 270 counts of murder by the Scottish courts, returning to Libya amid saltires flying at Tripoli airport.

It is inevitable that the decision will be subject to further parliamentary scrutiny, and I take on board Margo MacDonald's point. I turn to Mr MacAskill's statements on the prisoner transfer agreement, to which he has given ample weight. In fact, the prisoner transfer agreement could never have been agreed anyway, because the Crown appeal against the leniency of Mr Megrahi's sentence was outstanding. The cabinet secretary's response earlier today did not make sense. It may suit the Scottish Government to focus attention on that agreement, but it does a disservice to proper scrutiny by Parliament. Whatever decision was made, it was always for Scottish Ministers to make. The decision was made for release on compassionate grounds. That was an issue for Scottish ministers alone. It would have been much better if the application for compassionate release had simply been treated like any other: if the medical evidence, written representations and advice from the Scottish Prison Service had simply been gathered and a decision made on the basis of that information, without fanfare and pre-announcement. However, by the time the cabinet secretary made his announcement, it was inevitable that there would be huge questions about his reasoning in making the decision. It was inevitable, given the leaks and speculation that characterised the weeks leading up to the decision, that the response from those who disagreed with his decision would be all the more anguished. That was regrettable, avoidable and damaging for our country. However, it was not simply the way in which the decision was made that hurt our international reputation—

I am saying that it is academic, because the Crown appeal was on-going. It was not simply the way in which the decision was made that hurt our international reputation, but the way in which it was announced. Many of us here are Christians: in Scotland, we have people of many faiths and none. However, Mr MacAskill's suggestion that the only compassionate action to take was to grant Mr Megrahi compassionate release to Libya was wrong. His suggestion that the decision should be taken in the context that, as a cancer sufferer, Mr Megrahi was being judged by a higher authority was bizarre and actually quite offensive, and his suggestion that his characterisation of our justice system and his view of our national understanding of compassion was the only possible view was quite wrong. It is clear that there are in Scotland different views of this difficult decision, and I respect those who hold a different view from mine, but it is also clear that the majority of Scots believe that Mr MacAskill made the wrong decision. It shows arrogance that is typical of the current Administration that the cabinet secretary presumed that he could speak for all Scots on the matter, when clearly he could not. He has failed to justify the decision that he has made, and to account for the shambolic way in which he went about making it. Today we will record that Parliament cannot endorse a decision that was meant to be arrived at through due process, but which instead came about through manipulation and mishandling. I believe that Scotland's Parliament will act today to restore the reputation that Scotland's justice secretary has done so much to damage. He has spoken for his Government and for his party, but he has not spoken for this Parliament or for this country. I move amendment S3M-4748.1, to leave out from second "notes" to end and insert: "believes that the process of making this crucial decision was mishandled by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice; believes that it was wrong for the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to meet Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed Al Megrahi in prison while considering his application for compassionate release to Libya and that this potentially sets an inappropriate precedent; also believes that it was unacceptable that the media was made aware of the decision a week before it was formally announced; does not accept that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice received or sought sufficient medical advice to make his judgement on Megrahi's prognosis; further believes that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice did not sufficiently explore options to  take account of Megrahi's illness other than compassionate release to Libya; recognises that Scotland's international reputation has been damaged not simply by the decision to release Megrahi on compassionate grounds to Libya but also because of the way that taking the decision was mishandled, and, given the mishandling of this process by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, does not agree with his decision to return Megrahi to Libya on compassionate release."

Is the reality of the situation not that the transfer request from the Libyan Government could not be agreed to while the Crown appeal against the leniency of Megrahi's sentence was outstanding? Did the cabinet secretary at any point have any indication that that appeal would be dropped?

When will the cabinet secretary publish the advice that he received on his decision to meet al-Megrahi personally, given that it is clear that he was not required to meet him? How would it have been outwith natural justice to decline the meeting in person when, after all, the cabinet secretary did not meet personally the American victims' families? Given that the media knew about the decision a week before those families, will there be a full leak inquiry into this appalling error?

This morning's stage 1 debate on this crucial issue was good and productive, as was stage 2—albeit that it was brief. Everyone in the Parliament realises the necessity to pass the bill today. The sums of public money at stake are high and there is substantial concern, and indeed anger, among the public, who think that payments to prisoners for slopping out should be restricted. The emergency bill procedure is rarely used because it curtails debate, but in this instance it has been entirely justified.  In the course of the day, I have been contacted by members of the legal community who are concerned about potential unintended consequences of the bill, which addresses a narrow situation. I was reassured by the comments that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice made in his speech and by his responses to Patrick Harvie's points in the stage 1 debate. The issue of how the bill and the one-year time bar might affect other situations in which claims are made about breaches of human rights has been raised with me. I am persuaded by the discretion that the bill affords to the courts, which is an important aspect of the debate, but I acknowledge that others remain concerned. There is a strong argument for ministers to introduce into Parliament the draft limitation (Scotland) bill, which has been prepared by the Scottish Law Commission, because it deals with those issues more comprehensively, and I urge them to do so. The concerns that have been raised highlight the fact that the issue is complex, which has contributed to the time that it has taken to reach this point. I take issue with what Angela Constance said this morning and what the First Minister said this afternoon. It is clear that there has been a genuine desire to resolve the situation. Co-operation between Governments has been to the fore in the way that the matter has been dealt with. The fact that we are uniting in the chamber to pass the bill is indicative of collaboration between parties here and between ministers at Holyrood and Westminster. I do not think that there is any need to pick out further points of debate, although the issue of what the hoped-for savings should be spent on will be a matter for discussion. We will continue to have a debate about cuts or increased spending for the Scottish Government in the next two years, but I do not think that it would be productive to spend more time on that now. This morning I referred to potential areas for investment, to which I am sure that others will return this afternoon and on other occasions. The key point is that we do all we can to limit further compensation payments in the future because they are unacceptable. For that reason, the emergency bill will receive support from the Labour Party and, I am sure, from members throughout the chamber.

The issue of compensation payments for prisoners as a result of slopping out has been extremely controversial, but the debate today should not be. We all agree that Parliament must act to ensure that the payments can be curbed. There has, understandably, been great concern among the public that the payments have been made. Of course we want the several million pounds involved to go not to offenders as a result of their incarceration, but to investment in key areas of Scottish life, such as health and education. There has been anger that people who have been put in custody because of serious offences can, as a result of their time in jail, receive some £2,000 in compensation payments if  they can show that their rights have been breached. The Somerville judgment greatly extended the potential for the number of claims. A loophole in legislation has been exploited as claims against Scottish ministers have not been subject to a one-year time bar, as they are for UK ministers or indeed for other public authorities. It is right to seek to close that loophole today. We understand the need to achieve our aims through a curtailed parliamentary process—emergency bill. As the Law Society points out in its briefing, that process has not allowed for the usual consideration of amendments. I am pleased that the society has scrutinised the bill and raised important matters for consideration, but I am satisfied by the arguments that the cabinet secretary has just made that we should proceed without amendment. I understand the legitimate reasons why the bill must be passed as an emergency bill, and therefore why there is not the usual capacity for further debate. However—this relates to issues that Patrick Harvie raised—I wonder whether other consequences could be considered by Parliament if the Scottish Law Commission's draft limitations (Scotland) bill were to be progressed. If appropriate, we could have further opportunities to discuss the issues that Patrick Harvie and the Law Society have raised. ln his statement to Parliament in March, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice told us that the Scottish Prison Service had had to make provision in its annual accounts for £66.7 million in the financial year to meet the costs of claims for slopping out. He made it clear then, as he has today, that the introduction of a one-year time bar would enable us to draw a line under our liability in relation to claims of the kind that are being made in respect of the Somerville judgment, and that the result would be the release of up to £50 million for spending on other, more worthy, purposes. I am pleased that we can now introduce this one-year time bar, following the successful conclusion of dialogue between the Scottish and UK Governments. The clear intention is that, after we vote on this bill today, the UK Government will seek the agreement of the Westminster Parliament to a comprehensive solution for all three devolved Administrations through primary legislation. The process has not been simple; it has taken considerable time, and complicated legal questions have been discussed, and are being discussed again today. The initial House of Lords judgment on the Somerville case itself was a split decision. There has also been some debate over the best legislative vehicle to achieve change.  However, through the discussions it has been clear that the legislative solution that ahs been pursued by ministers has been the right one. I am pleased that UK and Scottish ministers were able to reach agreement. Ministers here have clearly been right to pursue this issue to what we hope will be a satisfactory conclusion. I am pleased that the Secretary of State for Scotland has, in turn, used his good offices to help the process. It is clear that since he came to office he, too, has appreciated the need for the speediest possible resolution. I have no doubt that there will be debate about the history of the issue, but there can also be no doubt that, during the previous session of Parliament in particular, there has been massive investment in Scotland's prison estate in order to end the practice of slopping out in our jails. Chemical sanitation still remains in Peterhead—although that will have to be resolved, it is a different procedure. It was right to invest in our prison infrastructure, not only because the Scottish Government must not be exposed to the potential for such claims in the future, but because our prison estate must be fit for purpose. Human rights should not be infringed. However, a key issue is the restriction of further claims—although they may not be eradicated by this legislation today. It would be helpful to know from the cabinet secretary how many claims the Scottish Government still expects to receive in the future. However, clearly and happily, there should not now be the potential for 20,000 claims, as was opened up by the Somerville judgment. The fact that this is a complex issue has also been borne out by the revised position on the commencement of the legislation, which will now be in November rather than in July. I understand that that was not done on the basis of legal advice to either Government but on the basis of advice from the Parliament. I will defer to legal opinion on this, although it seemed to me that a July commencement was reasonable, especially given the discretion that will be afforded to the courts under proposed new section 100(3B)(b) of the Scotland Act 1998. However, it would be useful to hear from ministers what impact that will have on potential future costs. Is it still hoped that there will be savings of some £50 million, or will that figure now be reduced? The other key question is about in what the Scottish Government intends to invest the savings. There remain the issues of prison capacity and the proposal for a pilot community court in Glasgow. There is also the understanding that the cabinet secretary is to announce significant additional funding for community sentences. It would be helpful to know to what extent they can be funded from the savings. Of course there are pressures on public sector spending, but the  demands in the justice system are none the less important and significant. There will be no savings if the bill is not passed, which is why we are pleased that it can be decided on today, in a single day, by Parliament. It is being concluded with co-operation between the Scottish and UK Governments and Parliaments. Aware as we are of the need to pass the bill expeditiously, we intend to support it without amendment today.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Scottish Enterprise Grampian on the findings of the feasibility study on proposed developments at Union Terrace gardens in Aberdeen. (S3O-7301)

Does the minister agree that full consultation on all options for redeveloping Union Terrace gardens is needed? What dialogue will ministers have with ACSEF on the potential for Scottish Government funding for the plans at any stage?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it appropriate for the member to call other members liars, particularly when they are telling the truth?

On the issue of Faustian pacts, why is the SNP so enthusiastic in its support for Tory efforts here today and yesterday at Westminster, when we now know from Andrew Lansley that a Tory Government would mean £3.5 billion of cuts for a Scottish Government? Would that perhaps serve the SNP's purposes?

All members want Scotland to have the most robust legal framework possible in relation to sexual offences. The impact that such offences have on their victims makes it all the more important that we have the right laws to deal appropriately with those who commit such offences and that we deal in a fair and informed way with the sensitive issue of what constitutes a sexual offence.  As members have said, we have dealt with the issues against the backdrop of what remains a worryingly low conviction rate for rape. Reports today suggest that the conviction rate is going up, but it nevertheless stood at only 3.7 per cent in 2007-08. The Lord Advocate rightly pointed out in evidence to the Justice Committee that there is no panacea for the problem and that the bill is not specifically about improving conviction rates. We require further detailed research into the system of investigation and prosecution of cases. A package of measures will be required, so that people have more confidence to come forward and report rape, which still too often goes unreported.

That is a valid point, but the crucial point that I am making is that the perpetrators of such crimes should not expect to go unpunished and should face severe penalties for their actions. The understanding of consent to sexual activity has also been debated. Margaret Curran's successful amendment will ensure that someone who is incapable of giving their consent to sexual activity cannot be deemed to have consented simply because of earlier statements. That move forward provides greater protection from unwanted sexual activity to those who lack the capacity to consent. That has helped to make the bill better. Another key debate was on consensual sexual relationships between 13 to 16-year-olds. Like John Lamont, I believe that the retention of the status quo is right. However, it is important that we consider the welfare issues that have been raised in connection with that, particularly by many organisations that work with children and young people. It is important to implement the Justice Committee's recommendation that multi-agency co-operation should provide effective support to children who are involved in underage sexual activity. Consultation with young people on the impact of the bill is important, too. My colleague Cathie Craigie raised that issue on several occasions. We are not happy with Robert Brown's amendments on penalties that were agreed to today. We believe that, in minor cases of sexual assault or sexual assault on a child, it is for prosecutors to ensure that cases are prosecuted effectively. However, we are not comfortable with the fact that sexual assault or sexual assault on a child that is prosecuted under the solemn procedure could result in only a fine. The issue is not about an additional disposal. People have talked about the status quo, but we are discussing  how the law should be modernised. I fail to see why Robert Brown cannot understand, in whatever size brain he has, why we feel it was more appropriate to maintain the status quo after stage 2, in which sexual assault or sexual assault on a young child, when prosecuted under the solemn procedure, could not result in simply a fine. I thought that Bill Aitken would be with me on that, given his attitude on the general issue. A fine is the most unsatisfactory outcome. Robert Brown mentioned community sentences, which would be a more appropriate disposal. However, we are where we are. The vast majority of the process has been consensual. It is important to give credit for the hard work that has been done on the bill. Ministers, the committee, the clerks and civil servants deserve great credit for reaching a broad consensus on difficult issues. It is of great importance that we do all that we can to protect people in our country from harm and that we have effective and modern laws on sexual offences.

I seek reassurance from the cabinet secretary on the list of offences for which conviction results in an automatic listing as unsuitable to work with children. Will not the absence of the provisions in the schedule allow unsuitable people to work with children in the period until the consultation on the list of offences is concluded? I seek further detail on that and the timescale for the consultation.

Will the member take an intervention?

The key point for us is that, whatever the intention behind the amendments, they would have the effect that conviction for a sexual assault or a sexual assault on a child that was prosecuted on indictment could result in the imposition of a fine. We feel strongly that that would be unsatisfactory.

We support Robert Brown's proposal. The requirement to undertake an information and publicity campaign for children on their attitudes to part 4 of the bill was raised in the Justice Committee and in its report, not least by my colleague Cathie Craigie. I accept that the cabinet secretary has made a commitment to undertake such a campaign and to provide age-appropriate materials, but amendment 120 is still beneficial. If it leads to further reassurances on the point and more detail on the Scottish Government's plans for a campaign, that will be welcome. The issue is particularly important because there was such a focus on it during the committee's deliberations and in the stage 1 debate, as Robert Brown pointed out in some detail, and members throughout the chamber have stressed that young people need education and support on the issues. Notwithstanding the questions that the cabinet secretary raised in his letter to Margaret Curran, about the detail of implementation of the amendment, it is pretty clear how its intention would be achieved. I do not doubt that such a campaign will be forthcoming, but I am sure that the chamber will be further reassured by details of what it will cover and when it will take place. At this stage, though, we are minded to support amendment 120, which addresses a particular concern for the committee.

Clearly, the vast majority of the amendments that we will consider are non-controversial. Margaret Curran's amendment 1 is important. We, on this side of the chamber, are very pleased that the Scottish Government will accept it. As Robert Brown said, Margaret Curran's amendment deals with the vexed issue of prior consent. I welcome whole-heartedly the fact that the cabinet secretary listened to the concerns that were raised not only by Margaret Curran in lodging the amendment, but by Rape Crisis Scotland and  other organisations. They support the intention to, as the cabinet secretary himself put it, "provide greater protection from unwanted sexual activity to those lacking the capacity to consent." That is an important principle, which amendment 1 guarantees. It will be for Margaret Curran and the cabinet secretary to answer Robert Brown's questions directly, but we think that the amendment strikes the right balance. I am not convinced that amendment 1 will have the effect on the bill that Robert Brown says it will have. It will still be available to prosecutors to make the most sensible decision. I think that we are reaching a consensus that the amendment is the right way forward. The issue is difficult, and I am pleased that the cabinet secretary sees the amendment as the best balance to strike. In the past few weeks, I have not exactly been fulsome in my praise for the cabinet secretary, but his approach to the bill has been constructive and his approach to the amendment has been the right one. Labour supports amendment 1 enthusiastically, and the amendment is also supported by Rape Crisis Scotland and the other organisations that have taken a great interest in the detail of the bill and its effect. I hope that it will receive support throughout Parliament today.

We are taking an important step today in looking to ensure that homophobia and other forms of discrimination have no place in Scotland. Legislating for these aggravations will send out a clear message that we will not tolerate the victimisation of groups who should be valued in our society. The bill will also be an asset to our courts in dealing effectively with the perpetrators of these crimes. I pay particular tribute to all those who have worked so hard to ensure that the bill is passed today: the Justice Committee and its clerks, who have worked with ministers and civil servants; all the external groups who have presented such thoughtful and well-researched evidence; and, of course, Patrick Harvie, who has done so well in forging a strong evidence base for proceeding with the bill and, just as important, a broad coalition of support for it, if not complete unanimity. I know that that has taken perseverance and tenacity on his part and that the bill has followed the work of the sentencing commission and the deliberations of the working group on hate crime. I believe that the process of the bill has better enabled consensus. We have had the kind of cross-party dialogue and engagement that is too often missing  around legislative proposals, for which Patrick Harvie deserves great credit. In Scotland and throughout the United Kingdom the need to redouble our efforts to tackle crimes of discrimination is clear. In Westminster, the response has been to make new provisions in law to deal with such offences. The Scottish Government's criminal justice statistics show that in 2006-07, eight homicides in Scotland were recorded as having a homophobic motivation. The British gay crime survey of 2008 showed that one in five lesbian and gay people had experienced a homophobic hate crime or incident in the past three years. Those are truly shocking statistics. Of course, the bill is not just about LGBT people, important though that aspect of it is. It is also absolutely right that it addresses the problem that people with disabilities are more likely to be victims of hate crimes. The briefing that we have had from the Royal National Institute for Deaf People referred to a survey of its members, which found that 14 per cent of respondents in Scotland said that they had been a victim of physical or verbal assault because of their deafness. The bill is also about encouraging more people to report these kinds of crimes, which, as Patrick Harvie said, too often go unreported. Tim Hopkins of the Equality Network gave persuasive evidence to the Justice Committee on how the introduction of the legislation will encourage greater reporting of these crimes. That has been the experience following the introduction of other aggravated offences legislation. Good proposals were made in the Justice Committee's stage 1 report, as was the case in evidence, to ensure that we get the most from the bill. The committee urged the Scottish Government to work with criminal justice partners to ensure that disposals can—across the country, where practicable—include elements that aim to address attitudes that lead to hate crime. I welcome the suggestion in the committee's report, echoed by the Law Society of Scotland, that in order to ensure that we monitor effectively the use of the legislation, crime codes should be assigned to aggravations. If a code were assigned not only to the offence, but the aggravation, it would be easier to monitor use and establish the rate of successful prosecutions. It is right to highlight the need for appropriate training. Such training will ensure that police and prosecutors influence the legislative provisions. We want the legislation to be as effective as it can be. We all want to live in a society that does all that it can to tackle hate crimes, to ensure that they are reported and that our justice system deals properly with offenders. Doing that protects people  in our society who are either among the most vulnerable or who are perceived to be so. Labour welcomes the bill. We will support it at decision time.

With the latest prison statistics showing that fine defaulters make up less than half a per cent of the prison population, does the cabinet secretary agree that, although there should be effective alternative disposals for fine defaulters, ending custodial sentences for them will not solve the problem of prison overcrowding, and that the proposals for scrapping sentences of less than six months generally involve much more serious crimes?

Will the member give way?

I welcome this debate on the cashback for communities initiative which, because of legislation that was introduced by the previous Executive, benefits many individuals and communities across Scotland. Labour ministers pioneered the work that is being done to ensure that the communities that pay the price for the criminal profits of a few benefit when those ill-gotten gains are rightly seized by the courts. Of course, we welcome the fact that the scheme has continued to be promoted by ministers in the Scottish Government. We know that it is not slow to promote the scheme, given that there have been 12 press releases celebrating it since March last year. However, I do not dispute that this is an initiative that we should—as a country and a Parliament—shout about from the rooftops. It is something that we all support and, given the fractious and contentious debates that we have on the Government's justice policies, it is good that we can discuss today an issue on which there is greater consensus. We will support the Government's motion today and hope that our amendment, which seeks to  build on it, will also be supported. However, in the general and refreshing air of agreement, we should not shy from asking important questions about the future focus and direction of travel of the policy. There can also no complacency about the success rate of seizures of the illegitimate profits of those who have been convicted of criminal activity. That is not a simple process. Authorities north and south of the border have felt the benefits of the legislation, but a great deal more could still be achieved in terms of recovering the proceeds of crime. We look to ministers to ensure progress in that, and I will return to those questions later. We believe that funding through the cashback for communities scheme must focus relentlessly on projects that divert the people who are most at risk of offending and on the communities that are most affected by crime. During the previous Executive's time in office, a host of such activities were funded. In particular, I draw attention to the drug dealers don't care campaign, which was launched by Cathy Jamieson and Hugh Henry and saw the seizure of £1.5 million of drugs and cash from dealers. I will not disagree about the potential for sporting activity—including football, of course—to provide effective diversion from offending. In the previous session of Parliament, I was the Enterprise and Culture Committee's reporter on the future of Scottish football and, while researching that, I visited midnight football league schemes. The evidence of their success in reducing crime and antisocial behaviour was clear. One scheme in Fife offered access to indoor sports facilities on Saturday evenings, and one in Glasgow provided late-night floodlit pitches for use by young people. In both instances, youth offending in the immediate area fell by up to 70 per cent. Aberdeen Football Club's community football programme reaches some 40,000 children across the north-east and, earlier this month, Hearts came to Parliament to brief members on the success of their scheme here in Edinburgh, so I do not need to be persuaded of the merits of investing in that kind of activity. However, when we think about investment in such sporting activity, and in the cultural activities that the cabinet secretary mentioned, we must always ask whether the activity is going to be diversionary from crime and antisocial behaviour and whether it will benefit in that way the communities that are most affected by crime. I am sure that that is true of the project in Edinburgh that Malcolm Chisholm mentioned, and street football, which has also received funding, clearly fits the bill. The initiative must not, however, be used to fund elite sport provision, and if the money is invested  in cultural programmes, they must be programmes that encourage maximum participation by the targeted groups. The scheme must always be linked to improving communities and addressing crime. I have heard concerns about whether that focus will be maintained in the current programme. I ask ministers, when they fund programmes directly and work with the national bodies—whose participation in the scheme we welcome—to ensure that that priority is clear when awards are made. However the schemes are administered, it is the amount of funds that are successfully seized from criminals that determines how much can be invested. It is accepted throughout the UK that, although legislation on proceeds of crime has been an excellent start to the work, far more needs to be done to maximise the amount of illegal assets that are recovered from criminals. Those who profit from crime will always be adept at concealing their profits, to the extent that some are even granted legal aid because of their success in hiding their money. It is estimated that, on average, just 10 per cent of criminals' total assets are confiscated. We should look for improvements in the amount of assets that are recovered and do more to ensure that the Mr Bigs of the criminal world are not let off the hook. I do not suggest that that is easy, but it was never the intention to stand still on the work. It is essential to the cashback for communities scheme to ensure that we maximise both the number of successful prosecutions and the funds that are recovered. That is one reason why it is so important to get on with the job of building the crime campus at Gartcosh without further delay. We must ensure that more and not fewer people are prosecuted for fraud. We must reconsider what can be done to ensure that as much money as possible is seized from criminal gain and reinvested in communities that are affected by criminal profiteering. Those communities can benefit from the cashback for communities scheme. I welcome the fact that the Scottish Government wants to extend the range of crimes that the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 covers. We will support that. The cabinet secretary has said that, so that we can do more, £400,000 of the funds that are seized will be used to support the Crown Office's work on pursuing criminals' assets. That approach has been called a virtuous circle because the seized funds will be used to help seize more funds in the future. That, too, is something that we can support—we hope that there will be greater investment in the scheme through that work. The cabinet secretary has also talked about introducing a policy of incentivisation, whereby police forces will be able to retain a proportion of  the funds that they are involved in seizing. Such a policy is already in operation for forces south of the border, but I am sure that I do not need to tell the cabinet secretary that we do not always have to do exactly what is done down south. We must do what is best in the Scottish context. In Scotland, we decided previously that the funds should be gathered centrally to be invested in projects in communities that are affected by crime—projects such as cashback for communities. If that is to be changed—some figures suggest that agencies would receive 50 per cent of what they recover—it should be the subject of a full debate, because we would have serious questions about such a change in the direction of travel.

I would welcome further dialogue with the cabinet secretary on that. I find his reassurance helpful. We welcome the cashback for communities initiative and the fact that it is taking forward opportunities that are presented by legislation that was passed under the previous Executive. I hope that members will support our amendment, which seeks even greater success for the scheme and a continued community focus in respect of investment of the funds. We are happy to support the Liberal Democrat amendment and the Government motion. I am sure that all members look forward to a future in which we can do even more to ensure that illegal profits are taken out of the criminals' pockets and put into the communities that most need our support and protection. I move amendment S3M-4244.1, to insert at end: "; believes that every effort should be made to ensure further progress in recovering assets from those who profit from crime, and believes that funds obtained through the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 should continue to be focussed on projects in communities affected by crime and in activities that provide diversion from offending."

We have had a good and informed debate on a serious and important issue. I join all the members who welcomed the decision of Robert Brown and the Liberal Democrats to bring the subject to Parliament. Society and Governments have no more important role than protecting our children and pursuing effectively those who are responsible for crimes against them, which rightly provoke revulsion whenever they take place. It is important to have at our disposal every tool to achieve those aims. The proposed missing children alert system could make a difference in  locating children who have been abducted. That is why the written Declaration of the European Parliament on Emergency Cooperation in Recovering Missing Children is an important step forward. As Cathie Craigie said, it is supported enthusiastically by Labour members of the European Parliament and across the parties, as we have heard. Several members have referred to the impressive and encouraging examples of such work in the United States and in other parts of Europe. To establish an Amber alert system throughout the continent, Governments and police agencies will be required to work more closely together. As Anne McLaughlin said, making progress on such work can be difficult and, at times, frustratingly slow. However, every effort must be made to persevere with the initiative, because of its potential. It is good that at least an initial scheme is working in England and Wales, but we should examine examples from abroad of full systems that are operational and consider how we can make similar progress in Scotland. The UK-wide exercise that the minister mentioned is encouraging and we want to build on such work. How best to achieve such a scheme will be debated. That might be through a Europe-wide scheme or through national alert schemes that communicate effectively with one another. Missing Children Europe has argued that having schemes that work within national boundaries but communicate with one another would focus attention in the country in which a child went missing and in the countries that border it. John Lamont was right to say that we must ensure that the system is effective, which will take careful thought. Karen Whitefield said that it is important to consider how to implement schemes so that people are not desensitised to them when they have been in place for a while. Bill Aitken also referred to that. Those points were well made and need to be properly considered as schemes are developed. The crucial point is that a system should, however it is achieved, work across borders. Effective collaboration between police forces is needed. I read in some of the debate about the proposal that some people are sceptical about how well police forces from different countries will work together. The key point is that police forces will increasingly have to collaborate more effectively as more free movement takes place in an expanding European Union. That thinking drives our amendment, which I hope Parliament will support. Such co-operation is crucial not only in recovering missing children but in tackling other important areas of crime, particularly in alerting police forces when people with serious criminal  backgrounds move into their jurisdictions—that issue has arisen here. Better joint working needs to happen, and implementing the missing children scheme should be part of that process. However, we know that that initiative alone will not be enough to make the progress that we want in order better to protect our children from crime. We welcome the pilot in Tayside that will allow parents and guardians to ask the police whether new partners or other adults who have easy access to their children have convictions for child sex offences. That follows successful pilots south of the border and Paul Martin's campaigning work on Mark's law. The horrific offences against children that were detected through operation algebra and the successful prosecution of those who were responsible show the challenges that the police face in preventing and detecting such crimes. It is a sad and sobering thought that more children will go missing in our country, but that is the bleak reality that we must face. We must do all that we can to deal with such appalling situations wherever they occur. The debate has shown that Europe-wide adoption of alert schemes would make a difference. The Scottish Government must work with the UK Government and Scottish police forces must work with their counterparts throughout the UK and Europe to progress that vital initiative. I am happy to endorse the motion in Robert Brown's name, which we will support at decision time.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. Does he accept that the escape of this violent offender has, once more, damaged people's confidence in the open prison estate and in his ability to provide leadership in ensuring the protection of the public in this country? Only last year, after Robert Foye's escape from Castle Huntly, the cabinet secretary said that mistakes would be learned from, so how and when was it decided that Martin was fit to be introduced to an open prison environment? Who authorised that move? In his statement last year, the cabinet secretary said that such decisions would be made at the most senior levels. Was he involved in the decision or even aware that it was being made? Is it not simply unacceptable to blame civil servants when such issues of public safety are ultimately the cabinet secretary's responsibility? If Professor Spencer's report confirms that there has been a significant failure of process in the Martin case, will the cabinet secretary seriously expect us to believe that he bears no responsibility for that? The issue concerns not simply the number of prisoners who abscond—one abscond is one too many—but the question of who, in the light of experience, is deemed to be fit to be placed in the open estate. If the cabinet secretary now accepts that it was wrong for that man—who had a history of violence and going on the run—to be placed in the open estate less than halfway through his sentence, is it not self-evident that only a year after he gave similar assurances to Parliament after the Foye case, that response has been found wanting? In that light, how can we now accept his assurances that the mistakes will not be repeated?

I welcome the legislative consent motion, which I am pleased that the Scottish Government has brought before Parliament today. The Coroners and Justice Bill was introduced in Westminster to  deliver more effective, transparent and responsive justice and coroner services for victims, witnesses, bereaved families and the wider public. It will make several important changes to the law to achieve those goals. Some of the policy areas that this Westminster bill covers will be debated here as we consider the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, which is before the Justice Committee, but some important legislative changes are best expedited through our agreeing to the motion, which I hope that the Parliament will do. Having observed the progress of the proposals, I believe that an example has been provided of welcome collaboration between the Scottish ministers and their UK counterparts in the Scotland Office and the Ministry of Defence. That is particularly evident in relation to the provisions on fatal accident inquiries. It is very welcome that in future we will be able to investigate in Scotland the deaths while abroad on active service of Scottish service personnel. Given the recent and current conflicts in which Scottish troops have been actively engaged and the fatalities that have occurred as they have played their part in the engagement of our forces abroad, the issue has been a great concern to bereaved families at the most difficult and traumatic of times and to representatives from all political parties here and at Westminster. We all agree that, whenever possible, we should enable relatives to avoid the added stress of travelling considerable distances down south for inquiries into the deaths of their loved ones. Avoiding that stress will now be possible, although that might not happen in every instance—for example, in some instances of multiple deaths. Ministers are taking the right approach through flexibility and continuing work to ensure that the two Administrations can work together so that inquiries can be conducted here whenever possible. We support the necessary provisions on the European Union services directive and the provisions to ensure that people who are convicted of crime cannot profit from memoirs—that measure is widely supported. The provisions on information sharing are not referred to in the motion, which reflects the decision in Westminster to put such measures in a new bill. I was minded to agree that when information-sharing measures can assist in addressing poverty and deprivation, they should be welcomed, but that debate is for another day. I am sure that the motion will attract the support of all parties. Labour will certainly support it.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to provide rehabilitation and retraining in prisons. (S3F-1705)

Does the First Minister agree with his justice secretary that the prison regime for which his Government is responsible is "a skoosh"? The justice secretary wants to take thousands of offenders out of jail and refuses to invest in proposals for community courts—despite the clear will of the Parliament. Does that not leave the Government's policies on sentencing lacking any credibility?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. Is not the statement an insult to the Parliament? After the Parliament clearly expressed its will that a community court be established in Glasgow, why has the cabinet secretary not reflected on his position but simply trotted out the same arguments against the court that we heard from the Scottish National Party last week? We all recognise the financial pressures that exist. However, despite the pressures, Glasgow City Council made it clear that it was ready to invest millions in the court, because it thought that the approach would work. Given the cabinet secretary's wider sentencing strategy, the court is surely far more than a desirable extra—it is an essential part of the strategy. If the Scottish Prison Service's £4 million in VAT savings is not to be invested in the court, what will it be invested in? When will the cabinet secretary's target for community sentences to start within seven days be met, if the court does not go ahead? The cabinet secretary talked about a coherent strategy. Does not his decision show how incoherent his strategy is? How can his plans to treble the number of community sentences have credibility, when the current system is creaking at the seams and he refuses to invest in proposals that are proven to deliver tough and effective community payback? The Parliament and the Government's own research support the establishment of the community court, so why are ministers standing in its way? Is this not the clearest illustration of the  fact that the Scottish Government's justice strategy is not just soft touch, but out of touch?

On a point of order—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I refer to the code of conduct in relation to courtesy to other members, given that Ms Marwick has made several inaccurate comments with regard to the circumstances in which the question was withdrawn.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to improve the application process for the Scotland rural development programme. (S3O-6786)

When will the new deadline for applications in the next round of the rural priorities scheme be published? I have received complaints from constituents about the length of time that grant applications take in the wider programme. Will the SRDP review examine the potential to speed up the application process?

Is that right? I was told that I would have six minutes.

Okay. Scottish Labour has supported enthusiastically the proposal for a community court in Glasgow, which Labour ministers in the previous Executive were keen to take forward. It had been intended that the court would deal with some 2,000 cases every year, and its main aim would have been to deal quickly and effectively with criminal incidents and antisocial behaviour. When the plans were announced, it was hoped that the court would be up and running in 2009. The Scottish National Party is now in power and, although it is 2009, the court is not up and running. Indeed, the plan has been abandoned. The situation that we have reached, in which an excellent proposal has been ditched, is deeply disappointing, so I welcome the debate. In pointing to the incoherence of the Scottish Government's policy, the motion addresses the nub of the issue. The Government seeks to expand massively the number of community disposals through what amounts to the abolition of sentences of less than six months, but it is failing to provide anything like the investment that is required to make such an expansion achievable. As we have heard, the planned community court in Glasgow was based on proven models of success at Red Hook and Midtown, and in  England. Members who visited New York have said how impressed they were by the swiftness with which offenders are dealt—they usually appear in court a day after they have been arrested, and when sentences are awarded they begin there and then. That is a far cry from the situation here, in which only 1 per cent of sentences begin within the Scottish Government's seven-day target. We are nowhere near making the progress that the minister says that we need to make if we are to achieve the overall objective. A community court would have been a focal point for those efforts. The sentences that are handed out by community courts, which involve work that is identified by the local community, are exactly the community payback that is supported across the Parliament. The idea of progress courts, which the Scottish Prisons Commission advanced in its report, was incorporated in the plans for the community court. It was proposed that the judge would play a key role in community engagement and that the new approach to sentencing would help to engender greater confidence in communities. The cabinet secretary's approach threatens public confidence in community sentencing and will not advance community safety. Labour wants more use to be made of community sentences, and we advanced the principle of payback when we were in government. Although the cabinet secretary has proposed a trebling of community sentences, only a 20 per cent increase in funding is to be provided. At the same time, organisations such as Sacro are having their budgets cut, there is stasis on the development of the domestic abuse and drugs courts that were introduced in the previous session of Parliament, and there has been a 14 per cent drop in the number of drug treatment and testing orders. The decision not to proceed with the proposed community court leaves the SNP's policy without any credibility. The Scottish Government's approach is a recipe for disaster in our justice system. We know that even many of those who support the abolition of sentences of less than six months have made it clear that the measure requires major up-front investment, which the Government is not providing. That message is conveyed in the Liberal amendment, which we will seriously consider supporting, and the motion's description of the Government's strategy as "incoherent" is a good one. We do not believe that the matter should be allowed to rest. The Government's amendment is entirely inadequate. The Government should reverse its decision and seek to continue to work in partnership with Glasgow City Council to develop the plans for a community court. We have  stated that we believe that the proposal can be afforded; Bill Aitken made the same point, Derek Brownlee suggested as much in his intervention, and we point out that the cabinet secretary has said that the Scottish Prison Service has made some £4 million-worth of VAT savings. There will be a real cost if we do not proceed with the proposal: a great opportunity will be lost to make progress on community sentencing in Scotland and to develop what could be a blueprint for delivery throughout the country. The Scottish Government might believe that the proposed community court should not go ahead, but I am confident that the Parliament thinks that we should proceed with the idea. That is why we will support the motion. I move amendment S3M-4065.1, to insert at end: "and further believes that the Scottish Government should reverse its decision and seek to progress plans for a community court in Glasgow."

To ask the Scottish Executive what funding mechanism it will use for construction of the Aberdeen western peripheral route. (S3O-6711)

We have been waiting for two years to hear what the funding mechanism will be. Contributions will be required from both local authorities at this time of frugility—to use the words of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. If the decision is to be made after the receipt of the planning inquiry report, how long after that will it be? Does the minister have an early view of the likelihood of the route being funded through the Scottish distant futures trust?

In March, the First Minister said that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will pursue with individual councils the question why not all councils in Scotland have managed to achieve the teacher numbers that we would all wish them to. In the light of that statement, and given that teacher numbers in Aberdeen have fallen by 153, why has dialogue on the issue not yet taken place between ministers and Aberdeen City Council? How will ministers help the council to restore teacher numbers to previous levels, given its plans for further cuts of £5.9 million in its education budget next year?

We must take from the framework and the debate the message that there can be no let-up in tackling antisocial behaviour in our communities. As Labour members, we are proud of our record in Government in empowering people whose lives had been blighted by antisocial behaviour. They wanted their right to a peaceful and better quality of life to be protected. We listened to them, and, as Labour members have made clear during the debate, the new legislation has been used to great effect in communities throughout Scotland. I do not disagree that, five years on, it is right to refresh the strategy; and that in doing that, it is right for the Government to bring together key stakeholders on such a crucial issue—I  acknowledge the important role that they play in tackling antisocial behaviour. However, the Government must ensure that the final overall approach is right, and members on the Labour side of the chamber believe that it is not. We make no apology for our belief that the first priority must always be the victims of crime and antisocial behaviour. We cannot endorse the Government's new approach, which seeks to reduce enforcement and to abandon the use of powers that have made a difference. That approach would abandon the people, families and communities who are the victims of antisocial behaviour. We should be on their side rather than telling them that they are on their own.

We have said that throughout today's debate, but we need to strike the right balance. The best thing that the Government's framework can say about our groundbreaking legislation on antisocial behaviour is that it will not be repealed, but it is made clear that the previous Administration's approach is being abandoned. However, the framework admits that antisocial behaviour is still a major problem and the statistics that I have seen show no reduction in the use of the new powers. There is still a need and a desire for those powers to be used, so there can be no room for complacency. People whom I meet who are directly affected by antisocial behaviour want those powers to be used more, not less. Other members have also referred to the experiences of their constituents. The framework appears to identify the problem as being that people's expectations are too great in relation to what should be done to tackle antisocial behaviour—as if the problem was how to educate them about that. Richard Simpson was entirely right on that point. Surely, rather than ask people to manage their expectations, we should directly respond to their problems. That is why we do not want to restrict the opportunities for enforcement. Instead, we should address the frustration of those who believe that enforcement is not being used enough.

That is a false premise. The framework document makes it clear again and again that the Government wants to move away from enforcement measures, which are referred to on page 1 as "simplistic quick-fixes". The framework states that councils should put in place a "support package" for a perpetrator before they can even apply for an ASBO. The tone of the document is clear and is why we oppose the motion. We want new avenues to be opened up for the victims of antisocial behaviour and we want action to be taken against such behaviour. That is why Paul Martin made it clear that we want community organisations, such as community councils and resident groups, to be given a clear role and process for applying for use of enforcement measures. The framework says that communities should be involved more in dealing with antisocial behaviour—we believe that our proposals would be an effective way in which to achieve that. I find it extraordinary that some of the successes of antisocial behaviour orders and of other, wider enforcement measures are not referred to in the document.

I refer Mike Rumbles to the success of the dispersal order in Aberdeen—I know that Mr Rumbles did not support that, but I did—which is one just one of the many examples that we have heard about from across the country. For years, Beach Boulevard in Aberdeen had been plagued by so-called boy racers—mostly guys aged about 40—until the introduction of the dispersal zone, which was a huge success and was widely welcomed by local residents because it also applied to stationary cars. Dispersal orders can provide a good framework. I do not say that the framework is wrong to highlight other interventions and preventive measures, but we need to strike the right balance. Indeed, I understand that the families project in Dundee, which is run by Action for Children Scotland and is mentioned in the framework, was started by Dundee City Council under the leadership of Kate Maclean. As Hugh Henry said in his excellent speech, midnight football schemes were rolled out across Scotland in the previous parliamentary session. Labour supports such measures, but there must also be a strong role for enforcement in when other approaches are not successful. It is right that good practice should be shared, but the framework says that no new funding is available for the strategy. The document talks about "record levels of investment" in local  government to help to implement the strategy, but we dispute that. We know that many organisations that are currently doing great work in helping to reduce antisocial behaviour are facing budget cuts. Of course we want to see positive role models for young people and positive images of young people, which is why we have expressed our disappointment that the Government failed to support the ProjectScotland initiative, which furthered exactly that goal during the previous parliamentary session. The Government engages in a lot of talk but does not provide the funding. That is the bottom line. I am bewildered by the framework's tone on enforcement, because members of the Government have not been slow in demanding tough action when they have been confronted by antisocial behaviour problems in their own areas. In February 2007, Kenny MacAskill was questioned about young people in Edinburgh signing antisocial behaviour contracts—I think that that was some time before young people in London were doing so. The framework refers often to the measure. He said then: "We need to tackle the problem at its source and make youngsters and their parents responsible for their actions. If they breach acceptable standards of behaviour in society, there must be consequences for them rather than just a slap on the wrist." That tone is very different from what is in the framework. If that approach was right in that situation, why does the Government not believe that it is right for every community in Scotland? We need to use every tool at our disposal to tackle antisocial behaviour—not leave half the tools in the box. We agree that parental responsibility is important, which is why we do not believe that the fact that parenting orders have not been used is a matter for celebration. We think that answers should be given about why they have not been used. In government, we listened to communities that wanted tough and effective action to be taken to tackle antisocial behaviour. We are not confident that the approach in the framework will move that work forward, which is why we cannot endorse the framework. However, we will continue to make the case in Parliament and in the communities that we represent that more must be done to tackle the scourge of antisocial behaviour. That is what communities throughout Scotland want: they deserve no less.

Let us be clear: Labour promised year-on-year increases in police numbers. Members have represented that correctly in their speeches.

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with Aberdeen City Council about its financial situation. (S3O-6512)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the funding problems of Aberdeen City Council in finding finances to enable it to proceed with the 3Rs project, which is to provide badly needed new schools in the city. Following the financial problems of Landsbanki Islands, which has been financing the scheme, has the cabinet secretary had any further dialogue with the council on how the Scottish Government might be able to provide the council with support to ensure that the project can go ahead?

As the report emphasises the link between alcohol  misuse and crime, will the minister support our proposals for alcohol treatment and testing orders—as alternatives to custody—and post-custodial programmes? The minister mentioned accountability and single outcome agreements, but the report highlights gaps in those agreements in relation to drug and alcohol misuse services. How will alcohol support services such as Albyn house in Aberdeen be maintained in the face of council cuts?

If ministers believe that it is important that community sentences are served quickly, why were they unable to tell me, in parliamentary answers, how long offenders are waiting to serve their community sentences? It was found through freedom of information requests that the figure for offenders who begin to serve such sentences within seven days is appallingly low. Surely ministers need to know that information not only to progress their flawed plans for a massive and unresourced increase in the number of community sentences, but because of the other offences that occur while offenders wait to carry out their community sentences. That is hardly payback.

All of us realise the toll that alcohol misuse takes on Scottish society, so I welcome the opportunity to debate once more that concern in this chamber. I also welcome the Scottish Government's change of heart on full parliamentary scrutiny of the alcohol framework. In advance of the publication of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, we called for it to be divided into two separate bills. It is clear that to have debated those major policy proposals only as regulations would have been wholly inadequate, so the fact that they will be decided on in a separate bill is a move forward. However, that is not the only change that must come. The Conservatives are right to highlight the genuine concerns about enforcement of the current licensing laws. Last year, there were 576 recorded offences of underage drinking and only 88 of them were proceeded against. That is not good enough. There should be a three-strikes-and-you're-out policy for licensees who sell to those who are underage. For ministers to have credibility in introducing their framework, such issues must be addressed properly, particularly as we are discussing further policy initiatives when many of the new provisions in the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 are yet to come into force. There must be further changes in the way that the Scottish Government takes forward its proposals on alcohol. We in the Labour Party genuinely wanted to see more details in the final framework than were in the consultation document, which would allow us to make informed choices about the kind of issue that Mr Rumbles raised. However, additional detail was hard to find, and we still do not know how irresponsible promotions will be defined or how legislation will be framed. It is vital to know that, because there are serious questions of legality. However, as Hugh Henry said, that does not mean that we should not consider bold measures. Some alcoholic drinks are sold too cheaply, and we are well aware of the scale of the problem of harmful drinking, which is clear from the Audit Scotland report. Nevertheless, whatever the Parliament does has to be legal and workable.  Scottish Labour held a summit to discuss the proposals with a range of organisations but, up until now, the Scottish Government has failed to engage properly with stakeholders on the issue. It is no wonder that the responsibility for this area has been removed from Mr MacAskill and given to health ministers, because the case for the measures to tackle crime and antisocial behaviour has not been made. I refer not only to the flawed proposal to ban 20-year-olds from purchasing at an off-licence—a localised injustice—but to the key proposal on minimum pricing, which will not touch the price of certain alcoholic products that have been identified again and again not only with antisocial behaviour, but with violent crime. It is right that we have been challenged not simply to criticise and question the Government's policies but to produce our own, which we have done. Our proposals for a mandatory challenge 21 scheme and for alcohol treatment and testing orders have received wide support, but ministers rejected both proposals out of hand for spurious reasons. To do justice to this issue of real concern for Scottish society, the debate must move on and real efforts must be made to reach consensus on policies.

Yes, there needs to be action on pricing, but such action must be explored and considered properly through the bill that we now have before us. It would be wrong to pre-empt that. I welcome the fact that Mr Aitken is reading The Guardian . Who knows where Tory justice policy will end up as a result? Just as Mr Aitken's reading The Guardian is very much out of context, the words of the Prime Minister are very much out of context in Mr Aitken's motion. That is our concern. If the Scottish Government is prepared to embrace a consensual approach, we can make progress. Attitudes to alcohol in Scotland will not change overnight and laws on their own will not make the difference. We know that whatever we do now will be done after careful consideration and full debate. I hope that the real victory will be a Scotland with a better and more mature relationship with alcohol.

Labour supports this legislative consent motion because it is important that our borders are perceived as having the same levels of security as those of the rest of the United Kingdom. However, some valid questions have been raised about a couple of issues relating to the legislative consent motion, and it is right that we have the opportunity to discuss those questions in Parliament today. The UK Government is acting to strengthen the law in relation to the security of borders, and it is important that this Parliament takes action to ensure that the same legislative provision can apply here in Scotland. At the Justice Committee, the cabinet secretary pointed out the legal loophole whereby an immigration officer would have to allow a wanted person to enter or leave Scotland even if the officer was aware of an outstanding arrest warrant in that person's name. It is indeed important that immigration officers in Scotland are given the same powers as their counterparts in England and Wales, so that they have powers of detention with the appropriate safeguards. We think that the effect of the legislative consent motion will strike the right balance between giving police officers primacy in enforcing the law in such areas and allowing immigration officers to detain someone who is subject to a warrant for three hours until the police arrive. Because of the presence of police at the vast majority of locations in Scotland that are points of arrival and departure, the powers may require to be used only infrequently. Nevertheless, it is important that immigration officers here have the same powers as officers in the rest of the UK, so that we are not perceived as having any weaker border controls. It is of course right to have the appropriate powers in place to deal with every eventuality, and I understand from the cabinet secretary's evidence to the committee that the police support this measure.  As the cabinet secretary said, the Justice Committee's report pointed out two concerns expressed by the Scottish Refugee Council about the legislation. The first is the SRC's concern that the enforcement powers of UK Border Agency staff in Scotland would not be subject to the same degree of scrutiny and accountability as in England and Wales, as asylum seekers and others subject to enforcement powers in Scotland would not have parity of recourse to an independent and direct complaints mechanism. However, the cabinet secretary has sensibly suggested that the police complaints commissioner for Scotland could be given powers to oversee certain complaints made about UK Border Agency staff. I understand that the cabinet secretary has written to the Justice Committee with information on further progress on the issue; and this afternoon he has assured the chamber that he is in further dialogue with UK ministers. We seem to be moving sensibly and effectively in the right direction, which we welcome. The second SRC concern has also been expressed by the Law Society of Scotland. It relates to clause 50 and to the transfer of two classes of work away from the Court of Session—immigration appeals and judicial review, which would instead go to an upper tier tribunal. Clearly, that would have practical impacts. Further dialogue on those points between Home Office ministers and the cabinet secretary would be welcome as the bill progresses through Westminster. I do not want to pre-empt any wider view from my group on the points, but I think that it is fair to say that I look forward to being in further contact with the cabinet secretary. Valid concerns have been raised, and I hope that there can be further constructive dialogue among ministers here and at UK level. Clearly, the overarching priority is to ensure that Scotland has the same appropriate ability to secure its borders as the rest of the United Kingdom has. I therefore once more confirm our support for this legislative consent motion.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made with the fuel poverty programme. (S3O-6292)

We all want measures that will tackle fuel poverty effectively. However, the minister will be aware that the number of central heating installations fell from 1,236 in October last year to 520 in November—a fall of more than 50 per cent. Can the minister justify a cut of such  magnitude five months before the new fuel poverty programme is scheduled to start?

Does the First Minister agree that the direct intervention of the Secretary of State for Scotland to resolve the issues around the Somerville case was welcome and effective? [ Interruption. ]

Can the First Minister say whether money saved as a result raises the possibility of ending the current sanitation arrangements at Peterhead prison without the closure of the community prison in Aberdeen?

Does the minister not accept that our manifesto commitment was to increase the number of police officers year on year and that we stood on our record of 7,000 new recruits and 1,500 more police on the beat? It is interesting that, yet again, he tries to divert attention from his own manifesto, which is what is in question here.

I did not say the things that Mr Gibson suggests I said. Unlikely though it might be, perhaps he can provide some enlightenment. Why did Mr MacAskill clearly say in an interview three weeks ago that the target would not be reached? Why did he say that if that was never going to be the case?

I simply pose a question. We certainly want the Scottish Government to put those additional police officers on the beat. If the cabinet secretary is so confident about that today, why did he say just three weeks ago that the total figure would not reach 17,265 officers? Is he saying that the figure will be at least 17,275, which is the bottom of the range that is set out in the projection study?

Ever since the Scottish National Party came to power, the Parliament has sought to hold it to its manifesto commitment for 1,000 more police officers in Scotland. This is not simply a debate about numbers; it is about a clear promise to communities in Scotland that that commitment on extra police would be kept when so many of the Government's manifesto commitments have been jettisoned. However, trying to get clarity from ministers on the commitment has been like trying to nail blancmange to a wall. By September 2007, the SNP had moved away from the pledge of 1,000 more police to "the deployment of the equivalent of 1,000 additional police officers". When the cabinet secretary was asked, on "The Politics Show", how many police officers there would be, he said: "I find that, actually, a rather silly question. The number will, you know, be whatever that will be." The Parliament, and others without, has ensured that the Scottish Government returned to a commitment of 1,000 more police officers. Alas, though, even now it has been necessary to seek further clarity from ministers on that pledge. Yesterday, they published a police force projection study that they said showed that the target would be met. The cabinet secretary attacked what he called doom-mongers—unlikely as it may seem, the phrase "doom-monger" may have been aimed in my direction. All I can say in response to the cabinet secretary is "Physician, heal thyself", because it was not me but the cabinet secretary who, when asked by Colin MacKay, "Will there be 17,265 officers by 2011?" said no. At a recent First Minister's question time, the First Minister, in his best Tony Soprano impersonation, issued me with a dire warning that I would have to apologise to Parliament on the issue. I am afraid to say that no such apology will be forthcoming—not because I seek to follow his example in failing to apologise for the Government's litany of broken promises, but because we had to raise our concerns about the fact that the cabinet secretary said in the interview that the target of 1,000 more police than in May 2007 would not be met.  In the SNP amendment, Mr MacAskill returns once again to the issue of 1,000 extra recruits, but 1,000 recruits 1,000 more police officers does not make. Between 1999 and 2007, the previous Scottish Executive delivered 1,500 more police officers to create a record number of police in Scotland. When the cabinet secretary talks of record numbers, that is nothing new—we achieved that and we are proud of it. However, to do that over eight years, nearly 7,000 new officers were recruited. It is still not clear to us from the projection study that the level of planned recruitment will result in 1,000 extra police officers. If the cabinet secretary is so confident that it will, why does he not simply sign up to our motion? His projection study predicts that the lowest possible number of new officers that there will be is 10 more than we refer to in the motion, so it should have been easy for him to sign up.

I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has made that clear commitment, but it raises the question why he could not sign up to the motion, which would have made that absolutely clear. Labour councillors in Strathclyde, through the good offices of the Strathclyde police board, are investing the funds of their own councils to put more police on the beat there—nearly 200 extra officers. We have not even said in the motion that the extra 1,000 funded by the Scottish Government should be above and beyond that. The extra recruitment in Strathclyde shows that a postcode lottery on police recruitment is opening up, with recruitment forging ahead in Strathclyde, while in Grampian, recruitment targets are having to be scaled back by some 60 officers—the First Minister may care to reflect on that. I am sure that it will become clear that Grampian is not the only force to be affected in that way. It is important that those who come forward to join the police now receive exactly the same level, length and high quality of training that have been the hallmark of the Scottish police. Reports in two newspapers in November raised serious concerns about pressures on training provision. On this crucial issue, it is time to have a clear strategy for delivery. Today, the cabinet secretary said yes but three weeks ago he said no. For too long, with the mibbes aye, mibbes naw approach that has been taken, it has seemed as though Kenny Dalglish rather than Kenny MacAskill has been in charge of the pledge. That is why we wish to see new, independent scrutiny, not simply of the reporting of the figures but of the projection study  and the plans to make the pledge a reality. Despite all the statements about the projection study, and despite the comment that Kenny MacAskill has just made, the amendment in the name of the cabinet secretary still does not bind the Government to a clear target. It simply refers to the projection study. If the cabinet secretary has moved on from that, we welcome that. However, on that basis we cannot support the Scottish Government's amendment; nor can we support the Conservative amendment, which is merely an addition to that. The Liberal Democrat amendment is not only a more accurate reflection of the history of the issue; it is far more productive in looking forward, and we are happy to support it. If the SNP cannot accept independent scrutiny of its progress on the issue and cannot make a clear commitment, doubts will remain. In any event, it will still be the job of the Parliament to hold the Government to account on this key pledge—it is clear that the pledge will not be kept unless we do so. We are gratified that, on this occasion, our debate has resulted in further information and, hopefully, the clarity that we seek from the Scottish Government. Nevertheless, we will continue to press the Government to keep its pledge on police numbers. That is why we have brought this debate to the chamber today. I move, That the Parliament believes that the Scottish Government must ensure that there are 17,265 full-time equivalent police officers by March 2011, calculated on the basis currently used by the Chief Statistician in the reporting of the official Police Officer Quarterly Strength Statistics, for the SNP's stated manifesto pledge for 1,000 more police officers to be met.

I congratulate the Justice Committee on its scrutiny of the Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill, and I congratulate Patrick Harvie on bringing it to the Parliament. We very much support it. This has been a good and consensual debate, in which members have reflected on the fact that the journey to this point has not been short. It was in 2003 that Robin Harper lodged an amendment to the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill that would have addressed the forms of prejudice that we are discussing. Since then, the working party on hate crime, which was established in the previous parliamentary session, has produced its deliberations. Marlyn Glen mentioned its wider work. In addition, the Sentencing Commission for Scotland has done work on the issue, and provisions have been introduced in England and Wales on offences that are motivated by the victim's sexual orientation. I congratulate Patrick Harvie on ensuring that the bill has come this far, which has given us the opportunity to debate and pass it. In the light of the Justice Committee's scrutiny of the bill and the extensive consideration of the issues that has taken place within and without Parliament, I believe that a clear case has been made for the bill. The evidence that the committee received was compelling. As Patrick Harvie and the cabinet secretary said, the 2002 beyond barriers survey of almost 1,000  LGBT people from across Scotland found that 23 per cent of them had been subjected to a physical assault and 68 per cent of them to verbal abuse, just because they were LGBT. Mike Pringle mentioned the worrying evidence of "The Gay British Crime Survey 2008". Worse still, in 2006-07 eight homicides in Scotland were recorded as having a homophobic motivation. That truly shocking statistic appears in the Scottish Government's criminal justice statistics. However, it has rightly been pointed out that the bill is not simply about doing all that we can do to ensure that the LGBT community can live free from fear of intimidation and victimisation. It is also about doing more to tackle crimes against people who have disabilities. A survey that was conducted in 2004 by the Disability Rights Commission and Capability Scotland found that some 47 per cent of disabled people in Scotland had experienced hate crime as a result of their disability, with 31 per cent of respondees reporting that they had suffered verbal abuse, intimidation or physical attacks at least once a month. The problem is clear and the scale of it could not be clearer, so it is vital and absolutely right that Parliament does everything that it can to tackle it. We need to increase confidence in the criminal justice system that deals with hate crime. Too many lesbian and gay people believe strongly that the police cannot and will not take homophobic hate crimes seriously. We must change that, and I believe that the bill will help. We must improve local responses to hate crime. Ultimately, we must increase the proportion of people who commit hate crimes who are brought to justice. Robert Brown spoke well on how the bill will ensure that such crimes are deal with most effectively in the courts. We in Scottish Labour are keen that even more action is taken to support the victims of crime. We want to increase the proportion of victims or witnesses of hate crime who come forward to report what they have suffered or what they have seen. We must confront the fact that we are not doing enough for the victims of such offences. We know that three out of four LGBT people who have experienced hate crimes or incidents did not report them to the police and that some seven out of 10 of them did not report them to anyone. I found the evidence of Tim Hopkins of the Equality Network persuasive. He told the committee: "one of the bill's first effects will be to encourage more people to report crimes. It is likely that in the first couple of years after the bill is passed ... we will see the same thing that happened when the religious aggravation element was introduced, which is that the number of aggravated crimes that are reported to procurators fiscal and prosecuted will go up as people get more confident about reporting them to the police."—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 13 January 2009; c 1489.]  Paul Martin covered the recording of such crimes, which is another vital issue. SAMH identified the fact that people who have mental health problems can face hate crimes of a prolonged nature and that they are often targeted as a result of fear and ignorance. It can, of course, be even more difficult for people who have mental health problems to have the confidence to face such crimes and to report them. In Labour, we are proud of our record in standing up for the rights of people with disabilities—for example, through Jackie Baillie's bill on parking—and the rights of members of the LGBT community. However, on whether it is right to pick out certain groups in that way, and whether we are in danger of creating a hierarchy of victims—Bill Aitken referred to evidence to the Justice Committee on that—the case was well made by Stonewall Scotland that what is sought here is not special treatment, but fair treatment. The aggravation is based on the motivation of the accused, not on the identity of the victim. It is also about the accused's perception of the victim. Non-disabled and non-LGBT people can be victims of hate crimes. Stonewall Scotland has provided examples of that. The bill is not simply about the rights of disabled and LGBT people; it is about the right of all of us to live in a society that does its utmost to tackle hate crimes and to ensure that they are reported and appropriately dealt with in our justice system. It is our responsibility to ensure that we have the right approach, and that we effectively tackle crimes that are targeted at people who are either among the most vulnerable in our community or perceived to be so. That is why Labour welcomes the bill and will vote for it at decision time.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is supporting the performing arts in Aberdeen. (S3O-6192)

Does the minister agree that the great and hospitable city of Aberdeen deserves and needs thriving performing arts, just as other Scottish cities do? The Scottish Arts Council's help has been welcome in ensuring that the city's famous venue the Lemon Tree can reopen under the excellent management of Aberdeen Performing Arts. However, does the minister agree that further support will be required if, in addition to visits to Aberdeen from touring productions by national companies—I am sure that Gilbert and Sullivan productions will be welcome—more productions are to be developed in the city?

Given the concerning incidents of pupils being found with knives in a number of schools, is it not vital to have a clear picture of the extent of the problem? Why have I been told that the Scottish Government does not hold centrally the number of such incidents and that it has no plans to do so? Does the minister agree that such data should be collected to inform the action that we all want to be taken on this important issue? Knife crime in schools might be rare, but we should know whether it is.

I am pleased that we have this opportunity to debate Aberdeen crossrail, which is a vital transport project for the north-east. We have suffered many disappointments under an SNP Government that promised our area so much, but the failure to give Aberdeen crossrail the necessary backing—it is omitted entirely from the strategic transport projects review—is a particular blow to hopes for the public transport options that our area needs. I say to Maureen Watt that that "winna wash" with people in the north-east. In my members' business debate on crossrail in 2006, members from all parties supported my call to move from the feasibility study that the previous Executive had funded to a firm commitment to construction with a clear timetable for delivery. I very much regret that that consensus has not  survived into the current parliamentary session. Frankly, I think that the minister's uncharacteristically intemperate comment to Mike Rumbles would have been rather better applied to his own strategy. I note that both the SNP and Tory amendments refer to "incremental" improvements. That is all very well; of course I welcome the additional services from Aberdeen to the south and the modest improvements in journey times, but a step change from that is required if we are to realise the Aberdeen crossrail project. Given the Conservatives' previous support for crossrail, it is regrettable that we could not get a consensus, at least among the opposition parties, by agreeing to the much clearer statement of support for the project that Alison McInnes's motion represents. The Aberdeen crossrail project needs that kind of clear support if we are to create the necessary political momentum. Like Mike Rumbles, I am surprised that both amendments refer to Laurencekirk station. The new station is a welcome development indeed, but no one has ever understood Laurencekirk station to be part of the crossrail project. As Lewis Macdonald said in his excellent speech, the reference in the Government amendment to the impact that additional stops will have on journey times misses the point in what strikes me as a worrying way. With full realisation of crossrail, that would not be relevant. Congestion in Aberdeen is a very real problem. The eventual completion—the project has been delayed by the minister—of the Aberdeen western peripheral route and the improvements at Haudagain that will now only follow the AWPR's construction will also require the development of Aberdeen crossrail if we really want to tackle congestion. People travelling into the city from the shire need to have a realistic alternative to the car. For too many people, no such alternative exists at the moment. A frequent through service every 15 minutes from Inverurie to Stonehaven—with the potential for new city destinations and even for the eventual extension of the line north into the minister's constituency—would give commuters a real alternative. The increments should involve starting with a half-hourly service and moving to a service every 15 minutes. The Scottish Government's approach seems to be far more "incremental" than that. The crossrail plans were put in place to address the fact that Aberdeen as a city, and the north-east as a region, are not as well served by rail links as other parts of the country are. Both the First Minister and the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change know that well, so it is very surprising that the crossrail project has  not been given greater priority. We know that there is no shortage of demand for increased rail services. When a similar facility was put in place in Edinburgh, there was a 72 per cent increase in passengers. I am sure that the Aberdeen crossrail project would be equally successful. Congestion takes a heavy toll on business in Aberdeen. Even with the necessary road improvements—which are now further away than was originally envisioned—only progress on crossrail can provide us with the hope that we can tackle the increased congestion that is being predicted. It is self-evident that crossrail is crucial if we are to aspire to a sustainable transport policy for our part of Scotland, but it is also vital to the economy of the city and the shire. I was surprised by Maureen Watt's comments on the economic impact of the project, given that it would increase tourism in the area. Given the Administration's emphasis on the importance of oil and gas, surely it should agree that the oil and gas capital of Europe should have the necessary transport infrastructure. I hope that Parliament will support the motion in the name of Alison McInnes. The Scottish Government should reconsider its approach by pledging its full support to the Aberdeen crossrail project, which it knows the north-east needs.

The Parliament has acted in unity before to protect and advance the rights of workers who have been recklessly exposed by their employers to asbestos, whose health has suffered dramatically as a result, and whose families have also borne scars of trauma and loss. Labour members are proud of the previous Scottish Executive's Rights of Relatives to Damages (Mesothelioma)  (Scotland) Act 2007 and of the work of Des McNulty, who initially pursued the issue as a member's bill, Bill Butler and Duncan McNeil. Of course, members on all sides have frequently made the case for sufferers of mesothelioma and their families. Stuart McMillan initially introduced a members' business debate to raise the Parliament's concerns about the impact of the House of Lords ruling. Members have been moved to act by the experiences of the people whom they represent, and we are moved to act as a Parliament today. It is right that we look to pass the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill, which we are pleased the Scottish Government has introduced and which we hope will unite the Parliament once more to protect the rights of those whose health is affected and who are at risk of serious illness because of employers' faults. We have previously had very good, non-partisan debates on those issues, which are of such great importance, and I am sure that that will be the spirit of this debate. We welcome the introduction of the bill, and I very much welcome the minister's opening speech and, indeed, the sensible amendments that we passed earlier, which strengthen the bill's effectiveness—Bill Butler pursued that issue at stage 2. It would be good to receive further information from the minister later about his discussions with Mr Brownlee on what action will be taken on the costs. That issue has been debated by members, but there might still be matters that require further discussion. Once again, the Justice Committee has diligently and effectively scrutinised legislation to ensure that the bill that we pass has been improved by the committee process. Today, we must pay tribute in particular to the tireless campaigning work of Clydeside Action on Asbestos, which has represented the victims of asbestos exposure so passionately and persuasively and has received wide recognition for its work. We must also acknowledge the work of the trade unions—my union Unite in particular, I am pleased to say—which have provided excellent representation for their members. We also acknowledge Thompsons Solicitors for all its work, which has helped to ensure that the bill is as effective as possible in reversing the House of Lords judgment. As the Parliament has heard many times throughout the years, mesothelioma leads to a speedy and painful death. The insurance industry has argued that pleural plaques are not harmful in themselves and do not necessarily lead to mesothelioma, but the opposite case has been put irrefutably by members of all parties during the debates on the bill. Pleural plaques cause not just  anxiety but ill health. As I mentioned in the stage 1 debate, a Unite member from Stonehaven said: "Pleural Plaques is a time-bomb. The Doctors could call me tomorrow to tell me I have mesothelioma and sufferers have to live with that prospect every minute of every day. It's undoubtedly deteriorated my quality of life ... I'm more worried, anxious, lethargic .... my health is poorer." I do not believe that employers or the insurance industry should be able to walk away from that. The approach of Labour members is clear: the crucial issue is that the bill be passed. We hope that it will be passed unanimously, given that it has received the support of all parties so far. Our job is to make the right provision in Scotland to enable people with pleural plaques to regain the right to claim compensation.

First, let me pay tribute to Gil Paterson for his efforts on the issue. Having attended a number of members' business debates on the sufferers of asbestosis and pleural plaques, I know that he has been involved in the issue over the years and has taken it seriously. I have been in dialogue with my Westminster colleagues and I know that they, too, want to make progress on the issue. UK ministers have undertaken a full consultation about what measures should be taken in light of the House of Lords ruling, and it is right that they give the issue full consideration. UK ministers have engaged in the kind of consideration and consultation that our Justice Committee has said is important in dealing with such matters, so I do not think that they should be criticised for that. It is right that Westminster looks to make progress; the bill that we are considering is right for us, but it is right that we look to progress across the country. On that basis, I hope and am confident that Scottish Government ministers will continue to have constructive dialogue with their counterparts in Westminster, which is the right way to take the issue forward. The key issue for members is to ensure that we make the right provision in Scotland. We must do the right thing by the victims of pleural plaques and by those who have so effectively taken their case to this Parliament in arguing that their rights to justice and compensation were, unfortunately, removed by the House of Lords judgment. That is a wrong that needs to be righted.  I maintain that passing the bill will not in any event result in unbearable costs for the Parliament or others, and the minister rightly said that this is an issue of justice. I hope that today is a day on which the parties come together in a spirit of unity—as has so often been the case in Parliament in the past—to take action to defend the rights of those who have been recklessly exposed to asbestos in the workplace. That is why the bill has Labour's whole-hearted support.

The bill has enjoyed unanimous support so far and I hope that that continues to be the case today. However, I am afraid that I cannot support the amendment in the name of Derek Brownlee, even though he made his case in an unusually reasonable manner. Amendment 9 looks to the wider issue of post-legislative scrutiny, particularly the impact of costs once a bill has been passed. The issue is one that parliamentary committees can take up at any point in time. There is no need to amend the bill to do that. This is not the most appropriate way for the Parliament to engage in this level of scrutiny. There has been a lot of debate on the costs of the bill. In this case, we have to accept that we cannot come up with an exact figure for the resource that is required to implement the bill. Amendment 9 addresses not only the cost on Government and local authorities but the cost on individuals and businesses. In those cases, surely insurers will be responsible for meeting the majority of costs, as they have been in the past. I do not accept the predictions of future costs that the insurance industry has produced. In my view, they are significantly overinflated. Based on the information that was available to them, Scottish ministers have done their utmost to come up with the most realistic estimate of costs. The amendment does not make it clear what would happen to the report or what its intention would be. If passed, the amendment would create further uncertainty for victims of pleural plaques, which is not a desirable outcome. Given that the best indications that we have are that costs are not extraordinary and that the level of payments to victims of pleural plaques is not unreasonable, I believe that the best way forward is for us to pass the bill without the amendment, and I will vote accordingly. I am not saying that Mr Brownlee has not made reasonable general points about post-legislative scrutiny and the costs of legislation once it is in place, but those are matters for parliamentary committees, rather than for an amendment to legislation.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement and for briefing me and other justice spokespeople on the issue earlier this afternoon. The issue of compensation payments for prisoners—many, of course, for slopping out—has been a vexed one, because nobody wants offenders to receive such payments. That is why it was so important that the previous Executive invested so much in ending slopping out in all but one prison. I ask the cabinet secretary to ensure that the issue is taken forward constructively and collaboratively with colleagues in the United Kingdom Government. This is a highly technical matter and there is scope for considerable debate on the details of the law: I understand that there was a split decision in the House of Lords on the Somerville case. I am sure that we can all agree that the issue must be resolved satisfactorily. I spoke to the Secretary of State for Scotland yesterday evening and he made it clear that he wants a successful outcome, so I ask the cabinet  secretary to receive the latest communication from the UK Government in that spirit. Of course, the secretary of state is meeting the First Minister today. Finally, the cabinet secretary has made suggestions about what £50 million could be spent on should the money be retained. Can he give further details of what consideration there has been of how such funds might be spent?

Why did the First Minister say last week that mandatory challenge 21 schemes and alcohol treatment and testing orders are in place when they are not? I ask that not to debate veracity in the chamber; I ask him to agree that all parties wish to tackle alcohol abuse, that sensible proposals from all sides should be seriously considered and that the final decision on major policy changes in this area must be for the whole Parliament.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise for giving you no notice, but I seek your guidance on whether the answer that I received from the First Minister was in line with standing orders on courtesy to other members, particularly as, unlike the First Minister, I was careful not to deviate from the serious subject matter of Nigel Don's question. Is that an issue on which you can rule, or is it only a matter for the  ministerial code, in relation to which the First Minister himself makes judgments?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I will not apologise for the 1,500 extra police that were put on the streets when we were in government, in stark contrast with the current position. However, the SNP's promise was not for a projection study but for 1,000 extra police. Was the Cabinet Secretary for Justice wrong when he said that that will not happen?

Once again, Parliament is indebted to the Justice Committee for a thorough and considered report. Community policing is not just about that long-held ideal of a local bobby who knows their patch; all of us in this chamber know that the communities that we represent want visible policing that is responsive to their needs and is aware of the particular challenges of crime and antisocial behaviour that they face. That is why, across this chamber, there is a common desire for extra police. We will debate the progress of the Scottish Government towards that later, but that goal is there because we know that our communities want there to be effective strategies for visible community-based policing. Members across the chamber have made that point well in what has been a good debate. Communities want strong and well resourced community policing because it works. In my area of Grampian, the dedication by the police of resources to specific geographical areas that have been experiencing particular problems has resulted in impressive reductions in crime and antisocial behaviour. The committee found different levels of activity on community policing in different forces, and it is right that the committee has recommended that there be a greater emphasis on the development of community policing strategies in all forces. It is clear from the evidence that the committee heard that, although Strathclyde Police and Central Scotland Police  have developed detailed plans for community policing, other forces are still in the process of doing so. Everyone, no matter where they are in Scotland, should be able to expect effective community policing to be given the same strong priority in their area that it is given in other areas. The Scottish Government has responded to that with the Scottish policing engagement principles, and it rightly points out that much of the delivery will involve local operational decisions being taken by forces. They will have to strike a balance between the capacity for response and specialised policing, for which there will always be a need, and the requirement for greater community policing. As Michael Matheson pointed out, the people that we meet are focused on the desire for more local police. It is reasonable to say that, although there should not be central direction of each force's community policing strategy, ministers who are working with police boards and authorities have a role in ensuring that all forces are putting in place their broad definition of community policing; that all forces are doing their best to minimise abstraction—community police officers should not always the first to be abstracted to other duties; and, at the very least, in sending out a clear signal that a two-year minimum tenure—to which Paul Martin referred—is desirable. It is important that best practice is shared and that, as initiatives such as those in Strathclyde are rolled out, those experiences are evaluated and taken up as successful examples for other forces to use. Training—as James Kelly mentioned—is crucial if community policing is to be given the priority for which we have all expressed a desire today. That should include training of new recruits and of more senior officers who will be responsible for ensuring that there is a focus within their force on community policing. There have been capacity issues within the police college, and ministers have a role in ensuring that the right resources are available to allow new recruits and existing officers to receive proper training in community policing. The Scottish Government has promised research into the impact of community policing, and the timescale for that is important, as it is for all the responses to the committee's report. I would like ministers to outline when they expect those actions to be achieved. The committee's definition of community policing refers to resources and, although the Scottish Government's definition does not, we must realise that resourcing is key. The cabinet secretary, in his letter to the committee, outlines the Scottish Government's pledge to recruit 1,000 extra officers. Like Cathie Craigie, I am afraid that that I cannot share the unusual optimism of the Tory members, and the straying Jackson Carlaw, on  that issue. The letter does not give us confidence that the pledge is on track and that the police strength figures—the crucial indicator—will rise by 1,000. That figure—not the figure for recruitment—rose by 1,500 while we were in office, providing record police numbers. I am happy to inform John Lamont that there were also sharp decreases in crime rates during that time. The ministers must reassure us that overall police numbers will now increase by 1,000. In reality, however, a postcode lottery is developing in relation to the police recruitment pledge. In Strathclyde, the local authority has recruited 200 extra officers for community policing, but it has had to fund that itself, rather than using funds from central Government. In my area, Grampian Police—having had record recruitment levels during the previous session of Parliament—has had to scale back its recruitment target by some 60 officers. Half of that reduction is due to the pensions shortfall. It is crucial that the police numbers promise is kept for all Scotland. That promise is central to the Government's pledge on community policing, and it cannot be allowed to go the way of local income tax, student debt and class sizes, to name but a few. We want progress on community policing, and the report by the Justice Committee shows how that can be achieved. If the Scottish Government does back the report and deliver on police recruitment, our communities will feel and be better protected from crime.

In the eight years of the previous Administration, the police-strength figure increased by 1,500—that did not happen just through recruitment. Does the member accept that the Scottish Government should pledge to provide 1,000 extra officers on top of the police-strength figure?

In ensuring that Scotland's laws on sexual offences are reformed, the Scottish Government is moving forward with broad support. We are happy to endorse the general principles of the bill. As Stuart McMillan said, the previous Scottish Executive asked the Scottish Law Commission to examine the law relating to rape and other sexual offences and the evidential requirements for proving such offences. I welcome the fact that the commission's recommendations have been taken forward by the Scottish Government in the bill to ensure that our sexual offence laws provide clarity and reflect the circumstances of Scotland today. I echo the comments of others about the good work that the Scottish Law Commission has done, which informs the bill that is before us. As someone who was not a member of the Justice Committee but who was an observer of its proceedings, I congratulate the convener, deputy convener and members of the committee on their thorough scrutiny of the bill. The bill process has benefited immensely from the way in which the committee ensured that so many who have expertise on the issues played a full role in giving evidence at stage 1. That was Parliament at its best in developing legislation. Clearly, that work is reflected in an informed stage 1 report that provides constructive and sensible proposals. I believe that the Scottish Government's response to the committee's report is indicative of the constructive dialogue on the bill that ministers have had with the committee, which has been reflected in this afternoon's debate. The debate has also shown that the bill deals with difficult issues relating to what can be a challenging relationship between the law and sexual activity. The need to foresee as wide a range as possible of scenarios and cases seems to me to be at the centre of some of the discussion over terminology and definition. It is right that those matters will continue to be discussed as the bill progresses.  Of course, there is still concern about the conviction rates for rape. In her evidence to the committee, the Lord Advocate rightly pointed out: "There is no panacea for the low conviction rates for these types of crime."—[ Official Report, Justice Committee , 25 November 2008; c 1408.] She also said that the bill is not about improving conviction rates specifically. In its briefing for the debate, the Law Society of Scotland is right to say that the bill, in itself, will not resolve any of the apprehended difficulties in the low conviction rate for rape cases. A number of different, additional measures will indeed be needed, which is a point that the cabinet secretary made in his speech. The Law Society is right to call for further detailed research into the whole system of investigation, prosecution and consideration of verdicts. In its response to the committee, the Scottish Government has said that it will carry out further research into attrition in rape cases. Robert Brown highlighted the problem of getting complaints of rape into court. His point is borne out by the statistics. Rape Crisis Scotland informs us that, in 2006-07, 942 rapes were reported to the police. Of those, 65 cases were prosecuted, and there were 27 convictions for rape. I do not think that anyone reflecting on those figures will feel at all comfortable. It is important that research is carried out into what lies behind such figures. A package of measures is required to address the issues. The Lord Advocate pointed out that, under the current legal framework, juries have a narrow notion of what rape is. We are now widening the definition of rape. That must be understood. In the continuing education campaigns on these issues, to which the cabinet secretary referred, work must be done on wider issues such as women's rights, but work must also be done so that the public understand that rape will no longer be the narrow crime that it was before the bill. I hope that ministers will not only make progress with such work but update Parliament on that progress—and on the wider work that the Government is doing, beyond the bill, to ensure that rapes are reported and effectively prosecuted. The Scottish Government has asked the Scottish Law Commission to review aspects of the law of evidence, and I took on board the points that Conservative members have made today. Those aspects of the law will have a bearing on the issues that we are discussing today, and I echo what Nigel Don said. We look forward to discussing the Law Commission's review. In the debate, members have discussed the issue of consensual sexual relationships between 13 to 16-year-olds. It was clearly an area of considerable debate in the Justice Committee. We have broadly taken the position of reflecting the  status quo, so that flexibility remains with the Lord Advocate. However, as Bill Aitken said, it would be expected that prosecution would remain a very exceptional circumstance. The restatement in the bill of existing statutory provisions is superfluous, but it emphasises that point. The cabinet secretary was right, in his response to the committee, to say that he will give further consideration at stage 2 to the committee's concerns over the exclusion of oral sex from the provisions of section 27. I share the concerns that other members have expressed. The welfare issues that have been raised in relation to this area of the bill, particularly by many organisations working with children and young people, need to be addressed beyond the bill. It will be important to implement the committee's recommendation that multi-agency co-operation should provide effective support to children involved in underage sexual activity. The cabinet secretary has expressed support for the recommendation. Education campaigns will be vital. As Robert Brown and Cathie Craigie said, such campaigns should be informed by consultation with young people themselves. Such measures are particularly important with regard to the issues that Cathie Craigie has highlighted, where pregnancy is involved. Such situations have to be handled appropriately, with support provided for the prospective mother. These issues are not easy, and they will require further consideration. However, Bill Aitken made clear the committee's intention, and Cathie Craigie's points require careful consideration. The intention should be given effect. The other major area of continuing discussion is on the committee's proposal for a separate offence of rape with an object. Rape Crisis Scotland has instead called for a separate offence of sexual assault by penetration. It is clear that the committee's proposal comes from a desire to see effective prosecution of this serious crime. Scottish Women's Aid has argued that this crime is different but equally severe. I know that the committee gave the issue very serious consideration before arriving at its conclusion on the most effective way to proceed in order to ensure that such offences were appropriately prosecuted. Paul Martin referred to that. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has emphasised that he wants to achieve consensus on the issue. That is the right way in which to proceed. Further consideration is required in a number of areas, such as prior consent, and historical abuse and threats. The committee has also stated that trafficking for sexual exploitation is not a matter for  the bill. Margaret Mitchell referred to that. However, we know how important the issues around sexual exploitation as a result of trafficking are, which have been raised at stage 1. We had a constructive members' business debate on the issue, on a motion that was lodged by Murdo Fraser, in which the Minister for Community Safety indicated that the Scottish Government would do further work on the issue. It is clear, from its constructive response to the committee in general, that the Scottish Government is considering all the arguments carefully with a view to producing legislation that we can all agree is designed to be as clear and effective as possible. We are glad to support that approach. We are pleased to give our support to the bill to ensure that we have the best possible legislative framework for tackling these most serious issues and crimes. 16: 21

To ask the First Minister, in light of reports that around 700 victims of human trafficking for sexual exploitation are living in Scotland, whether the Scottish Government will ask the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency to set up an internal specialist unit to tackle this problem. (S3F-1464)

Given those disturbing reports and Amnesty International UK's research showing that, within the UK, Scotland has a disproportionate number of victims of such offences, is it not time to establish a unit in the SCDEA to tackle trafficking? Will the First Minister not only continue constructive engagement with UK counterparts on trafficking but consider reform of the law, because the successful police operations in Scotland against these appalling crimes of exploitation, to which he referred, have not been followed by prosecutions?

I, too, congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing a debate on an important and distressing issue. It is appalling to think that, in Scotland today, there are hundreds of trafficked women and children—the figure could be more than a thousand—working in the sex trade. The figure is disproportionately high compared with that for the rest of the UK. The International Justice Mission is to be congratulated on its work in the area. It rescues victims of such abuses and raises awareness of the human impact of a horrifying global industry. Amnesty International showed the extent of the problem in our country through the publication of its report "Scotland's Slaves", which was launched at the Scottish Parliament last year. That report showed that, during operation pentameter 2, Scottish police forces raided more than 50 premises, 59 people were dealt with as victims of trafficking and 35 suspects were arrested. As Jamie Hepburn said, cases of trafficking were uncovered right across Scotland, and the victims included people from eastern Europe, Asia and Africa. As well as finding evidence of trafficking for  the sex trade, the police operation found evidence of the trafficking of people into Scotland for domestic and agricultural labour. Both Amnesty International and the International Justice Mission have highlighted a need for more support for the victims of trafficking in Scotland. Progress has been made—the UK ratified the European convention on action against trafficking in human beings in December last year and has established the UK human trafficking centre in Sheffield. In addition, victims of trafficking are allowed a 45-day reflection period and might be entitled to a year's residence. However, further progress needs to be made, which will require work at Westminster and by the Scottish Government. We should of course support the national and local groups in Scotland that work on the issue, which make the case that there is an urgent need for accommodation for victims of trafficking. There is also the issue of successful prosecutions against those who are responsible for human trafficking. The International Justice Mission reports that, despite the success of operation pentameter, as of 2008, there had—as Murdo Fraser said—been no prosecutions in Scotland for human trafficking. Jamie Hepburn is right to say that we must ensure that such cases can be prosecuted correctly. There have been 48 such prosecutions in England and six in Wales. Through the Policing and Crime Bill, the UK Government is looking to create a new offence of paying for sex with someone who is controlled for another person's gain. The International Justice Mission argues that similar legislation should be considered here in Scotland. The case for that is persuasive, as I fear that the actions that Margo MacDonald mentioned will not be sufficient on their own. During stage 1 consultation on the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill, the Scottish Trades Union Congress, Victim Support Scotland and others raised the issue of sexual offences that relate to human trafficking. In its stage 1 report on the bill, the Justice Committee said that although trafficking is not a matter for that bill, the Scottish Government should consider it further. I would welcome the minister's thoughts on that suggestion. We all agree that the victims of human trafficking need to be properly supported and helped through their horrific experiences, and that those who abuse people in that way must be brought to account. I hope that the Scottish Government will support further action on such matters. This has been a good debate.

Has the cabinet secretary discussed the impact of there being no community prison in Aberdeen with local social work agencies and the police? Is he aware of the police's security concerns about the 40-mile journeys for prisoners to the courts and the impact on the rehabilitation of prisoners who are placed further away from key services and their families?

It is clear that the development of the new crime campus at Gartcosh, which will bring together the key agencies that are involved in tackling crime, could be of huge benefit in tackling cases of major  criminal fraud. Can the minister assure us that there will be no further delays in its construction and give us a clear timetable for when it will open?

The consultation examines the issue of  recompensing jurors. Does the First Minister agree that jurors should be adequately recompensed for their vital contribution? The Scottish Government's consultation specifically invites views on the Irish model, in which there is no recompense for jury service at all.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had in relation to the provision of alcohol misuse services in Aberdeen. (S3O-5465)

I am sure that minister will be aware of the excellent work of Albyn house in Aberdeen in providing alcohol misuse services. Is she aware that despite a sharp increase in new referrals to Albyn house, there is still no certainty about a funding package to ensure that the facility does not have to close? Given national policy on designated places, will she tell us what she will do to encourage Aberdeen City Council, Grampian NHS Board and Grampian Police to come to an agreement as soon as possible to preserve that vital local service?

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In that case, I ask you to reflect further on whether the First Minister was in breach of rule 7.3.1 of the standing orders, given that there is no clarity—even following Mr Ewing's statement—that the First Minister did not mislead Parliament. Mr Scott's comments show clearly that the First Minister misled Parliament. I can confirm independently that Labour colleagues were contacted on Friday to be told that the issue had not been resolved. Indeed, I was informed by the Scottish Inter Faith Council that new funding arrangements were agreed only last night. I ask you, Presiding Officer, to use your offices to ensure that all correspondence on the issue from the Scottish Government is placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre. Finally, will you consider advising Parliament on whether the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee should discuss introducing rule changes so that in future you have authority over not only the asking of questions, but the answers?

I congratulate Lewis Macdonald on securing the debate and on his work, as the constituency MSP, for the laboratory in the campaign to secure its future and repel the threat of closure. It has been a cross-party campaign, as is evident from the speeches that have been made in the debate. What has made clear to me the compelling argument for keeping the lab open is not just the concerns of Grampian Police and the Northern Constabulary and the quite unequivocal statement of Colin McKerracher, the chief constable of Grampian Police, on the detrimental impact that closure would have on solving crime across the north of Scotland, but the passion, commitment and ability of the staff in Aberdeen. Along with their trade union, Unison, they have made a compelling case against closure in the context of a totally inadequate consultation process. I point to the excellent vision for the future for the service in the north that the staff produced in the excellent document called "Building on Success"—it is a successful laboratory, as members have said—and the excellent documents produced by the fingerprint unit and the forensic laboratory staff that provide a real map for improving the service in Aberdeen that will benefit the service throughout Scotland. The contrast between those excellent documents and the one from the SPSA is that the latter is not a consultation document at all and it does not add much to the debate apart from a sense that we will not be able to change the SPSA's mind. On that basis, it is regrettable that the cabinet secretary has not done more to ensure that the consultation process is adequate and working. What has taken place as a consultation has been totally inadequate. Of course, it has taken place against a backdrop of organisational turmoil in the SPSA, which gives me no more confidence in the proposed plans. I believe that the Northern Constabulary was not even consulted. Although I hope that the cabinet secretary and the minister will ensure that the lab does not close, if it is closed on the basis of a totally flawed consultation  process, that would be even more detrimental, destructive and wrong. As Lewis Macdonald said, Tom Nelson of the SPSA said: "I want every pound spent to have a significant return for the communities of Scotland". I argue—I think that we are all arguing—that if that is to be true for the north of Scotland, the Aberdeen lab must be kept open because it is delivering an excellent service now and helping to tackle and solve crime now. Mike Rumbles is right: this comes across as a cost-cutting exercise. I believe that the cabinet secretary has said that there is no budgetary pressure to close the Aberdeen lab, so surely there is no argument for its closure at all, because its closure would diminish the ability of our local police to solve crime—and I cannot believe that services throughout Scotland would benefit from its closure. I hope that the minister and the cabinet secretary will recognise that, will ensure that an excellent facility remains open and, in doing so, will ensure that a decision that would hamper the tackling of crime in our community does not go ahead. I hope that the lab in Aberdeen can build on its success and on the passion, commitment and abilities of its staff.

Will the minister give way?

If the minister is not seeking to remove judicial discretion on this matter, why is the measure being introduced at all?

Stuart McMillan should really have considered rewriting his speech after he heard what I said earlier. I made it quite clear that we view the proposals as very good ways of developing community sentences, but we oppose both the way in which they have been driven by the abolition of six-month sentences and the total lack of resourcing to achieve them.

The core purpose of our justice system must be to protect Scottish communities. Any changes to the way in which we deal with offenders must be driven by that goal and no other. Despite the motion's title, we do not believe that the plans will better protect Scotland's communities. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice is failing to act on overcrowding in prisons. There were reports last night that the replacement for Low Moss prison will be further delayed, and that is because the cabinet secretary alone decided to change the funding mechanism.

I am pretty certain that the cabinet secretary is misquoting Mr Whitton. Also, we would certainly not put political dogma ahead of public safety. The cabinet secretary has his answer. The cabinet secretary plans, in effect, to abolish six-month sentences at a time when there are cuts throughout the country to the budgets that support the current number of community sentences,  never mind budgets to expand them. I entirely agree with Cathy Jamieson's words, which he quoted. I do not resile from one word of that quotation. What he suggests is something very different. He proposes a totally unresourced step change, and that is why it is dangerous. The motion calls the Scottish Government's plan a "coherent ... strategy". The reality is that it is anything but coherent.

I object in principle to the removal from sheriffs of all discretion on the matter. We all favour the encouragement of more community sentences, but we cannot do that by the proposed mechanism alone, and we certainly cannot do it if the reform is not properly resourced.

I will take one more intervention and then I must make some progress.

I do not agree with that. It is clear that the Government plans to remove that discretion. The Sheriffs Association has also raised fears about that. Of course, the fact that we have a comparatively high prison population is not something of which we should be proud. We should always seek to drive down reoffending and explore new sentencing options to help achieve that. The report of the Scottish Prisons Commission, which was chaired by Henry McLeish, had those clear goals in mind and there is much in that report that we can welcome. The Labour Party does not support the proposal that will effectively lead to the abolition of six-month sentences. It is not only that we oppose the measure in itself, which will lead to thousands of offenders—many of whom are responsible for serious offences, including assault and knife crime—no longer going into custody. It is also that a lack of investment in the services that are needed to back up community sentences means that the existing level of demand for those services is not being met, let alone the demand that will be created by some 4,000 additional offenders—£1 million will not meet that demand.  The Scottish Prisons Commission's report states: "the Government and the people of Scotland should be left in no doubt that we first need up-front investment in better services in and for Scotland's communities." That is not happening; specifically, it is not happening in services that support community sentences. Changes to sentencing policy must be driven by what will best protect the public. The previous Labour Executive introduced many more community disposals because we believe that tough community sentences can be effective. However, the cabinet secretary's proposals on six-month sentences are being driven by his mismanagement of the prison estate and his fixation on having an arbitrary number of prisoners to match his budget, rather than having prison numbers that reflect the needs of justice and communities. He has claimed that he is bringing forward new prisons, but, in fact, he significantly delayed the opening of the new Low Moss, and Addiewell was commissioned by the previous Executive. He claimed today that the prison estate that he inherited was crumbling, but Her Majesty's chief inspector of prisons stated in his 2006-07 annual report that "Scottish prisons have been transformed in the last four years", and described the improvement as "remarkable." We can only hope that the further plans for development of the prison estate will be delivered on a reasonable timescale, but even with those developments in place, there are no plans for extra capacity. Although we do not want to go on building more and more new prisons, I question an approach that allows for no new capacity.

The cabinet secretary is obviously in stark disagreement with the chief inspector of prisons, given the comments in the chief inspector's report. Many of the improvements to which the cabinet secretary refers were already in the pipeline when we left office. We are not saying that we should not aspire to have more offenders carrying out community sentences that offer real and visible payback to the communities who have suffered because of  their crimes. However, Henry McLeish has said that such sentences cannot be a cheap option, and expanding their use so significantly without providing the right resources will damage public confidence in them. The real gap in the cabinet secretary's aspirations for change, and something that makes them a threat to community safety, is that, far from increasing investment or putting in record investment to enable such a massive increase in community sentences to take place, the community safety budget and the criminal justice social work budget are flatlining. At a local level matters are even worse. Sacro, an organisation that does so much to tackle reoffending, stated in its newsletter of August last year: "The current round of funding cuts shows no signs of abating and it is no consolation that Sacro is not alone in having to withdraw valuable services. We are doing all in our power to minimise the effects of these cuts ... and the resultant impact on the communities that we serve." I understand that in Fife alone Sacro lost about £1 million of services. In Aberdeen, Albyn house, which supports offenders with alcohol misuse problems, remains under threat of closure, and in Dumfries and Galloway Scottish Government funding for restorative justice programmes has been withdrawn.

I may later on, if I have time. In West Dunbartonshire, there have been huge cuts in the community safety budgets. Throughout Scotland, the number of drug treatment and testing orders issued has dropped by 14 per cent. In that context, how on earth will 4,000 more community sentences be sustained every year? The cabinet secretary has presided over a situation in which there has been sharp increase of 14 per cent in breaches of community service orders. A lack of public confidence in such orders is not surprising when we hear stories of community sentences resulting not in payback but in offenders watching videos. The McLeish report rightly says that community sentences should be served speedily after sentencing. When I asked the cabinet secretary how long offenders currently wait for placements for community sentences, he told me that he does not know. That is a far cry from instant justice. The Liberal amendment reflects our concerns about investment. However, given Robert Brown's concerns about knife crime, which we share, we are surprised that he supports moves that would in effect end custodial sentences for about 81 per cent of those involved in knife offences. The  Conservative amendment is sensible and we will support it should ours fall. On other aspects of the Scottish Government's strategy, ministers are rightly progressing other recommendations of the Prisons Commission, including that on the rolling-up of cases, but it is regrettable that other proposals will not be considered further, such as those on electronic monitoring of curfew for those on bail and the establishment of a national community justice council. We want much clearer progress to be made on ending automatic early release and we look forward to having more details on some of the wider measures that ministers have outlined. However, overall, we cannot agree that the measures represent a coherent strategy. That can be no surprise when we have a cabinet secretary who wants to release thousands from custody, whereas the Scottish National Party candidate in the recent by-election in Glenrothes, Peter Grant, boasted in a leaflet: "there are more prisoners in our jails than ever before. That's good news". Perhaps he should have spoken to Mr MacAskill first. It is irresponsible to have no fallback position on prison capacity other than the proposal to end six-month sentences, particularly given that sheriffs often apply such sentences as part of the disposal of cases in which people are accused of significant offences. We welcome real efforts to improve community sentences and we are proud of our record in government in promoting them. However, the fact is that the proposal for a massive, unfunded expansion in such measures, driven by the abolition of six-month sentences, is unwise, unrealistic and irresponsible and will not help to protect our communities. That is why we challenge the Government. We will continue to do so, because we will always put public safety first. I move amendment S3M-3174.1, to leave out from "supports" to end and insert: "expresses concern that the Scottish Government's proposals for the abolition of six-month sentences are unworkable and will not improve community safety; agrees that it is right to seek to expand the provision of tough effective community sentences and payback but that to be effective such measures must be properly resourced and that this is not the case under current national and local funding settlements, and believes that any changes to the sentencing system must put first the delivery of justice and protecting the public."

The cabinet secretary is opening prisons that we commissioned when we were in government. What is his response to reports last night that there will be a delay of some two years in the construction of the Low Moss replacement prison?

I think that the cabinet secretary is comparing apples with pears. Can the cabinet secretary tell us how the new community sentences that will be handed out will be resourced?

In a spirit of partnership, we, of course, welcome that limit. However, does the minister accept that members on the Government benches have argued not for a 50mg level alone but for three different limits? I believe that that makes the case for having a full consultation and taking the evidence-based approach that I am calling for. Surely the Department for Transport is looking for constructive engagement from the Scottish Government on this matter.

Will the member give way?

I was not dancing on the head of a pin. The consultation is clear: a change in the alcohol limit is being consulted on. Misrepresentation of that fact by SNP Government members is why there has been mischief and a failure to reach consensus. It is unfortunate that Mr Brown, too, has taken that position.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does Ross Finnie agree that we did not say that the issue should not be discussed or debated in the chamber; we said that the important point was how work should be taken forward? Why cannot it proceed in a constructive and collaborative fashion? The opportunity exists for us to do that.

Over the past year, Scotland's relationship with alcohol has been at the heart of debates here, and rightly so. Over the festive period, people across Scotland will enjoy a drink at a host of celebrations. It does not benefit our approach to come across as being solely puritanical, so we should acknowledge that social drinking is part of this time of year, as people enjoy a well-earned break. However, we must also acknowledge—not only during the festive season but throughout the year—that too often it becomes evident that in Scottish society we have not got the balance right between sociable drinking and drinking irresponsibly to excess. It is a huge challenge to change what has become a real cultural problem in Scotland. Drink driving is an area in which that problem can have its most devastating impact. Drink driving is also one of the areas in which real progress has been made, because the vast majority of people are acutely aware of the dangers of drink driving and its potential consequences. Over the years, there has been a significant change of attitude on the issue. The British Medical Association briefing for the debate tells us that in the past 10 years the estimated number of drink-driving accidents has fallen by 16 per cent and the number of casualties by 18 per cent. However, that decline is not reflected in the number of fatalities, which remains at an average of 50 deaths per year on Scotland's roads—the same number as 10 years ago. The impact of every fatality is devastating and every fatality is a needless waste of life, which makes it all the more important for us to bring about reductions in these most depressing of statistics. The Government motion is right to point out that there can be no room for complacency. The statistic that is quoted in the motion— "that one in nine road deaths in Scotland is related to drink driving"— places stark emphasis on that point. It is understandable that a significant body of opinion is pressing for a reduction in the permissible level of blood alcohol while driving and is making extremely persuasive arguments on the point. Parliament should take those arguments seriously; clearly, ministers have already been persuaded that the 80mg limit should be reduced to a 50mg limit. Parliament has a crucial role to play in our police forces having successful campaigns against drink driving—locally and across Scotland—by ensuring that they are given the right resources to enforce the limits that are in place. I know that the Scottish Government supports the Road Safety Scotland campaign and its "Don't risk it" message. We could have a whole separate debate on police  resources, but the drink-driving limit is reserved to Westminster and our party views it as sensible to have consistency across the UK on the matter. I hope that, on this most important of issues, we can get beyond stoking up constitutional debate, with ministers here seeking to set themselves in opposition to their Westminster counterparts. Surely it is more important to seek consensus.

I am coming directly to that point. Mr Adam has already made an interesting contribution on that issue in an earlier intervention. I am concerned about the Scottish Government's positioning on the constitutional issue. I am puzzled that, when the issue was raised at last week's First Minister's questions, the First Minister pointedly expressed disappointment "that the 'Road Safety Compliance Consultation' document, which was published on 20 November, did not include a direct question on lowering the drink-driving limit."— [ Official Report , 11 December 2008; c 13349.]  That is not accurate. I sincerely hope that the First Minister, while not seeking to create an unnecessary division on the issue—

I will make some progress first. I have with me the "Road Safety Compliance Consultation" document, from the Department for Transport. On the first page of the document, in the executive summary—we do not have to look too far—it invites views on five issues, the second of which is drink driving. Only a little further down that page, paragraph 12 says that "There have been calls for some years for a lower limit of 50 mg/100 ml, or less. We have said that we will keep the limit under review." That is discussed in the context of a lower limit. The consultation goes on to ask respondents for answers on the direct questions: "what priority they think should be given to a change in the prescribed alcohol limit for driving" and "what evidence they are able to offer—and what further evidence do they consider should be obtained—to support a fully-considered decision whether or not to change the limit." I do not think that it could be much clearer than that. There is no need or room to create unnecessary divisions on such important points.

The document does consider significant and speedy action on the matter in the light of evidence and consultation, which is the right way to form policy. Every Government needs to make key decisions on important issues of policy such as this on the basis of sound and clear evidence. We have heard that there is sound and clear evidence out there; the consultation provides an opportunity for that evidence to be heard and properly considered. The best approach would be for Scottish Government ministers to engage constructively in the consultation with their UK counterparts and to make the case for a reduction in the level, for which I have sympathy. It is right, before making policies in such important areas, to engage fully in consultation, so I believe that the UK Government is right to do so. Scottish ministers may seek further views as they engage in the process. All the evidence should be examined carefully. The fact that a 50mg limit exists in other parts of Europe is persuasive, but there is perhaps a case for a different limit, and even for a further reduction. Perhaps members will make different cases on this point. Brian Adam made an extremely pertinent intervention on the issue earlier, during the cabinet secretary's speech. It is a crucial point, which deserves constructive debate and consideration.

I am persuaded that a good case can be made for reducing the limit—my opinion tends in that direction. However, there is a consultation process in which all the evidence for, and implications of, setting a new limit will be considered. It would be better to have a lower  limit, but action should be taken on the basis of all the evidence and proper and constructive engagement. I hope that the Scottish Government will engage constructively in the consultation, because the issue is of the greatest importance, although I am rather more depressed that it might not do so after having heard the speech from the Government benches. Perhaps the situation will improve during the debate. The issue is crucial and deserves constructive debate and consideration. If we are to address drink driving, enforcement and education campaigns are crucial, not just at Christmas but throughout the year. In 2006, the Scottish Executive launched a Scotland-wide summer campaign to tackle drink driving. During the summer of this year, Grampian Police cracked down on drink driving in my region. It was disappointing that the police found 29 motorists who were driving under the influence of drink or drugs, although it was notable that in the second week of the crackdown the number of drink drivers halved. That demonstrates not only that drink driving is a problem all year round but that police campaigns make a difference. We expect the Scottish ministers to ensure that Scottish police forces are encouraged and resourced to engage in more targeted campaigns, which have a direct and constructive influence. The appallingly high number of road fatalities in Grampian, particularly on rural roads, means that people in the area are conscious of wider issues of road safety. Last year on Grampian's roads, 37 people died, 14 of whom were under 25, and 233 people were seriously injured. Such figures have led to concerted local campaigns, for example in The Press and Journal , and local action, for example by Aberdeenshire Council, which supported the safe drive, stay alive campaign. Earlier this month, Alison McInnes, who is a member for North East Scotland, highlighted the high number of fatalities in our area during her members' business debate on young drivers. It is right to consider wider issues of road safety, so that we can reduce the still far too high number of fatalities on Scotland's roads. I welcome the amendment in Bill Aitken's name, which acknowledges the problem of people who drive under the influence of drugs. During many recent drink-driving campaigns, the police have targeted such drivers, whose behaviour also causes horrific and fatal accidents. We will support the amendment. I hope that the Scottish Government will support the amendments. The UK Government's road safety consultation presents the Scottish ministers with an opportunity to gather opinion from throughout Scotland on drink-driving limits, and to engage constructively with its UK counterparts so  that evidence-based progress can be made. The cabinet secretary said that the debate is not about constitutional matters—as, of course, it should not be—but it strikes me that he and his colleagues are doing everything they can to make it so, which is regrettable and inappropriate. There is an opportunity for consensus on a vital challenge that faces Scottish society and there is no doubt that members of all parties want effective action on drink driving. None of us wants to be a statistic in reports of lives that have been taken or devastated because of the actions of drink drivers. I sincerely hope that all drivers will heed the messages on drink driving so that during the festive season and the year to come people will be safer on Scotland's roads. I move amendment S3M-3125.1, to leave out from "calls" to end and insert: "recognises that the UK Government is currently consulting on road safety and related issues and that this includes an invitation for views on the current drink-driving limit; believes that a UK-wide approach on this issue is sensible; believes that Scottish ministers should engage constructively in the UK Government's consultation process, and believes that drink driving must be combated at all times of the year and that Scottish police forces must be properly resourced to ensure effective enforcement."

The cabinet secretary is, of course, responsible for the SPSA. Is he aware that Northern Constabulary will be affected by the proposed closure of the Aberdeen forensic laboratory, and that it has apparently not been consulted at all on the proposal? Does he not consider it to be vital to consult properly not only Northern Constabulary but the staff, who not only oppose closure but are offering real and effective solutions?

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government will ensure that the Scottish Police Services Authority and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency are as effective as possible in fighting crime and supporting local police forces. (S3F-1291)

In light of recent speculation on the relationship between the two agencies, will the First Minister assure us that there will be clarity on that key issue? Given the wider leadership issues in the SPSA, is it right for it to continue to propose the closure of the Aberdeen forensics laboratory on the basis of a flawed consultation process and despite the opposition of Grampian Police?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has held with Scottish Enterprise Grampian on proposals for a feasibility study into the potential redevelopment of the Union Terrace gardens in Aberdeen. (S3O-4869)

Can the minister pursue the issue of the timescale for such a study with Scottish Enterprise Grampian, given the impact that significant delay could have on the Peacock visual arts centre project, which has already received support and pledges of funding? What information will the minister seek on the options in the consultations on the proposals for this vital development for Aberdeen?

Can the cabinet secretary tell us what further measures will be taken to ensure that those who are currently on the waiting list for treatment at Peterhead can participate in the sex offenders treatment programme—that was identified as a problem—and that such offenders will in future be able to receive that treatment, which benefited from so much investment by the previous Executive, wherever they are located in the prison estate?

The cost is not the point. Does the minister accept that 72 per cent of the expenditure would be required anyway for the move to biometric passports? Is he saying that the SNP does not now support the move to biometric passports?

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. If this is such an important debate for the Government, why is no minister currently in the chamber?

Another pertinent point is that the debate has already been had in this Parliament. The public would rather that far more pressing issues were debated in this chamber, such as the prisons crisis.

Will the member take an intervention?

Yes—all those things.

Why are we having a debate on identity cards and a motion that is entirely on a reserved matter? I do not dispute that ID cards are of great public interest, but their introduction throughout the UK is not a matter for Scottish ministers, and this is a debate in Scottish Government time. Why are we debating a matter that is outwith the Scottish Government's control when our prisons are bursting at the seams, the Government is cutting corners in training to try to make its police recruitment targets, and crimes of dishonesty have increased in our capital city? Having heard the speeches so far, I fear that there are further increases in such crimes in the chamber, where myths are being perpetuated about costs, police powers and supposed civil liberties infringements in relation to ID cards.

It was entirely proper for action to be taken on Malawi, for example. However, we know what the tenor of today's debate will be, because the Liberal Democrats secured a debate on ID cards only last December. I did not agree with many things that were said in that debate, but it was interesting and the issues were well aired. I may not agree with the conclusion that the Parliament reached, but it is a fact that there was a debate and nothing has changed significantly since then. Bill Aitken was right. This is a parliamentary groundhog day. It is time that we debated issues that are within the competence of Scottish ministers, such as that is.  In contrast, the Government at Westminster is proposing a series of measures to enhance national security and public safety. ID cards are part of those measures. Many members of the general public will not understand the depth of opposition to ID cards in the other parties that are represented in the chamber, as opinion polls consistently show that a majority of people are in favour of them. That is contrary to what the Liberal Democrat amendment says. The fears that have been expressed in the chamber are not shared by people throughout the continent either. Twenty-four of the 27 European Union member states already have ID cards, so there is nothing extreme or unusual about introducing ID cards or about the kind of data that will be on them here.

I am sorry, but I do not have enough time. Of course, there is also the introduction of biometric passports, which I understand the other main parties support. Biometric passports will be required in order to meet international obligations. Their introduction is relevant to what the motion says about the cost of ID cards over 10 years because, in any event, approximately 72 per cent of the costs for UK citizens will need to be spent simply on implementing secure biometric passports. As with passports, the operational costs of issuing ID cards will be recovered from fees. Therefore, the Conservative party's amendment is, frankly, redundant. On the issue of securing our nation's borders, the Conservative party would do better to return to its previous position of support for ID cards, because the scheme will not only help with an efficient immigration system but make it more difficult for terrorists to conceal their identity or create multiple identities, which will make it harder for them to operate here. The UK Government has never claimed that the national identity scheme can prevent terrorism but, in the 18 months up to June this year, 67 terrorists were convicted in the UK courts and it is almost certain that 90 per cent of them had multiple identities. ID cards will play an important role in tackling that.

Robert Brown mentioned almost all the purposes. We will get a range of benefits from ID cards. I will point out another one. As was mentioned in our previous debate on civil liberties, the Association of Chief Police Officers has stated:  "a national ID card scheme could deliver considerable benefits. Many areas of policing would benefit, not least the ability of the police to better protect and serve the public." That is one benefit of the scheme. The Government's proposals balance the objective with individual rights. It is important to acknowledge that the Identity Cards Bill would have imposed no legal obligation on individuals to carry an ID card and that it included a prohibition on the requirement to produce one. The Liberal Democrats raise the issue of storage of data, which of course has been an issue for the Scottish Government as well as for the UK Government. The minister did not remember the loss of students' data here. The fact is that data are stored at present not only by the Government but by a host of other organisations, including banks. Identity cards will help to address fraudulent use of personal data and the unnecessary proliferation of forms of ID. People will find that to be of great benefit. I say to Mr Brown that Jacqui Smith is right. I can assure him that Mr Martin and I look forward to applying for our ID cards next year—they cannot come quickly enough. Like it or not, ID cards are a popular proposal, because they will be of real benefit to individuals. They can help to make our society safer and will not threaten civil liberties. What threatens progress on tackling crime in our country is a failure of leadership in providing the resources and tools that we need in Scotland to build on the previous Executive's progress on making our communities safer. The Scottish ministers are stalling on tackling antisocial behaviour, failing to address the prisons crisis and creating a real-terms cut of £35 million in the budget for tackling crime—no wonder they want to debate ID cards. The fact that we are debating a motion on ID cards and not matters on which the ministers have authority smacks of them smarting from an election defeat in Glenrothes and failing to provide the leadership that we need on tackling crime in this country. On that, whether they like it or not, we will hold them to account.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Thanks.

Over 10 years. Does the minister not accept that 72 per cent of those costs will be required to be paid anyway to implement biometric passports—which I understand that the SNP supports?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to reform the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board. (S3O-4770)

Will the minister acknowledge that the wages board has ensured that strides have been made in addressing the issue of low pay among many agricultural workers? How does he respond to trade unions' fears, including those of my union, Unite, that abolition of the board threatens progress?

There is consensus on the issue of the reform of summary justice, and debate has taken place over how the new system is being deployed. Has the cabinet secretary received any preliminary results from the forthcoming review by the Inspectorate of Prosecution in Scotland of the operation of fiscal fines? When will the Government's response to that report come before Parliament?

Thank you, Presiding Officer—I will try to be as elastic as I can. The Parliament has a proud record of standing up for people in Scotland whose lives have been affected by exposure to asbestos at their workplace. On a number of occasions, we have heard about the devastating impact that that can have on individuals and families. During consideration of the bill, we have heard about the stress and anxiety that inevitably follows a diagnosis of pleural plaques. I welcome the fact that ministers have introduced the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill; it will come as no surprise that today the bill will receive Labour members' support. In the previous session, my colleague Des McNulty led a debate on the impact of asbestos-related diseases. He proposed a member's bill on compensation for the relatives of sufferers of mesothelioma, which prompted the Scottish Executive at that time to introduce the Rights of Relatives to Damages (Mesothelioma) (Scotland) Bill and to ensure its rapid passage through Parliament, steered by Cathy Jamieson and Hugh Henry. The Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill continues that important work and is a hugely important step forward. As members have indicated, the bill arises from cross-party concern about the impact of the House of Lords ruling of 17 October last year. In a debate led by Stuart McMillan, members from all parties expressed concern about the impact of the Lords' decision, which overturned the established position of 20 years that, where there has been wrongful exposure, individuals diagnosed with pleural plaques can pursue an  action. I am pleased that that cross-party approach has continued in the Justice Committee. The committee is to be congratulated on its careful scrutiny of the bill, which involved looking at a range of aspects of the bill's impact and informed its recommendation to Parliament that the bill is a proportionate response to the House of Lords judgment. The committee received compelling evidence on the impact of pleural plaques from Clydeside Action on Asbestos and from my trade union, Unite, which has campaigned long and hard on the issue. In its submission, Unite referred to the experience of one of its members in Stonehaven, in my region of the North East, who said: "Pleural Plaques is a time-bomb. The Doctors could call me tomorrow to tell me I have mesothelioma and sufferers have to live with that prospect every minute of every day. It's undoubtedly deteriorated my quality of life ... I'm more worried, anxious, lethargic .... my health is poorer." With such a toll on individuals, it seems incredible that it should be suggested that those with responsibility should walk away. Although there has been cross-party support for the bill, there was not unanimous support in the evidence that was submitted to the committee. In particular, the Association of British Insurers has opposed the bill; it has made the case that pleural plaques do not lead directly to mesothelioma—the same case that was made in the House of Lords. Even if that is accepted, there is still the fact of the scarring that results from exposure to asbestos; in those cases, it must be proven that there was wrongful exposure. I welcome the minister's comments on education about the impact of pleural plaques, but the argument that education, not compensation, is the answer does not wash. It is not enough to say to someone who suffers the kind of mental anguish that is described by the member of Unite whom I cited that their pleural plaques will probably not lead to mesothelioma, when so many sufferers have seen many former colleagues suffer the terrible fate of developing that dreadful and deadly disease. The minister referred to the evidence of Dr Rudd, who said that the risk of developing mesothelioma by those who have pleural plaques because of exposure to asbestos is 1,000 times greater than it would otherwise be. I am surprised that insurers have challenged the bill's legal competence, particularly given the Law Society of Scotland's submission in support of it, in which it stated that it was competent for the Scottish Parliament to amend the law in such a way and that there are examples of precedent. The main area of contention, to which the convener of the Justice Committee has just referred, is cost. That is why we have a reasoned amendment to the financial memorandum; it  reflects the committee's concerns about the greatly differing cost estimates that the Scottish Government and the insurers provided. To be frank, some of the insurers' more spectacular estimates seem wild in light of the evidence from Thompsons Solicitors, which has long experience of bringing such cases. The amendment reflects the fact that ministers can provide only such further financial information as it is possible for them to obtain. That point is particularly pertinent when it comes to evidence to support the higher cost estimates. In any event, I do not believe that those estimates will bear much further scrutiny and I am confident that, when we debate the bill at stage 3, we will have enough information to make the right decision and that the bill will be passed. I note that although it is still necessary to resolve whether the UK Government will make payments or whether UK ministers will invoke the statement of funding policy, the UK Government has in no way closed the door to discussion. I hope that further constructive dialogue on the issue is possible between the Scottish Government and the UK Government. The latter has been consulting to find its own way forward but the Scottish Parliament needs clarity because we in Scotland have agreed that the bill provides the best way for us to ensure that, despite the House of Lords judgment, sufferers of pleural plaques can bring cases. Whatever debates we have had and whatever further information we receive on the financial memorandum, I am hopeful and confident that parliamentary consensus will continue throughout the bill's progress through Parliament, to its conclusion at stage 3. If victims of pleural plaques have been wrongfully exposed to asbestos, it is important that they are recompensed by the people who are responsible. It is fair and reasonable that they should be, particularly given the emotional trauma that a diagnosis of pleural plaques brings with it—I am sure that many people who are in the public gallery would be able to give us personal evidence of that. That is why the Parliament should once more act to support those who are affected by exposure to asbestos, why it should build on what it has already achieved on that important matter of justice and why the Labour Party will support the bill today.

Does the minister accept that the UK Government has not ruled out a discussion, at the very least, on the issue with the Scottish Government, and that constructive dialogue between the Scottish Government and Westminster in the next few weeks should be a priority?

What reassurances can the minister give me on future teacher numbers in Aberdeen? With more than 60 posts lost already this year and more redundancies looming, the local branch of the Educational Institute of Scotland has suggested that teaching posts can be saved only at the expense of closing schools. With other local authorities also cutting teaching posts, what has happened to the Scottish National Party's pledge to maintain teacher numbers? Teacher employment was not a matter for local authorities before the election, so why is it now?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. We agree that it is vital that the secure accommodation estate is fit for purpose and that the right lessons are learned from the events of March this year at St Mary's Kenmure. There are lessons for communities, for staff—some of whom, unfortunately, were the victims of assault—and for young people who are in secure accommodation either because they are vulnerable or because their behaviour needs to be addressed effectively. Can the minister assure us that Parliament will be able to debate fully the recommendations of the  working group on secure accommodation that he has asked to report by spring? Given that the report on St Mary's highlights capacity issues and the relationship between staff and local police, will the working group focus on how effective joint working might be achieved to ensure the smooth running of the estate? Will ministers continue to be involved in securing that? If unruly certificates are abolished, might that not be expected to lead to greater demand for places in secure accommodation? In that context, does the minister agree that it would be short-sighted to reduce capacity in the estate? If the proposal goes ahead, what contingencies will be put in place for the few young people who are dealt with in that part of the system because their behaviour is simply too challenging or poses too serious a risk to themselves or others for them to be handled within the community or within secure accommodation? Finally, although the report focuses on what was a troubling and disturbing incident, the minister also mentioned the need to celebrate good work. How will the Scottish Government ensure that the excellent practice that takes place in secure accommodation is shared across the estate, particularly through staff training?

Does the First Minister not realise that the most effective way of tackling alcohol misuse by young people is strong local policing and proper implementation of existing laws—passed during the previous session—rather than the gimmick of banning off-sales to under-21s? Will he look at the impact of high caffeine content in some alcoholic drinks?

Although I welcome the focus on tackling such offences, how effective can that approach be when the community safety budget is being cut in real terms?

Police officers in Stenhousemuir and Armadale have said that it was not possible to distinguish whether it was the increased resources or the under-21 ban that made the impact. There is still no evidence to support the point that the minister is arguing.

We need a serious debate on the issue, but the cabinet secretary frustrates that ambition. It is accepted that underage drinking is a problem in communities throughout Scotland. To address that, we need policies that will make a difference. Instead, the cabinet secretary has again placed a political gimmick before real solutions.

We are a Parliament. We are giving our view now. This is a debate, in which we  are clearly presenting our views. If the SNP is serious about listening to other views, I hope that it will listen to what the Parliament says tonight and ditch the policy. We all accept that Scotland has a cultural problem with alcohol consumption. We know the toll that that takes on our health, through crime and on our communities. That is why the Scottish Government is culpable for placing a flawed policy at the heart of the debate. Our approach needs to be consistent, but the Government is not. The Government does not dispute that 18-year-olds can join the police, buy alcohol in a pub and run a pub, but it says that they should not purchase alcohol in an off-licence until they are 21, although the SNP wants to lower the voting age to 16. That simply does not make sense. The proposal is not just deeply flawed in itself. It is part of an artifice to allow political posturing from the Government on tackling underage drinking to hide the Government's failure to invest in measures that would make a difference to the problem. The cabinet secretary has also failed to win broad support for his proposal. Some members might know that, over the years, the Federation of Student Nationalists and I have not seen eye to eye. However, I am today pleased and proud to stand four-square with my friends in the FSN in opposition to the Scottish Government, so that we can debate the issues properly. The cabinet secretary mentioned the pilot in Armadale. The pilot's success is disputed. Although Chief Inspector Jim Baird welcomed it, he said that because initiatives "all ran in parallel it is not practicable, particularly with the low numbers of calls and reported crimes, to identify what operation had what effect." I do not doubt that the increased police presence and resources made a difference in tackling underage drinking. The increased police presence and not the ban on purchases in off-licences resulted in progress. There are much more practical alternatives to the proposal. Consideration could be given to challenge 21 schemes, which do not require unfair and discriminatory legislation, and to proof-of-age cards. Most of all, we must ensure that the existing licensing legislation is rigorously applied. As members said, that is not happening. We should expand the use of test purchasing, which has been successful, and we should ensure that premises that have been found to be selling alcohol to underage purchasers face immediate suspension of their licences—

There is barracking from the SNP benches, but the evidence does not back up what members are saying. During the previous  session of the Parliament, we established strong licensing laws. Proper enforcement of those laws will have the most impact, particularly on underage drinking. The purchase of alcohol from off-licences is only part of the problem. Too many young people have access to alcohol in other places, including the family home. That is why local policing and resources offer the best way of dealing with underage drinking. Instead of the 1,000 more police officers that were promised, only 74 have been provided. Instead of more investment in community wardens, in Aberdeen, in my area, we have witnessed wardens being removed from communities in which underage drinking is a particular problem and their duties being combined with those of traffic wardens. Instead of investing properly in community safety, the Government is cutting the budget in real terms. Instead of bringing incoherent and inconsistent policies to the Parliament, the Government should put its money where its mouth is on underage drinking. I welcome the debate that the Conservatives have brought, which has given all parties the chance to put the proposal in the bin, where it should be. The Parliament will do the debate a service at decision time when it ditches the proposal, so that we can consider the alternative measures that I described, which will make a real difference in tackling alcohol misuse in Scotland.

I welcome the fact that today's debate has been consensual, and I acknowledge the Cabinet Secretary for Justice's constructive approach to the legislation—although I look forward to a more robust exchange of ideas on future matters. The bill was born of a process that began under the previous Executive, which introduced the white paper in February last year. In the introduction to the white paper, Cathy Jamieson stated: "it is important that legislative provisions and other arrangements are in place for the judiciary which reflect the modern day circumstances and considerations they face." She also proposed that "a future Administration" could take forward the work on the bill. The current Administration is, of course, not the one that she had in mind, but it has nevertheless taken that work forward, and it is therefore right that we reach agreement on the legislation that is before us.  It is sensible to create a unified judiciary with the Lord President at its head, and to place in statute the independence of that judiciary, as it is a fundamental pillar of our democracy. That makes it all the more important to have the right processes in place for judicial appointments, and the Judicial Appointments Board for Scotland will put in place a clearer process. That is a move forward from the opaque nature of the previous arrangements—although Bill Aitken seemed to be rather nostalgic for those at certain points in the debate. The fact that the Judicial Appointments Board will have both lay and judicial membership reflects the will to ensure public confidence in the process. I noted with interest that the board's role of encouraging diversity in the judiciary sparked some debate at committee. Establishing a judiciary that is as representative as possible of our society cannot be achieved by the board alone. Merit must be pre-eminent in appointments, but diversity is an important issue for the board to bear in mind. Responsibility for judicial training now passes to the Lord President, and although the Justice Committee agreed that the Lord President should make arrangements for training, it also stressed that confidence in the judiciary would be enhanced if there was a mandatory element to training. I hope that the Lord President will take that forward. With the establishment of the Judicial Council and the oversight of the Lord President in matters of judicial conduct, the logic and benefit of a unified judiciary are made clear. The provisions in the bill on those matters are clearly steps forward from the current situation. The fact that the bill has provided for the incapacity of the Lord President by repealing the Senior Judiciary (Vacancies and Incapacity) (Scotland) Act 2006 and re-enacting it with minor modifications gives us and the public confidence that the right structures and systems are in place for the effective organisation of the judiciary. The previous Executive welcomed the greater involvement of the judiciary in the running of the Scottish Court Service, and the white paper put forward the proposal for a non-executive board, to be chaired by the Lord President. There was force behind that argument: if the Lord President was to have overall responsibility for the efficient disposal of business, that would need to be aligned with giving the Lord President authority over administrative support for the courts. The logic behind that is clear, but it is right and proper that it should be tested through the legislative process. My colleagues have sought to do that: testing the proposal was the motivation behind the amendments from Paul Martin and Cathie Craigie. It is important that members have stressed in the chamber today that MSPs must be  able to engage in legitimate scrutiny of the operation of court processes, which can be so important to wider approaches to court reforms. Although Paul Martin did not press amendment 18, it was important that we placed on record the importance of the Lord President being able to give evidence on the operation of the Scottish Court Service to a committee. We hope that not only the current Lord President, but his successors will be prepared to engage with committees in that area. Cathie Craigie mentioned the importance of ministers being able to effect legitimate policy aspirations for developments in court services after the changes come in. The cabinet secretary has referred constructively to the framework, which we expect to ensure effective joint working between the board and ministers on policy goals, as Parliament would wish. The changes will, of course, take time to come into effect. A future committee might wish to engage in post-legislative scrutiny of the area, so that once the transfer of responsibilities has taken place and has had time to bed in, we can be satisfied that the questions that members have raised today have been addressed. There has been debate over the membership of the SCS board. Pauline McNeill raised the concerns of part-time sheriffs. Although that did not result in a change to the board's membership, it is important that members of the board, and the service as a whole, take those views into consideration in future. A broad consensus has developed on the bill. The developments in the independence, appointment and organisation of the judiciary can only benefit public confidence in those matters, which are of fundamental importance to the Scottish legal system. That is why we are happy to support the bill.

Pauline McNeill has raised the distinct role and experience of part-time sheriffs, and that role and experience are driving their concern about not being represented on the board of the Scottish Court Service and not having had a dialogue with the Scottish Court Service on the matter. On the issue of consultation, I hope that the cabinet secretary will agree that if part-time  sheriffs are not to be represented on the board, there should have been dialogue with them not only about that but more widely to ensure that their views were heard on important developments in the SCS. Will the cabinet secretary assure us that they will be consulted properly on such issues in future?

We are happy to support Bill Aitken's amendments 20, 21 and 22, which we regard as sensible and beneficial in making the appointments process fair to candidates. It is fair that candidates should know where they are ranked on a list of successful applicants. As Bill Aitken says, that could make a material difference to whether successful applicants who are waiting to take up a position take on other commitments in the meantime. The amendments seem to me to aid transparency and accountability in the process, which is the drive behind the proposed changes. We therefore support amendments 20, 21 and 22.

The amendments go to the heart of what has been a largely consensual debate on the bill. The legislation that we are discussing has its origins in the previous session; the draft judiciary (Scotland) bill that was published in February last year proposed that the Lord President become more actively involved in the management of the Scottish Court Service. Nevertheless, it is important at this final juncture of the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill's progress to seek assurances from the cabinet secretary on how the  Parliament will be able to continue to scrutinise to its satisfaction operational matters in the courts. The Lord President said that he is willing to appear before the Justice Committee if he is requested to give evidence specifically on the management of the Scottish Court Service. That is welcome and, indeed, necessary to enable members to engage in proper scrutiny of the service's operation, which is their role. The bill places judicial independence in statute, so it would not be right for the Lord President to be compelled to appear before the committee. Amendment 18, in the name of Paul Martin, which would give the Parliament the power to request the Lord President's attendance, states clearly the hope and expectation of the Parliament that not only the current Lord President but his successors will be willing to accept invitations from the Justice Committee for that purpose. At the very least, it is important that we stress the significance of the issue in the chamber today. Although the bill may promote efficient management of the courts, we seek reassurance that that will not come at the expense of ministers' ability to seek specific developments in the Scottish Court Service—for example, drugs courts or domestic abuse courts. Such concerns drive amendment 19, in the name of Cathie Craigie. We must be reassured that ministers' legitimate policy intentions will not be frustrated by the change for which the bill provides, however desirable it may otherwise be. In his letter to the convener of the Justice Committee, the cabinet secretary emphasised the importance of the framework document, which will define the relationships between the SCS, ministers and Parliament. I understand that he intends to consult the Justice Committee before finalising the document's terms, so he may be able to offer us some comfort in that context. The consultation on the framework document may allow the committee to discuss the issues further. I hope that the cabinet secretary can reassure us on the issues that have been pursued by Cathie Craigie and Paul Martin through their amendments and that, as a result, it will be possible for us to develop a consensus.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure the highest standards of cleanliness in NHS Grampian hospitals. (S3O-4290)

Is the minister aware that there has been a marked increase in cases of Clostridium difficile at Aberdeen royal infirmary and that it has been identified as a factor in 34 deaths? What action is she taking to drive down those figures and improve hospital cleanliness, and how will she monitor progress by NHS Grampian?

An important new weapon in tackling drugs crime will be the bringing together of the key drug enforcement agencies at a new crime campus at Gartcosh. When will that campus open? Will the First Minister reassure me that it is not being delayed for two years?

To ask the Scottish Executive what  discussions it has had with Aberdeen City Council about the council's current budget plans. (S3O-4079)

Does the cabinet secretary recognise the concern in Aberdeen about the lack of transparency in the council's budget process? The administration maintains that £50 million of cuts were agreed under the most recent budget, whereas everyone else—including the cabinet secretary, according to his written answer to me in July—understood that the amount was £27 million. Does he agree that there must be full transparency on Aberdeen City Council's budget if the council is to be helped by other relevant parties to address its serious financial problems?

I congratulate Brian Adam on securing the debate. There will be unanimity in the Parliament on the need to secure a successful future for the Indian restaurant industry in Scotland, particularly in Aberdeen, by ensuring that there is the right number of skilled people to sustain the industry. There can be no doubt that the representatives of the industry who are involved in the campaign on the matter and who came to the Scottish Parliament to highlight the issues have succeeded in getting their message across. It will come as no surprise to members that I am a great fan of Indian cuisine, but it would be invidious of me to mention my favourite Indian restaurants in Aberdeen, because there are several of them. Aberdeen rightly enjoys an excellent reputation for its Indian restaurants, some of which have won UK-wide awards. I hope that they will continue to enjoy such success. It would be unfortunate if the lack of the right skilled workers were to put the industry at risk. A number of issues are at play. Brian Adam is right to point out in the motion the success of the fresh talent initiative in bringing skilled people to Scotland to work in areas in which there is a  specific need. I hope that the scheme's success can be built on through continued constructive discussion with the Home Office. I am sure that all members are conscious that we must balance the desirability of bringing skilled workers into Britain and Scotland with the need for an effective immigration system. Such a balance is needed whatever the constitutional settlement—and of course, I am an adherent of the current settlement. I understand that under the current system a special case can be made to the Home Office, so if shortages arise in the hospitality sector that affect restaurateurs there is scope for special arrangements to be made, on the advice of the Migration Advisory Committee. As Brian Adam said, I understand that the committee has recommended that restaurants should be allowed to recruit chefs from overseas, provided that they have more than five years' experience and are paid a minimum of £8.10 per hour. That seems to represent considerable progress for the campaign. It is important that the people who take up positions are appropriately skilled and fairly paid—that is a principle in which Labour members strongly believe. If there are further problems for Indian restaurants, I hope that consideration will be given to them. Every effort must be made to ensure that restaurant businesses are registered appropriately. I hope that greater efforts will be made to train people locally in the skills that are needed. If there is a need to assist the Indian restaurant industry in skills development for people locally, I hope that the Scottish Government will meet representatives of the industry to discuss the issue and that that it will take a positive view on support for the industry in that regard. It is important that the industry in Scotland should train people locally and not be dependent on bringing people from abroad to maintain crucial skills. I am sure that people from different backgrounds can enter the industry and develop their careers and skills. I hope that the issues are addressed effectively and I am sure that all members look forward to continued success for Indian restaurants in Scotland—particularly in Aberdeen, of course.

Given that Aberdeen City Council is making £50 million in cuts to key services, does Mr Adam really believe that the settlement for local government has been constructive? In that context, does he believe that the council tax freeze can be justified?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking with local health officials to ensure that the correct measures are taken in response to the findings of the Social Work Inspection Agency report on Aberdeen City Council, with particular reference to the provision of substance misuse services. (S3O-3907)

New figures highlighted in the Evening Express this week show that Grampian still has the longest waits for access to drug misuse treatment. What future role will the Scottish Government have in ensuring that the service failures in Aberdeen, which the SWIA report identified, will be addressed? What extra resources will be available to Grampian to help drive down waiting times? In what timescale does the minister hope to see progress?

In light of the minister's reaffirming of the 2012 homelessness target, what dialogue has she had with Aberdeen City Council? She has assured us that the situation is being  monitored but, with added pressure on council services following cuts to homelessness charities, and with that 2012 goal in mind, can she assure me that there will not be a diminution of services in Aberdeen?

The key question is whether it should simply be the First Minister who makes that judgment. Does the First Minister accept that, under the previous Administration, complaints against ministers were taken very seriously and that the incident to which he has just referred is not the routine experience in the Parliament? Will he clarify what he deems to be the appropriate criteria according to which he would refer complaints to the proposed new panel?

I congratulate Lewis Macdonald on securing the debate and thank him for his tireless work on these vital issues for Aberdeen. For me, one of the few positive aspects of this difficult time has been the opportunity to work alongside Lewis Macdonald and our MPs, Frank Doran and Anne Begg, in the campaigns against cuts and closures, and to work with local people, of whatever political persuasion, who have fought so hard to save vital services and facilities. I am pleased that we have campaigners with us here in Parliament today, fighting for local schools, for Glencraft, for Choices and for all the people and organisations that are affected by the cuts. Young people, disabled people and older people's groups are all fighting to save services and facilities that are crucial in their lives, as was eloquently encapsulated in Kevin McCahery's moving evidence to the Public Petitions Committee about the human impact of the closure of the Choices day centre for people with disabilities. This has been a dispiriting time for Aberdeen. We need to go beyond the expert analysis of the situation that has been provided by the Accounts Commission and move towards solutions. I am pleased that a suggestion that was made by Labour—that external advice should be sought by the council—has been taken on board by the  Accounts Commission, as the idea was initially rejected by the council administration. There has also been an unprecedented recommendation for a leadership panel drawn from the four main parties. If that proceeds on an equitable basis, we can work constructively through the severe challenges. We must be persuaded that the city council's administration will move forward in the same spirit. For me, the most damning thing that the Accounts Commission said was that the administration did not fully appreciate the seriousness of the situation. It is not acceptable for the administration to absolve itself of fault while blaming everyone else. It will be for the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth to defend his settlement to Aberdeen City Council, but how can we genuinely move forward when the administration—indeed, the First Minister, whom Nanette Milne quoted as calling for us to work together, sought to do this at the weekend—seek to implicate the Labour administration of five years ago, when the cuts and deficits were simply not happening. That makes collaboration difficult. I worry that the administration has still not acknowledged the seriousness of the situation. It is welcome that the cabinet secretary has sought a speedy response from the council and that ministers have sought further responses to the Social Work Inspection Agency report on the council, which was damning and which praised the Choices centre, which has been closed. Ministers must also consider the fact that, in closing services for the disabled, the council has been in breach of statutory duties, leaving service users no choice but to take legal action. I regret that other parties in the Parliament supported an amendment to the motion that sought to remove the lines about stopping cuts and closures. If we are not going to work together to stop cuts to education budgets, to stop the closure of successful and valued schools that serve some of the most deprived communities in Aberdeen, to stop the closure of facilities for our young people and to protect services for the most vulnerable people in the city, for the elderly, for the disabled and for the homeless—if we are not working towards the joint goals of saving those key services and, in doing so, restoring the reputation of our city, what is a new consensus for? It is very sad and shows a paucity of ambition if members of other parties feel that there are no alternatives. We believe that there are, and we have proposed them locally, nationally and in this debate. I hope that we can take action together locally and in a way that is supported by the efforts of MSPs across the chamber.  I congratulate Lewis Macdonald again on securing the debate and I congratulate the people who have travelled here to show their determination to fight for the great city of Aberdeen. They will not give up on ensuring that our council works for our citizens. We should all join them in that goal.

Is the minister concerned about the situation in Aberdeen where, because of cuts of nearly £900,000 in local authority funding for the Cyrenians, vital services that support hundreds of homeless people will be closed? What action will the minister take to ensure that the Government delivers on its pledge for action on homelessness and that the pledge is not broken in Aberdeen, so that those vulnerable people continue to receive the vital services that they need to help them turn their lives round?

No one could reasonably accuse the Parliament of not sufficiently debating rural issues—at least, not if we consider the number of debates that we have had on the subject. The minister from whom we are waiting to hear has been on his feet in the chamber so often that the Minister for Schools and Skills will soon deem that he has had two hours of physical education a week. I welcome this debate on the common agricultural policy health check, as the common agricultural policy is an issue of crucial importance to Scotland's farming industry and our environmental sustainability.

I certainly agree that there needs to be a rebalancing of the debate in that context. I am aware that the CAP health check is crucial to our environmental sustainability and, as a member for North East Scotland, I am keenly aware of how important farming is to our local economy and the many communities and rural businesses that rely on our having a successful farming sector. No one would argue that the CAP has been a perfect instrument to support the sector or that reform is not necessary. We will, of course, debate the pace and detail of the reforms—the consultation process will be vital in that regard—and I look forward to the minister's reporting back to Parliament at the conclusion of that process. Useful and informative views have already been expressed on the direction of the CAP health check, with particular debate about changes in EU-wide modulation, what the level of modulation in Scotland should be and how it should be achieved. Labour has argued for moving to greater modulation and I hope that the debate about future levels will take place in the context of farmers and rural businesses being incentivised to benefit from taking part in rural development and in projects to encourage environmental sustainability, because modulation can be an agenda for diversification as  well as for encouraging environmentally sustainable farming. It is important to have a system that can respond to changing circumstances, which we in Scotland know about only too well. There is certainly merit in the proposals for flexibility around article 68, so that there is the potential, for example, to focus on particular areas or to assist in risk management. There will be at least some consensus on several of those issues. The general theme of the health check in developing the CAP in a way that takes into account public confidence is sensible. It is important that the EU, the UK and the Scottish Government look beyond simply changes to the CAP and take wider and longer-term approaches to the future of the farming industry. I have spoken to farmers who wish that the sector was not so dependent on subsidy while acknowledging that that subsidy has been crucial in the past few years. However, we should be more ambitious in seeking to create a sustainable and profitable farming industry in Scotland. That means securing more business for local farmers through public procurement from the Scottish Government, local authorities and public sector agencies. It would be interesting to hear from ministers an update on their efforts in those areas. There is the wider issue of food prices. Although there is understandable concern about rising food prices, there can be no doubt that, for too long, farmers in particular have not received fair prices for their produce—farmers have certainly not been getting a fair price from retailers. Whatever debate we have about reform of the CAP, it will not make a difference to sectors such as the Scottish pig industry, which is going through severe difficulties at the moment. I am aware from my visit to Grampian Country Pork in my region not only of how deep that problem is, but of the devastating effect a failing Scottish pig industry would have on rural communities and on animal welfare standards that far outstrip those in other parts of the world. I hope that the Scottish Government will do what it can to assist that key industry. A number of us pressed in this chamber for the Competition Commission to take further steps to investigate the relationship between producers and supermarkets. It is significant that the commission proposed an ombudsman to settle disputes between retailers and producers. I am pleased that evidence will be taken in confidence, which is crucial. The new arrangements were long fought for and hard won. I imagine that they will take time to bed down, but I hope that the measures will create a more level playing field and that the key relationship between producers and supermarkets will benefit the sector. Along with other issues that I and others have mentioned, those arrangements will be important  in securing a long-term, sustainable and profitable future for Scottish farming. Our discussion about the CAP health check cannot take place in isolation from those issues, but it is in itself of crucial importance. It is right that the Scottish Government and this Parliament work with all those who have a keen interest in such changes to ensure that they work for Scotland, Scottish farming and for successful, sustainable rural communities.

On the review of the fishing quota, which was not announced in the Parliament yesterday, will the First Minister publish the legal advice that the Scottish Government received on whether it was competent for it to impose a ban on the permanent transfer of quota? How does he respond to Mike Park of the Scottish White Fish Producers Association, who has criticised the move in The Press and Journal , and Barrie Deas of the National Federation of Fishermen's Organisations, who said that the ban had cut the value of the Scottish quota?

We have heard warm words on skills from the Scottish Government, but we need the right initiatives for a successful skills strategy. The strategy that the Government produced, which it still defends today, created a new agency and precious little else. That is why Parliament deemed it insufficient, and I cannot believe that events since then could have led members to revise their opinion. However, clearly, that is what some members have done. Being a member for North East Scotland, I am well aware of the demand for more skilled workers. Not having the right skills programme means an opportunity cost for local businesses that cannot expand as they might hope to and a cost to those people who otherwise could have taken advantage of new skills in a strong jobs market. The oil and gas industry is not waiting for the Scottish Government on the skills issue—it is setting up its own oil and gas skills academy. The Scottish Government should at least be providing additional opportunities for such training. Training for work and training in life skills as provided by organisations such as the Aberlour Child Care Trust are among the life-changing opportunities that are available. It is a core part of Labour's political philosophy that everybody should have the opportunity to receive the education and training that they need to fulfil their potential. We are proud of the record of the coalition Executive, which increased the number of modern apprenticeships to 34,000 in the previous session. We are not resting on our laurels: John Park's proposed bill seeks to create  an entitlement to modern apprenticeships for 16 to 18-year-olds.

Members will find that our track record on skills was impeccable. We increased opportunity and success. Mr Neil would have been the first to shout his outrage at the withdrawal of adult apprenticeships, which is an opportunity cost for the people involved. His sudden reversal and his discretion on such issues is puzzling. However, I wish him well in the reshuffle for which he earnestly hopes. The impact of the withdrawal of many adult modern apprenticeships has been made clear to me by a constituent in Dundee. Steve Moyes is a director of Coralshore, which provides training in child care. Eight young women who started their course will not now be able to complete it. Months of effort by those women have been wasted, and they are now faced with the choice of funding their own training or losing their jobs. One 20-year-old woman, who had been on the point of completing her level 2 Scottish vocational qualification, will now not be able to obtain the necessary funding to move on to level 3. She has worked in a nursery for about two years, but she will now lose her job unless she can afford to pay for her own training. For that woman and many others in her situation, that is an unrealistic option. The fact that the move on apprenticeships happened with immediate effect means that the Scottish Government has left people such as her in the lurch. It is those very people, particularly young women, for whom we worked so hard to offer more employment opportunities who are being especially penalised by the Government's move. The priorities are perverse. Mr Moyes has asked whether withdrawing the apprenticeships on the basis of age is in line with UK law on age discrimination. I would be interested to know whether the minister can confirm that. We should be talking about more training opportunities for all. That we are not doing so shows that the already feeble skills strategy that the Government has set out is failing. The Government is short on detail on the kind of training provision that it will seek to provide, and its proposals certainly do not match the ambition that was outlined at Westminster earlier this month, or indeed the ambition of my party and others that are represented in the chamber. That is why the Government should finally acknowledge the will of the Parliament and return to the chamber with a strategy that takes the kind of  initiatives that we and others have suggested to ensure that we have the highly skilled, successful Scotland that we all want.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will support drug and alcohol misuse services in the north-east. (S3O-3115)

I am sure that the minister will be aware of the excellent services that are provided for people with alcohol misuse problems at Albyn house in Aberdeen. Due to the withdrawal of funding by Aberdeen City Council, those services remain under threat. Will she confirm that, although the intervention of NHS Grampian is welcome in ensuring that the unit remains open in the short term, it is essential that a long-term solution is found as soon as possible, to ensure that Albyn house can continue to provide its excellent and invaluable services in the future?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether every local authority, including Aberdeen City Council, is meeting the terms of the Scottish Government's concordat with local government with regard to educational provision. (S3O-2974)

How can the commitment to smaller class sizes be fulfilled in Aberdeen when, as other members have pointed out, schools are being closed and teaching posts are being cut? If that is in line with the Scottish Government's concordat with local government, how on earth can the concordat be used as a vehicle to fulfil Government pledges on education? Will the cabinet secretary report back to Parliament following her meeting with directors of education to tell us if impressing on them the importance of those issues will result in those pledges being fulfilled?

We have heard many criticisms of the Scottish Government's proposed local income tax, not least because, as Mr McLetchie said, it is not a local income tax at all. There is wide agreement that the term is a misnomer. The tax is indeed a nat tax—a national income tax. I will focus on two key areas of the debate: first, the impact of the tax on families, with particular reference to younger people; and, secondly, its impact on the provision of key local services, particularly those for the vulnerable. Labour has pointed out repeatedly that the proposal will hit families with two or more incomes. That relates to the question that Margo MacDonald posed earlier. I am talking not about families where those in employment are on extravagant incomes but about people who have jobs with average salaries. Both we and the Scottish Conservatives have released estimates of how much extra such families would have to pay. In many cases, it is hundreds of pounds, and I made similar findings about the impact of the Government's proposal on families in the north-east. It is as much of a fantasy to say that four out of five families will be better or no worse off as it is to say that the proposal will be popular throughout Scotland. A great many families in today's Scotland have two or more incomes coming in, not because they are wealthy but because many young people are staying in, or moving back to, the parental home. The Scottish household survey figures for 2006 show that almost half of 20 to 24-year-olds were living at home. A huge number of people are affected. Many such households will pay more because the young people are working. At present, students are exempt from the council tax, but they will be subject to local income tax if they are in employment while studying. I am afraid that young people are staying on in their parental home not purely because of their affection for their parents but because of an issue about which every party in the Parliament has expressed concern: the affordability of housing.

I give way to Margo MacDonald.

The position of those young people is crucial. I take that point entirely.

I am sorry. I must make progress. Many young people are staying with their parents to save money so that they can get on to the housing ladder. They will find it more difficult to save under a local income tax because, although they are not required to pay council tax, they will be required to pay local income tax. The second issue on which I want to focus is the huge, £800 million funding hole in the Scottish Government's proposals. The potential impact of that is of grave concern. Either the Scottish Government would have to admit that sufficient funds could not be raised on the basis of a 3p hike and that the rate would have to be much closer to the 5p that the Burt commission said would be necessary, or there would be even more swingeing cuts to local services of the kind that we have seen in Aberdeen, where the administration, which includes party colleagues of the cabinet secretary, has instigated £27 million of cuts that most affect people with disabilities and older people, as well as young people who have had their access to sporting facilities restricted. It has been suggested that the First Minister will intervene personally in the situation. I would be interested to hear the cabinet secretary enlighten us on that. The reason why I found Jamie Hepburn's speech so perplexing is that I fear that the Scottish Government will not hesitate to axe vital local public services for its own political purposes in relation to this policy. It is clear that its sums do not add up and that the most vulnerable people in Scotland are likely to pay a high price for that. The debate has shown that the nat tax proposals are neither progressive nor advantageous for hard-working Scottish families. The proposals are shambolic. On all counts, the proposals are not worthy of approval by the Parliament. That is the message that should come loud and clear from Parliament this morning.

We keep being told that the local government funding settlement is historic. It is certainly historic in Aberdeen—it has resulted in swingeing cuts to key services and facilities, the likes of which have never been seen in the city before. Mr Adam fails to recognise that when Labour left office there was a surplus of some £23 million—now we have £27 million of cuts, which will hit older and vulnerable groups in particular, as well as services for people with disabilities. At a time when we are trying to encourage people to lead healthier lives, sports centres are being closed—a move that has caused particular dismay among the city's young people.

None of those decisions was made under a Labour Administration. Indeed, several suggestions for alternative funding decisions have been put forward locally, which certainly do not include spending around £80 million on new office accommodation for the council administration. This budget is the most right wing that the Parliament has ever seen. The cuts in Aberdeen, which will affect children, young people and people with disabilities, are—I tell Mr Adam and his colleagues—no laughing matter. Those of us in the Parliament who said that the settlement would hit the vulnerable were told that we were scaremongering and asked how we dared to suggest that councillors from other parties would make budgetary decisions that would remove lifeline services for people with disabilities. Well, in Aberdeen, the SNP colleagues of ministers are, as members of the council administration, making exactly those decisions. Last Friday, my parliamentary colleagues and I, along with affected groups, held a meeting that was attended by more than 400 people to highlight the concerns about the impact of the cuts. The leaders of Aberdeen City Council were invited, but they did not attend to hear those concerns. It was heart-rending to hear the fears of some of the people at the meeting about how devastating the cuts would be for them. The sporting hopes of young swimmers and skaters who do not know where they will be able to train have been dashed and we heard about the plight of disabled people who will lose jobs at Glencraft and the facilities at the Choices centre, which has given real meaning and direction to the lives of many people with disabilities, some of whom cannot imagine life without it.

I am sorry, Mr Brown—I do not have time. I cannot believe that if the SNP councillors had been there, they would not, at the very least, have thought again about the impact of their budget. Of course, local decisions are crucial, and the cuts do follow mismanagement of council finances by those with responsibility for such matters, both in the current and the previous administration, since 2003—failings that the Accounts Commission has highlighted, as the cabinet secretary said. However, those failings have undoubtedly been compounded by the national funding settlement. Not only is Aberdeen at the bottom of the national funding table but, as Mr Brown said, we still do not know what services we can expect to be delivered locally through a single outcome agreement.

I think that the voters will judge that the settlement was poor indeed, Mr Rumbles. We need to know what kind of provision will be made under a local single outcome agreement and whether services such as those for people with disabilities will be protected in future. Before the election, the SNP promised good times for the north-east, but Aberdeenshire—not only Aberdeen—has received a poor funding settlement. Any benefit to poorer families and older people from the council tax freeze has in our part of Scotland been more than offset by increased charges. Those charges are compounding the impact of the swingeing cuts in the city of Aberdeen. Even under the Conservative Government and Michael Forsyth, Aberdeen never experienced cuts such as it is suffering now. Everything must be done to ensure that the cuts do not go ahead. I realise that opposing the order today will not change the position, but I urge ministers to do all that they can to mitigate the cuts, which are due for April 1—a poor joke on the vulnerable in our city. If the cuts proceed, there is no doubt that Aberdeen will have been shamed by its own council administration, and that the north-east will have been badly let down by the SNP.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is encouraging healthy living and participation in sports in Aberdeen. (S3O-2702)

The Scottish Government has said that it wants to increase participation in sport, but some swimming pools and sports facilities in Aberdeen are being closed, while the opening hours of others are being severely restricted. How are such decisions consistent with national policy? Has the minister had any discussions with Aberdeen City Council on that issue ahead of any single outcome agreement? What will the Scottish Government do to ensure that people in Aberdeen have more opportunities, not fewer, to take part in sport and lead healthy lives?

The member is extremely confident about her party's early years strategy, but does she not think that it is regrettable that in Edinburgh and Aberdeen nurseries are being closed by councils in which her colleagues are in power?

To ask the Scottish Executive what it is doing to support the performing arts in the regions of Scotland. (S3O-2601)

Does the minister agree that it is vital not only to provide support for regional artistic events, such as the Aberdeen international youth festival, but to ensure that the right funding is invested in the regions of Scotland to ensure that people there can have similar access to artistic and cultural events as people in central Scotland? In Aberdeen, for example, there is a desire to see not only touring companies—including, we hope, more visits from Scottish Opera—but more local professional theatre.

Will the member give way?

The debate has to be about what is best for students and our universities and colleges. The abolition of the graduate endowment may provide the SNP with a fig leaf for its failure to fulfil its manifesto promise to abolish all graduate loan debt, but it does not mean one penny more for one more student. The fact is that, under our proposals, students, particularly those from poorer backgrounds, would have seen a significant increase in their bursaries. Under the SNP, they will receive only an inflationary increase in the young students bursary. Unlike the SNP, which has simply not been honest with the student community, members on this side of the chamber have been consistent on the issue of student funding. We believe that the retention of the endowment would have secured better student support. One crucial reason for doing that is that we must tackle the problem of the drop-out rate at our universities. For students to drop out is a waste of our investment in their education and a waste of an important life chance for them. The previous Executive knew the importance of improving bursaries. It knew that they make the difference between people being able to continue their studies and dropping out.  Indeed, there has been an increase in students from poorer backgrounds dropping out of university over the period.

The moral obligation is fulfilled by the examination of that very issue in the commission that we have proposed. The issues that are involved in student support should be examined more widely, which is why we are pleased to endorse the proposal for an independent commission of inquiry into student support and funding for further and higher education. The Scottish Conservatives' amendment will ensure that the inquiry will be undertaken in a tight timescale. The proposed commission will have real teeth and will be truly independent, as the Government will need to agree the full remit and membership with the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. There is a clear need for such a commission to examine the wider issues, as well as student support. The proposal to abolish the endowment without significantly increasing bursaries is typical of the Government's chaotic and damaging approach to further and higher education funding. We are already seeing the consequences of the Scottish Government's decision to cut university funding, with the announcement of 100 job cuts at the University of Dundee. That is damaging not only for our universities but for the Scottish economy. The job cuts fly in the face of the Government's economic strategy, particularly when one considers that the University of Dundee has been at the forefront of making Scotland a world leader in biomedical research. The university has helped to attract some £50 million of private investment from Wyeth Pharmaceuticals. It is disastrous for Scottish universities that English universities will have a funding advantage of 5 per cent when, in the past, we in Scotland had the advantage.

In a moment. We face the prospect of losing vital academic expertise to south of the border, particularly given the funding gap for universities next year in meeting previously agreed pay deals. I will take one final intervention.

My erstwhile university colleagues will remember that I have been consistent on the issue. I will not preach to my successors about what they have said today. The additional £10 million from the Scottish Government meets only half the £20 million funding gap for previously agreed pay deals, which is a fundamental difficulty. That is why we are pleased that the University and College Union supports the call for an independent commission.

I am sorry; I do not have time to give way. Student presidents support the abolition of the endowment, but some believe that a review is also essential, because students want to be properly supported while they study and they want to study at institutions that receive the right funding, so that they can provide an excellent education. Universities Scotland might be bound into the future thinking task force, which we believe is totally inadequate, and some principals might be reluctant to speak out for fear that a touchy Scottish Government will jump down their throats, but the sector realises that, for the future of Scottish education, which is important to us all, an independent review is essential. That is why Andrew Cubie supports the proposed review. I understand why the SNP does not want an independent commission to scrutinise its policies on student and institutional funding.

I am sorry; I cannot. However, it is extraordinary that the Liberal Democrats, who have attacked the funding settlement week in, week out, and who have argued that there is a crisis that needs to be addressed, have, when given the opportunity today to vote for an independent review to scrutinise and provide solutions to the issues, stood by culpable and supine. Any future criticisms from them on the issues will ring hollow. They stand in the way of consensus today.

That is a ludicrous misrepresentation of our position. Like Liberal Democrats, we have campaigned for the funding settlement. However, although the Liberal Democrats say that they have campaigned for that settlement, they have not lodged amendments to that effect. In fact, they have objected to other amendments and moves to increase university funding, so I accept none of the points that Jeremy Purvis made. We must ask why the SNP is rounding up troops against an independent commission when, as David Whitton said, the SNP's 2003 manifesto said—

I will give way if I have time.

I understood that I had eight minutes, Presiding Officer.

The manifesto said: "We will reconvene the Cubie Committee ... The committee will not be restricted in its remit." What has changed between then and now to make such a review unnecessary? Then, universities had the funding edge and we had increases in bursaries, for which more students were becoming eligible. Now, universities face a funding crisis and we have barely any increase in the bursary. Students from poorer backgrounds in Scotland now have some £2,000 a year less to live on than do their English counterparts. The arguments for a review are far more compelling now than they were in 2003. Is the SNP's reluctance born of a fear that putting its plans to abolish all student loans before a commission would reveal that, despite its protestations, the SNP always knew that its sums did not add up and had no intention of proceeding with the policy? There is no doubt that debate in the chamber on the issues is heated, because they are crucial, so there is all the more reason for them to be taken into a context where they can be considered in detail by people with specific expertise—by a body that involves not just the Government and principals, but students and campus unions. That would provide a blueprint for ambition for how we fund our universities and our students. Along with the Conservatives, we have lodged a reasoned amendment that presents the  opportunity to build a consensus and move forward on these vital questions for Scotland's future. Not supporting such a review would not only deny the potential for that consensus but let down our education system, our students and our country.

rose—

Will the member give way?

I supported the establishment of the endowment as a student president, because it meant the introduction of bursaries. I was consistent on that for seven years—the SNP was not consistent for seven months on the abolition of graduate debt. If there is a more generous  bursary, surely students will get into less debt. Does Bill Wilson not accept that?

Will Keith Brown take an intervention?

Does the point that Mr Purvis makes not reinforce the fact that it is more important to provide additional funding to students while they study than to abolish the graduate endowment?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

That justifies our arguments, which will follow this afternoon. We supported Jeremy Purvis's amendments at stage 2, so we have no objection to the amendments that he seeks to make today. The matter is technical and in no way changes the effect of the bill. It certainly does not represent any kind of victory on student funding. However, it will be helpful to have the clarity that a legislative requirement on the provision of student support that might otherwise have been affected by the new act will give. Therefore, we have no objection to amendment 1.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is encouraging partnership working with the voluntary sector to deliver key services to vulnerable people. (S3O-2397)

How can effective partnership working or added value be achieved in Aberdeen when council funding for voluntary sector groups is being slashed as part of £27 million of budget cuts? What action will the Scottish Government take to alleviate the effect of Aberdeen City Council's decision—highlighted in today's Evening Express —to threaten with closure the Glencraft factory, which has for decades enabled people with disabilities to have meaningful jobs?

To ask the Scottish Executive what impact it considers that the funding settlement for local authorities will have on the delivery of key local public services. (S3O-2297)

The cabinet secretary's answer will raise eyebrows in Aberdeen. If, as he has stated, the funding settlement is good for Aberdeen City Council and will fully cover inflation, why are his colleagues in Aberdeen pushing through £27 million of budget cuts to key local facilities for young people and key services for older and vulnerable people? That is not scaremongering—people in Aberdeen face budget cuts of £27 million. What will the cabinet secretary do to ensure that they do not lose out badly because of the actions of his Government nationally and of his colleagues locally in Aberdeen?

I congratulate Marilyn Livingstone on her motion and James Kelly on presenting it so well to the chamber. In his speech, he showed that there has already been a significant return on the investment that was made by the previous Executive in Supporters Direct. I hope that the Government will take the opportunity to build on that success. My interest in the subject comes from having been the reporter on football for the Enterprise and Culture Committee in the previous session. The report on football that was agreed by that committee recommended that the support for Supporters Direct be continued, with appropriate funding to enable its work to be expanded. I hope that the cross-party support for that work continues in the current session. The work of Supporters Direct is important not simply because football is a great passion in Scotland and, for a number of us in the chamber—as George Foulkes knows—a great burden, but  because there has been, for too long, too great a gulf between the people who run football and the fans without whose support, week in, week out, the clubs would not exist. That is something that George Foulkes, in his all-too-short time as chairman of Heart of Midlothian, tried to address. We also know that football clubs are not just about the excitement of the league but can play a much wider role in their communities. Aberdeen Football Club has led the country in developing community outreach programmes, using football as an educational tool and addressing key issues such as antisocial behaviour. Some clubs, such as Ross County and Raith Rovers, which Claire Baker mentioned, are even involved in running extremely successful programmes to help people who are out of work to find employment. The benefits of what can be achieved in a community by a well-run club became clear to me when I compiled the committee report on football to which I have referred. That is why good governance of clubs and of football as a whole is so important. Involving supporters in governance is also crucial, not only because they should be involved but because they can provide an important check and balance at board level. For me, the impetus for the report on football came from the need for us to examine how our football clubs and the game as a whole are governed. Political scrutiny of such issues is not welcomed in the sport, but the fact that the way in which the game is governed has not changed materially for decades and that governance is centralised needs to be scrutinised. The Scottish Football Association is moving in the right direction. The appointment of Gordon Smith is challenging and welcome. Organisations such as Supporters Direct and the Scottish Professional Footballers Association, which have expertise and innovative ideas for developing football, have an important role to play in the future of football and our clubs. Our clubs, our national game and our society as a whole can reap the rewards of properly involving in governance people who have a passion for their clubs and for the development of football in Scotland. Many examples of that have been given tonight. Lewis Macdonald mentioned the commitment by fans of Aberdeen. Like other speakers, I hope to hear from the minister that the Scottish Government will continue to commit itself to the important goal of involving supporters in the governance of our clubs and the good governance of our game.

Even in those circumstances, the situation is still worse for the north-east. Aberdeen City Council is bottom of the funding table. Under the previous formula, Aberdeenshire Council was getting closer to the funding average, but under the current formula we are now further away from that.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

If this is a generous settlement for local authorities, why is the cabinet secretary's party colleague in Aberdeen, Councillor Kirsty West, saying that her authority is closing schools because the council has insufficient funding from the Government?

Does the cabinet secretary realise that the extra £10 million meets only half the £20 million funding gap that Universities Scotland says exists for the pay agreement? That leaves serious questions about university funding.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government's proposals to establish a concordat with universities will mean for higher education in Scotland. (S3F-480)

Will not the aspirations of the concordat require funding? The additional funding of £10 million that has been announced by the media will leave universities £10 million short in meeting pay agreements alone, which will open a gap between them and institutions south of the  border. No concordat can make up for the Scottish Government's hand-to-mouth funding for such drivers of our economy. Rather than the current task force, surely a full independent review of higher education funding must now be called.

I also congratulate Patrick Harvie on securing the debate. World-leading research on environmental policy and renewable energy technologies is going on right now in many of our campuses, not just at Aberdeen University but at Edinburgh and other institutions. It is particularly important that such crucial research takes place on campuses that are themselves environmentally sustainable. Patrick Harvie was right to highlight where Scottish institutions came in last year's environmental league table and where they could do much better. Institutions could do better in repairing and replacing ageing university infrastructure. That requires additional investment, as highlighted in a recent Audit Scotland report. Colleagues will be aware that I have taken great issue with the Scottish Government on revenue funding for our universities. Environmental sustainability on campus is likely to be affected by the funding settlement. As under the previous Executive, there is significant capital investment in tertiary education, therefore it is vital that it is invested in buildings that have environmental sustainability at their core. It is also important that the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council should have a role in ensuring that that is the case, as well as in encouraging university courts and boards of management to develop sustainability policies for their campuses.  The motion is particularly important because it acknowledges that creating greener campuses is not simply about decisions that are made at an institutional management level. There cannot simply be a top-down approach. It is important that students themselves take the initiative, through the campaigning of individual groups and through the efforts of NUS Scotland and individual students associations. Jamie Hepburn took the initiative with Glasgow University students representative council—when he was not calling on me to resign. It is important that political societies also take the issue seriously. I know that Labour students do. The work of groups such as People & Planet is vital, not only for securing the future sustainability of campuses but for our society as a whole. While the activities of those students benefit the environment, their educational campaigns have an impact on the rest of our community. Our educational institutions should be at the forefront of research into environmental sustainability, and there should be exciting capital projects on campuses. For example, the University of Aberdeen's new library must be sustainable. I am sure that our rector, Mr Harper, will do all that he can to ensure that the project is exciting and environmentally sustainable. That should be the model for campuses throughout Scotland.

The rector is of course right, and I am sure that he takes credit for that. Through such initiatives and through capital projects such as the exciting new library in Aberdeen, we should ensure that Scotland takes a world lead in securing greener campuses.

How does the cabinet secretary expect that the new agreement will affect the fish-processing sector? Does he recognise that the recent negotiations show that reform of the CFP, rather than withdrawal from it, is the way forward, particularly when his ministerial colleagues admit in written answers that membership of the CFP is a requirement of membership of the EU?

As the cabinet secretary has met representatives of Lothian and Borders Police and agreed to provide extra funding for its significant additional duties, is it not right that he should also meet representatives of Grampian Police to discuss funding for its additional duties so that we can be confident that there has been parity of treatment?

The day before the spending review was announced, the First Minister outlined the Government's strategy for economic growth and set out aspirations that attract broad support in the Parliament. However, as happened in other areas, the Government's words on economic growth were not matched with investment through the spending review. Far from being the vehicle for the delivery of a more prosperous Scotland based on a knowledge economy, the spending review announcements ran counter to that aim. Instead of driving Mr Mather's overarching purpose, the spending review ran it over. The contradiction was pointed out at the time by university principals, who made clear their astonishment at the funding settlement for their institutions. The student community's fury at the announcement that the promise on graduate debt, which had played a central role in the election campaign, was being unceremoniously dumped, was matched by principals' dismay at the opportunity cost to Scotland of their being awarded only £30 million of the £168 million that they had requested, and a budget share that is at best flatlining. Alex Neil should know that—if not, Universities Scotland will tell him. That is why we call on ministers to amend the spending review and invest in areas that will boost economic growth.

The member would not take an intervention from me, but I will give way to him.

There are certainly ways of increasing the revenue line for universities and we have made a proposal to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee in that regard, as Mr Neil well knows. There is other action that we can take to ensure that the spending review is consistent with the promotion of a strong knowledge economy. John Park talked about the Government's failure to produce a comprehensive skills strategy. The failure to invest adequately in skills will be a costly decision for our country as we seek to compete globally. Other countries are massively increasing investment in their people's skills and academic expertise.  The previous coalition Executive put its money where its mouth was on the delivery of economic growth through investment in education. Spending on universities increased by some 18 per cent and spending across tertiary education increased by some 22 per cent. We reaped the rewards of that investment. We met universities' funding requests because we knew that Scotland as a whole would benefit if we helped to develop areas such as life sciences and to bring in private investment from companies such as Wyeth Pharmaceuticals. In contrast, under the current Government the universities have received a settlement that offers only a 2.3 per cent uplift in their budget over the spending review period and a real-terms cut next year. Universities Scotland tells us that given commitments on pay there will be a £20 million funding gap for universities next year. It is an unfortunate irony that the funding settlement was announced by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, who argued in January 2004 that giving a funding advantage to universities south of the border would lead to "a draining of Scotland's academic resources" and to putting "Scotland's universities ... to the financial sword"— like Christina McKelvie, I can quote members. John Swinney's words were eloquent, but his fears were misplaced, because significant extra investment in tertiary education followed. The bitter irony is that under Mr Swinney's budget settlement a 5 per cent funding gap will emerge for the first time between our universities and English institutions, as the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee heard from Universities Scotland. It is clear that the Scottish Government's proposals in no way reflect the consensus on the issues. It is incumbent on us to make proposals for a review of the settlement, and we are doing that in the committee. It is also incumbent on the Government to listen and respond to the deeply held concerns of the people of Scotland. People are worried about decisions that have been made about an important part of public life. The vague promise of extra end-year funding for universities and the establishment of the future thinking task force, which includes neither trade unions nor student bodies, represent an inadequate response to people's serious concerns. We need short-term action to address the issue. In the medium and long term, we need an independent review of how we fund higher education, so that we can maintain and improve our current position. We have two universities in the world's top 100 universities, whereas the Scandinavian countries, to which the Government  is fond of referring, have only one university in the top 100. Not only has the Government dumped its promise on graduate debt but it has no coherent strategy on student hardship. The Government has the wrong spending priorities. It seeks to abolish the graduate endowment but offers no significant increase to the young students bursary, which provides money for students who need it most, particularly students from poor backgrounds. As other members said, the Government's approach is another example of how it has put political expedience before social justice in its budget. I say to Mr Gibson that although the SNP has portrayed itself as a socially progressive party for years, its actions in government make clear that it is nothing of the kind. It does not surprise me that in Aberdeen—where local government certainly has not been improved by PR—SNP members are seeking to invest in expensive new office provision for themselves while cutting care packages for vulnerable people in the city. It is no wonder that there is concern that the SNP nationally is abandoning national strategies that ensure that key services are provided for the most vulnerable people. The SNP is failing the people who should have been prioritised in the spending review, just as it is failing to deliver its strategy for economic growth. If those two key areas are not served by the spending review, Scotland will not be served by the spending review. That is why it must change.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order presiding officer, I ask you to clarify that the reports that are being compiled by the committees on the budget process are private documents and therefore cannot be referred to in the debate. You made that clear in your comments at the beginning of the debate.

Does the cabinet secretary agree with John Swinney's words from January 2004 that giving a "funding advantage to universities south of the border" will be followed by "a draining of Scotland's academic resources and Scotland's universities put to the financial sword"? Is it not the case that the spending review settlement opens up a funding advantage for English universities of some 5 per cent now, not in 2010? Has Mr Swinney not ignored his own dire warnings? Has the cabinet secretary been able to promise the principals any additional funding to the current poor settlement?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek guidance on the announcement that you made today in relation to the "Scottish Ministerial Code", and particularly in relation to paragraph 1.1(c), which states that ministers should correct "any inadvertent error at the earliest opportunity."  At question time today, the First Minister advised Parliament that university funding was increasing in real terms "throughout the spending review" period, when the reality is that there will be a real-terms revenue cut for universities next year. I am sure that no one in the chamber needs reminding of the definition of "throughout", but, for the avoidance of doubt, the "Oxford English Dictionary" defines it thus: "Through or during the whole of (a period of time or course of action)", and the "Collins English Dictionary" defines it as "through the whole of". Scottish Executive officials confirmed to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee yesterday that there will be a real-terms cut for universities next year, and that there will therefore not be an increase "throughout the spending review" period. Given that it is a matter involving the First Minister himself, would it be appropriate respectfully to ask him, on behalf of Parliament, to take an early opportunity to clarify his comments to Parliament in line with your ruling, Presiding Officer?

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government will encourage research and development in universities. (S3F-298)

How can it be consistent with the economic strategy's aim of greater knowledge transfer between academic research and industry that there will be—as the First Minister must know—a real-terms cut in funding for universities next year? That cut was confirmed by Universities Scotland, and the Parliament should be clear about it even if the First Minister is not being so. With a view to the forthcoming research assessment exercise, what were the principals offered at today's meeting if they have been offered neither a review of funding nor a better funding settlement in the current spending review?

If I was not going to make a consensual speech, I might ask where we would have been if we had followed the SNP's advice on the strategy for sustainable fisheries in the past few years. Where would that have left the industry? However, I am going to make a consensual speech, so I will not dwell any further on that point. I join the cabinet secretary in welcoming trainee skippers from Banff and Buchan College. Along with the cabinet secretary and others, I made representations to support the retention of the  courses that they are taking at the college. I am sure that those courses will continue to provide vital training. It is good to see the trainees here in Parliament. Each year, we gather ahead of the December fisheries negotiations. I remember hoping during the election campaign that I would be back to make this speech. I must concede, however, that I had not imagined that I would be wishing Mr Lochhead all the best on coming back from Europe with the best deal for Scottish fishermen, but that is exactly what I hope will happen—although I hope that it will be done by working with, rather than against, UK ministers. The fishing industry is crucial not just to Scotland as a whole but to the economy of the north-east in particular, through both the catching and processing sectors. In my speech, I want to focus on the tough times that our fish processors have faced. However, I will consider first the general debate on securing sustainable fisheries for the Scottish fleet. I begin by quoting what might be seen as an unlikely source for me—Mr Stewart Stevenson. In the equivalent debate last year, he said: "The first clear point is that ... we all want a successful, sustainable industry. We may differ about the route to that and about some of the difficulties that we face in delivering that, but let us at least nail the fact that we all share that objective".— [ Official Report , 13 December 2006; c 30327.]  That was a welcome tone to bring to that debate, and it is a point that we should be clear about today: we all want to see the best for Scotland's fisheries. That has not always been the tenor of the debate—including today—but it is the right approach to take. I have been supportive of membership and reform of the CFP, for example through the establishment of regional advisory councils and progress to greater local management of stocks. I hope that the Scottish fishing industry can be rewarded at this year's negotiations for the huge strides that it has taken on sustainability. It is right that real efforts are being made to ensure that the industry is viewed as it should be—as a vital and successful one that is coming through the hard times following decommissioning. Last year's mid-year review of the fleet by Seafish showed significantly higher fish sales prices, which has raised optimism. Average forecast profits of white-fish vessels show considerable improvement, and I understand that there have been significant increases in profits at harbours. While there has been cause for greater optimism in the catching sector with that increase in prices, there have been additional difficulties for the processing sector. It has had to deal with the double whammy of higher prices and often not  enough products to process—we remember being told of days when only one box of fish was landed at Aberdeen harbour. I might not see eye to eye with all the processors on an analysis of the solutions but, having met Andrew Charles of the Scottish Seafood Processors Federation, I know that that part of the industry does not feel that adequate attention has been placed on its plight, with 20 or so processing businesses having gone out of business in the space of only a few years. Measures that might have helped that industry have not proved to be effective thus far. In Aberdeen and across the north-east, the fish processing industry has a proud tradition, and it is still crucial to the local economy. I have pressed the minister and his predecessor on ways of relieving some of the severe pressures on the processing industry, such as by enabling processors to access financial instrument for fisheries guidance—FIFG—funding streams and, in particular, by enabling processors to benefit from business rates relief schemes due to financial hardship. However, although businesses in the sector have gone bust, I understand that it is still the case that none of them has benefited from business rates relief. I also understand that there are no new proposals on that. I am not pretending for one second that it will be easy to resolve the situation, but I seek reassurance that this vital part of our fishing industry will not be ignored when it comes to Government action. A good settlement at the negotiations will be crucial for the processing sector. I hope that the minister will be in dialogue with fish processors about the difficult economic situation in which they find themselves. There has been a great deal of debate today about the science of fishing and its accuracy. For me, that leads to the essential question about how much to invest in the science and how we ensure that we get the best possible science. It would be helpful if the minister talked about plans for future investment to support the science in this area, because the hope is that better science and a more accurate reflection of stocks will be better news for the industry and, of course, will help to inform the best policies for guaranteeing long-term sustainability. At the negotiations, I hope that every effort will be made to continue the policy of having sustainable stocks for the future and, at the same time, a sustainable fishing industry on land and offshore, because it is still very important to Scotland.

I know that Mr Brown is new, but I suggest that, if he had wanted to hear constant negativity, he need only have listened to members on the SNP benches in the past four years. I cannot help but wonder whether, when the First Minister introduced the strategy last week, articulating aspirations for the sustainable economic growth that we all want for Scotland, he did not at least pause for thought—particularly given his surroundings at the University of Glasgow—that there was a crucial mismatch between the strategy and what was to be delivered by his Government in the spending review the very next day. We can agree that the strategy should place at its heart the vision of a highly skilled workforce and economic growth, capitalising on Scottish excellence in research and innovation. However, that vision needs to be backed by investment, which is where the Government's approach falters.

I will give way to Comical Alex—Comical Alex Neil, that is.

As Mr Neil knows, that was not—and has consistently not been—part of our manifesto. Mr Neil talked about fighting for Scotland, but the reality of the situation—which would exist both with independence and under the current settlement—is that his Government's actions on university funding are putting our  universities at a competitive disadvantage to their English counterparts. On that issue, it is the other parties that are standing up for Scotland.

I do not agree that the budget maintains competitiveness. I also saw the initial press release from Universities Scotland, which talked about the budget threatening competitiveness. I understand today from Universities Scotland's own figures that, despite the triple or quadruple counting—whatever is going on in Mr Swinney's defence—it believes that, in real terms, it is getting only a quarter of what it asked for. That is the stark reality of the funding crisis that the Government is creating in the universities sector and which will defeat the purpose that the economic strategy outlines. The strategy contains aspirations with which I disagree, and it is unfortunate that the spending review announcement has undermined the aims with which we could agree. The strategy has a fixation with selectively comparing ourselves with Scandinavian economies, but it does not refer to personal taxation levels in those areas or to the fact that, put together, all those Scandinavian countries have only one university in the world's top 100, whereas Scotland has two. Perhaps we will head in the same direction as Scandinavia if the Government gets its way.

The strategy would have done better at achieving more skilled workers if more commitments had been made to modern apprenticeships—it appears that none has been made. In addition, yesterday I learned from Amicus that there are worries about what is happening to individual learning accounts. Improvements could be made. Skills are important. It is unfortunate that the Government is not delivering what it wants to achieve on skills. Unlike the Government's economic strategy, in "A Smart, Successful Scotland" and the former coalition's refreshed strategy we put our money where our mouth was. We increased investment in our universities by 18 per cent and investment throughout tertiary education by 22 per cent, which resulted in rewards.  The bleak picture of our economy in the economic strategy is not justified when we have had record-high employment. The evidence is that people—particularly graduates—are benefiting from obtaining rewarding careers. Of course, we have also had consistent growth in our economy. On the validity of targets, Derek Brownlee and Iain Gray talked about the UK growth target. However difficult achieving targets is, it has been made tougher by the Government's inability to have joined-up thinking between its economic strategy and its spending review, which was published the day after the strategy was issued. The funding settlement could not come at a worse time for universities, because the research assessment exercise is approaching. The previous Executive's funding increase helped universities to win more than our fair share of UK research funding, which developed sectors such as the life sciences and brought in private investment from companies such as Wyeth Pharmaceuticals. Under the current Government, universities have received a paltry funding settlement. However appalling the Government's dropping of a firm commitment on student loans was—some of us expected that volte-face—we could not have foreseen from the strategy a funding settlement for universities that would cause Sir Muir Russell to warn that our universities' competitiveness with their English counterparts is threatened and would cause others to warn that, if we do not allow for extra activity, the settlement will have an impact on academic staff's pay. That is a cost to our economy. How on earth does that settlement follow the Government's statement in its economic strategy that it will "ensure a funding system for Further and Higher Education ... that is responsive to the needs of individuals, employers and the wider economy"? It is clear that the spending review will not do that. On the day when the spending review was announced, Sir Muir Russell said: "this settlement appears inconsistent with the Scottish Government's aspirations for economic growth in its strategy published only yesterday". In that context, I give Fiona Hyslop full marks for bravery in responding to the debate. I understand that she will meet principals tomorrow. I hope that a rethink can take place on their crucial funding settlement. The Government cannot afford to repent at leisure, although from Mr Swinney's and Mr Neil's statements it does not seem about to repent. The Government's position is inconsistent and represents an opportunity cost to our economy. It needs a rethink. The only opposition to the aspiration to achieve economic growth comes  from the Government's own actions on university funding.

rose—

Students have certainly come last with the budget, and Kenny Gibson was clearly not listening when we heard the cabinet secretary admit that he was ditching the student debt pledge. The story of today's budget is one of students betrayed and universities badly let down. Perhaps we were expecting the betrayal of students, but the settlement that universities received today will have come as a disappointing shock to them. The SNP has dumped its policy on graduate debt, and universities, which asked for £168 million extra, are getting only £30 million. As Universities Scotland says, that is inconsistent with the Government's stated aspirations for growing a knowledge economy. Students were told that the SNP would "dump the debt monster". That was the campaign slogan, and I even have a picture of Nicola Sturgeon at a freshers fair with the debt monster—a guy in a gorilla suit—looking for student votes. Now, however, we know that the SNP is not dumping the debt monster; it is dumping its promise. What started off with Alex Salmond pledging to meet the student loan repayments of Scotland-based students, and with the SNP responding to questions on the policy by telling us again and again on television and in newspapers that it was affordable, then moved on to a pledge, in  "Reporting on 100 Days: Moving Scotland forward", to draft legislation to abolish the debt.

No. However, that legislation never appeared, and now we know why—because the SNP has unceremoniously and cynically ditched the policy. It is shameful for SNP members to have insisted until they were blue in the face that they would pay off those loans and then—despite the fact that some students will have voted for them on that basis—to abandon the pledge when in government. That is no way to treat students—or anyone. It would be tempting to use unparliamentary language, Presiding Officer, but it is clear that students will feel betrayed because that promise has been broken. All that we hear is the excuse that this is a tight settlement. However, it is a tight settlement that the Government knew was coming—it was predicted before the election—and which the independent centre for public policy research says is fair. The SNP says that it would not get legislation through, but the policy does not require legislation beyond the budget bill, and the Government is to introduce a bill on an independence referendum in the face of opposition.

No. The SNP's sums do not add up. If it was not going to cost £2 billion to scrap loans, why has the Government not introduced a proposal for the Parliament to debate, or did the SNP never really have any intention of implementing such a policy?

I am not going to give way. I have only four minutes, and I think that Mr Doris should sit down. To rub salt in the wounds—

To rub salt in the wounds, as Tavish Scott said, the SNP is delivering only half of what it said it would deliver in other areas of student finance. Our Executive was straight with students, in stark contrast to the current Administration, which pulled the wool over their eyes. We increased student bursaries year on year, massively beyond inflation, but there is no equivalent pledge in the SNP budget.  Earlier this week, the SNP talked of lofty aspirations for the role of universities and colleges in growing our economy, but when universities asked for £168 million extra the Government awarded them only £30 million. Sir Muir Russell, the chair of Universities Scotland, says that the settlement is a disappointing response, and he is concerned that it could weaken the competitive position of Scottish universities relative to universities in England. There was an 18 per cent increase for universities in the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition's spending review. We delivered on our pledges and put money behind what we said we were going to do. The actions of the current Government do not match its words on university funding and graduate debt. The cabinet secretary said that the budget heralds a new era of optimism, opportunity and delivery, but for universities it is no more than confirmation that they have been let down, and for students it is confirmation that they have been conned. The Government should be ashamed.

Will the cabinet secretary tell the chamber where in the budget the funding can be found to match, brick for brick, Labour's policy on building new schools? On universities, I understand that the revenue increase is just 2.9 per cent over the next two years, which is well below what was asked for. Will he confirm that that is the case, or is the increase anywhere nearer to the 18 per cent  additional increase that was made in the last spending review?

I congratulate Mike Rumbles on bringing the debate to the chamber. The Aberdeen western peripheral route is the key transport priority for the north-east, with some estimates putting its value to local businesses at £1 billion. Anyone who lives or works in Aberdeen knows how vital the route is to addressing the unacceptable levels of congestion in the city, which is why the route was a key commitment of the Scottish Labour and Liberal Democrat coalition, and why the announcement on its construction was so widely welcomed in Aberdeen  and throughout the north-east. Of course, my colleague Lewis Macdonald played a crucial part in bringing forward that commitment in his role as Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning, at the time when Jack McConnell came to Aberdeen to announce that the Executive had agreed funding for the route. There is cross-party support for the route to be constructed as a matter of urgency: we have heard that in all the speeches from local members tonight, which is why it was so disappointing to hear of the minister's decision to delay completion of the route by a year. That decision means an additional year of frustration for commuters and an additional year of costs to local businesses because of congestion. It is simply not credible to say—as the minister suggested last week—that no additional costs will be incurred in the scheme and, consequently, to local council taxpayers.

The minister decided to delay the project for a year. I cannot make it clearer than that. There has been further consternation locally about additional pronouncements from the SNP, including from the First Minister, about how final determination of the route will proceed. Of course, due process has to be undertaken and the outcome of the public inquiry is important, given the strong views of the affected residents. As Mike Rumbles pointed out, the idea that the outcome may be not abided by in any event neither follows precedent, nor is it the correct way in which ministers should proceed in such circumstances. If the inquiry is to be abided by—whatever the outcome—it is important for the minister to clarify what he meant when he said at committee that all the routes would be consulted on. If the inquiry ends simply in rejection of the route, the result can only be more, and significant, construction delays, which would be damaging and unacceptable. If the SNP is so committed to the route, such action would be strange. The SNP has thrown an additional spanner in the works with its determination to review how the route should be funded, despite a mechanism's having been put in place and agreed with the local authorities. Again, we should remember that the local authorities are partners in the project. As a result, local council tax payers will have to foot the bill for a share of the costs of any delays. I disagree strongly with ministers on their views on PPP. However, whatever the debate over PPP, a Scottish futures trust—which the minister has indicated is his favoured funding mechanism—is unproven, untested and unconstitutional. The trust  is no doubt one of the issues that the SNP has set up to pick a fight with Westminster, but to threaten to delay a vital project because of political dogma and affection for constitutional wrangling is to badly let down the people of the north-east. We have had assurances from the Administration that it wants the peripheral route to be completed as quickly as possible. Frankly, its actions thus far have not matched those words. I say to the minister that it is vital that he address those concerns: he must give the clearest possible commitment that there will be no further delay or prevarication in delivering this key transport priority for Aberdeen and the north-east.

What is the current estimate of the increase in cost of financing the western peripheral route that will result from the minister's decision to delay its construction by a year? What share of that cost will be borne by council tax payers in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire?

I congratulate Brian Adam on securing a debate on such an important issue, and congratulate on her excellent maiden speech and welcome to the chamber Shirley-Anne Somerville.  Recovered but not covered is one of many excellent campaigns that Macmillan Cancer Support runs. I am sure that we all look forward to taking part in Macmillan coffee mornings in the near future and I am glad that the organisation has raised an important issue, which Brian Adam has given us the opportunity to discuss. Last night, a number of us were at a citizens advice service event to mark the launch of its new role in advising people with health problems, one aspect of which is the provision of financial advice. When someone has an illness, especially a serious one, the last thing that they want to have to worry about is financial matters. I have encountered that issue in a number of contexts. I was pleased to hear that there are now ways in which people who have serious illnesses can access benefits and advice more quickly from citizens advice bureaux. Financial problems cause worry and can depress people who find themselves in the difficult circumstance of suffering from cancer. It must be particularly frustrating for people in that position to face such problems when they seek a holiday to help alleviate the daily stress and worries of their illness. As Brian Adam said when he spoke effectively about how some individuals have been affected, such treatment amounts to financial discrimination. As Shirley-Anne Somerville said, such discrimination is simply unacceptable. Insurance companies must engage on the issue and I hope that they will be willing to do so. I hope, too, that all levels of government will support them to take action. The joint research by Macmillan Cancer Support and the Royal Bank of Scotland is welcome. Let us hope that that ends with positive action and the right response from the insurance companies involved, which is to end the discrimination. I am sure that we wish to do all that we can to ensure that they engage properly in that process. I hope that we can give Macmillan all our support in making its campaign effective. The Royal Bank of Scotland is supporting the research and joining Macmillan in trying to progress the situation; that is welcome, but it is vital that the bank is not alone in doing that and that other companies, too, come to the table. It is unacceptable that people in vulnerable circumstances are being put through the stress of having to meet higher insurance costs, or faced with the prospect of not being able to go on holiday. I hope that we can all support the campaign until its goal is achieved and the discrimination is ended.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Yesterday, the skills strategy that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning brought to the Parliament was voted down. By so doing, the Parliament established that it deemed the strategy inadequate. Is it in order, at least in terms of protocol, that the cabinet secretary or her ministerial colleagues have not indicated that they will return to the Parliament with a new strategy that contains additional measures to tackle this key issue? Will you use your offices to urge the cabinet secretary and ministers to return to the Parliament on the issue, particularly as the Minister for Children and Early Years ignored the view of Parliament by insisting in the debate this morning on the adequacy of the strategy?

The member disproves the notion that attack is the best form of defence. The SNP has pledged to abolish all graduate debt. How will it pay for that? No SNP member has answered that question.

rose—

The point that Mr Brownlee makes is pretty facile. We live in an increasingly competitive global marketplace. Of course, we will  have to step up to the mark and deliver more in terms of skills. The point is pretty obvious.

This Administration talks big about the Scottish economy, but now it must walk the walk. We in Scottish Labour realise that the key to economic growth is investing in the skills of Scotland's  people. A step change in growth requires a step change in our skills strategy, and only that will deliver greater prosperity for Scotland. It will not happen through changing our constitution. We need a little less national conversation, and more action, to skill up our workforce and ensure that Scotland can succeed in an increasingly competitive global marketplace. As Iain Gray pointed out, we did not hear much about skills in the first days of this Administration. In this, as in many other areas, ministers have been short on detail, and I am not convinced that this strategy takes us much further forward. Of course, it is right that the strategy should reflect the strong skills legacy that this Administration inherited, and that it should point out that Scotland is growing faster than the UK as a whole with regard to the number of people in the workforce who have higher education qualifications. Moreover, we can all agree on the need for increasing rates of productivity to match that achievement. Developing the Scottish credit and qualifications network and the enterprise in education initiative and delivering parity of esteem are also very important in enhancing skills—such approaches must certainly continue—but, among all the bland statements that Mr Purvis referred to in the document, it says of learning that "Time spent going over old ground is time wasted." However, that is exactly what the strategy does. Although we welcome its identification of areas of existing consensus, we need to hear what more will be done to upskill Scotland. Instead, we have to wait for further decisions about modern apprenticeships, new support mechanisms and the long-term early years strategy without any indication of the investment that will be made or its timing.

I wish only that the cabinet secretary had attached the same urgency to any of the other important measures that need to be taken to give the impression that the Executive has a sense of urgency about this key issue. Unfortunately, she has failed to do so. As Jeremy Purvis was right to point out, although the skills strategy says that our colleges and universities will be asked to do more, it crucially does not mention the resources that they will have in that respect. In our manifesto, we said that we would increase funding by double the rate of inflation until 2011. There is no such commitment in this strategy, even though the  Administration is quite happy to commit to the vast spend needed to abolish all graduate loans. The document is right to reflect the tertiary education sector's crucial role in a skills strategy, which is why it is all the more surprising that this Administration has not continued to link the enterprise and lifelong learning portfolios. The folly of that is reflected in the paucity of thinking in the strategy. The link was an important part of the previous Executive's strategy, which was based on growing a highly skilled knowledge economy. Ministers might now criticise our economic record, but our approach led to record employment and a level of sustained growth that for the first time in many years matched the rest of the UK. We in the north-east are well aware that the fact that many areas of our economy, including manufacturing, are showing strong growth in itself creates skills challenges. Last night, representatives of the food industry, which is an important sector in our area, were in the Parliament to talk about skills development needs. The strategy mentions working with trade unions. That is essential, as the trade union movement in Scotland has been at the forefront of encouraging work-based learning. The briefing that we received from Unison and others suggests that there needs to be much more consultation with the trade unions. In Aberdeen, the Amicus section of Unite has come forward with ambitious plans for an oil and gas skills academy. We were happy to support such plans in our manifesto, because we realise that, if we do not respond to the industry's concern that it will not be able to find enough people locally with the skills that are needed to do the required work, opportunities will be lost to people not only in Aberdeen but across Scotland and the industry's capacity to maximise potential growth in our area will be threatened. Before the election, Alex Salmond appeared to acknowledge that and endorsed the union's proposals. However, his ministers have come before Parliament with a strategy that says nothing about skills academies, and the industry is now talking about going it alone with the proposal. I can understand its frustration at the lack of movement from ministers, but the involvement of public agencies will be required if the initiative is to progress. This is an area in which Government should be leading rather than following. The strategy is hardly the great call to action that it calls itself; it is barely a whisper. It is short on ideas. Merging agencies will not make the difference. Concrete proposals and actions are required, but the strategy is well short on those. We have produced real proposals to meet the challenge.

We were not prepared to rest on our laurels—we proposed to increase the number of modern apprenticeships to 50,000 a year, to tackle the problems of the NEET group and to establish skills academies. Mr Adam can shout from a sedentary position, but he knows about the demand that exists for an oil and gas skills academy in our area. It seems that this Administration is quite happy to rest on our laurels for us. That is why its strategy is totally inadequate. We all share a vision of a Scotland whose people will be even more highly skilled in the future. In seeking to achieve that ambition, the SNP's strategy is fine as far as it goes, but it does not go nearly far enough and it will not deliver the step change on skills that we need.

Does the minister agree that the approach that was taken not only in Scotland, but across Great Britain has been crucial to minimising the impact of the outbreak on Scottish farmers? Does he agree that the review that he has announced should be informed by the impending UK Government report? There have been many questions about the review's terms of reference. Once the minister has met Professor Scudamore, when does he expect to be able to report on that to the Parliament and the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee?

I am pleased to hear that the cabinet secretary will continue to award three-year spending settlements to local authorities. I understand that he does not want to be prescriptive, but will he be proactive in encouraging local authorities to award three-year funding settlements to the voluntary sector organisations that they contract to carry out vital local public services?

Does the member share my surprise at the extra year's delay in the western peripheral route, given the fact that, only two weeks ago, the minister told me that there was no review and no prospect of delaying the route? Is not that extremely disappointing?

I welcome the chance that the Green party has given us to discuss carbon offsetting. As always, Robin Harper has put forward his party's position on the subject well and entertainingly. I had not considered the carbon impact of hell before; I am not sure what we can do about it. The motion is right to say that we need to be sure that we use the most effective methods to address climate change. However, although the Greens put the SNP in power, which I must say was a remarkable act of generosity, given that they lost so many seats to the SNP in the election—it was like Caesar promoting Brutus from beyond the grave—it is not surprising that they have become a bit nervous about the divergence between their strategies on climate change and those of the SNP. The motion refers to the Executive's intention to introduce carbon offsetting for transport projects, but the Greens argue—rightly, in my view—that offsetting is not enough. However, that comes after the Greens put the SNP in power, despite the fact that the SNP, like me, supports the Aberdeen western peripheral route while the Greens oppose it. However, we now understand that, perhaps as a concession to the Green party, the project is under review, which I must say has been met with dismay in Aberdeen.

Okay. We need more clarity on that, because that is not what has been said previously. In relation to effective strategies for minimising the carbon emissions that result from transport policy, I converge with the Greens on the need for consideration of the overall weighting of transport investment. In particular, I agree that it is crucial to prioritise further investment in improving our railway infrastructure. The Executive seeks to prioritise road-building projects, such as dualling the A9, rather than schemes such as the Edinburgh airport rail link, which Alison McInnes  mentioned, or the tram system. In my region, I want the Aberdeen crossrail scheme to proceed from the planning to the construction stage. I know that the Green party agrees with me on that and I hope that SNP members do, too, as it is a crucial measure to improve public transport and address congestion. However, the Executive's Scottish transport appraisal guidance, which is used to assess the value and viability of transport proposals, has traditionally been weighted to favour road over rail. Therefore, I am attracted to the motion's proposal for "rigorous independent assessments of the ... carbon impact of each project", as that may create a more level playing field for those who make the case for rail projects. Our amendment talks about making "potential carbon reduction ... a central consideration in the evaluation and prioritisation of transport ... projects".

There is a debate to be had about the fact that an increase in the number of direct flights from Scottish airports can reduce the overall number of flights that people in Scotland make. Although there is heated debate in the Parliament about transport policy and its impact on carbon emissions, there appears to be broad agreement on strategies for carbon offsetting and its place in the overall policy on climate change. The Executive has inherited a legacy of investment in public transport and renewables because Labour set strong foundations for progress in this crucial area. For as long as the Executive is in place, we will oppose measures that run counter to that and support those that will help to achieve the progress that it is vital for Scotland to make in our contribution to tackling climate change.

We are still looking for an answer. When will the SNP's proposals to pay back all graduate loans be brought to the chamber? Retrospectivity did not seem to be a problem before. That was the SNP's manifesto pledge, after all, although other parties pointed out that it was unaffordable. On the Labour side, in the coalition, we increased the student bursary significantly year on year. By how much will it increase in this session?

We will engage with the skills strategy—but, yet again, for the SNP the idea of engagement seems to be one-sided. It is already rejecting Scottish Labour's proposals and, indeed, misrepresenting them. It is fitting that Parliament's first debate on education in this session has been brought forward by Scottish Labour, because our party has put education and skills at the heart of the success of devolution. It is also a pleasure to make my first speech in this session. It hardly seems four years since I made my maiden speech as the Parliament's youngest member, but now I look around me and see that I appear to be one of the  older members. The last four years have clearly taken a very heavy toll. I would like to welcome the new ministers to their positions. There is much on which Fiona Hyslop and I disagree, but I wish her every success in her new role. We have worked constructively together on keeping open rural schools that are sustainable; I hope that we will see progress on that issue. As a fellow MSP for North East Scotland, I would like in particular to welcome Maureen Watt to her new role and to wish her every success in it. She will be acutely aware of the great concern in Aberdeen at the council's £2 million cuts in schools' budgets, despite extra funding for schools from the previous Executive. The SNP is now part of the administration in Aberdeen, implementing that decision. I hope that that will also be an issue that ministers can address. There is much to do. When we consider national issues such as creating a knowledge economy and fostering excellence in education and skills, Labour's record in the coalition Executive is one of which we are proud. The SNP will have to live up to it. However, we want even more progress in key areas. We need more school leavers who are proficient in science and technology, and more opportunities for young people to gain vocational skills. That is why we want more science teaching in schools—which has never been simply a post-16 agenda—and it is why we created modern apprenticeships and wanted 50,000 people to benefit from them every year. A skills agenda is crucial. It can give young people better life opportunities and enable them to contribute to a successful Scotland. Our motion is not about denying opportunities; it is about creating more of them. The link between lifelong learning and economic success in the previous Executive worked, and it is regrettable that this Executive has broken that link. However, adopting some of our proposals today would go at least some way in mitigation. Our proposals for skills academies have been widely welcomed by people who are concerned about the skills gaps in our workforce, which represent an opportunity cost for thousands of people who could take up those skilled jobs.

Mr Harper is rector of the University of Aberdeen and I know about his interest in these issues. We are certainly not seeking to undermine the comprehensive system, but extra funding is needed to give more people more skills and to encourage them to take up education and training. In Aberdeen, employers, educators and trade unions are backing the proposal for a skills academy for energy and for oil and gas. Public agencies are taking those plans forward, and I agree with much of what Mr Purvis said, particularly the important points about higher and tertiary education funding. Some of the spectres raised about our proposals for skills academies do not apply. The skills academy proposed for Aberdeen will help to ensure that the city has a knowledge and skills base so that it can continue to be the energy capital of Europe. I would like to hear how this Executive will make progress with that initiative, as well as with proposals for skills academies in other areas. I am proud that in the previous Executive, Labour and the Liberals hugely increased the funding for our universities and colleges, giving them a £1 billion budget for the first time. When will we hear about this Executive's budget for tertiary education? I am proud that we put teaching and quality first. That must continue, because education is the key. Giving young Scots the skills to succeed, thus enabling Scotland to succeed, was the right priority for the previous Executive. We will do all that we can to ensure that it is a priority in this Parliament too.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will make improvements at the Haudagain roundabout in Aberdeen to reduce traffic congestion. (S3O-33)

I am sure that the minister is aware that I and other members pressed his predecessor on the urgent need for improvements at the Haudagain roundabout. The proposals for improvements to reduce the severe congestion in the area are welcome, but does he agree that we need a timetable for their implementation? Might further options for improvement be considered? Given that time is crucial, when can we expect the improvements to be in place?

The First Minister referred to Labour's achievements on renewable energy. Given that a Scottish consortium of universities has reached the shortlist to host the new £1 billion UK energy technology institute, does he agree that his Executive should back Aberdeen to be the hub for the new institute, which would confirm the city's status as the oil and gas and energy capital of Europe? Does he accept that his policy of pulling Scotland out of the UK would mean that Aberdeen would not have the opportunity to benefit from that exciting development?

To ask the Scottish Executive what business case has been received from Aberdeen City Council in relation to the construction of a 50-metre swimming pool in the city. (S2O-12443)

The minister's answer is welcome. Will she assure me that sportscotland and her officials are willing to meet Aberdeen City Council to discuss the expeditious drawing up of a workable business plan for the pool? Does she agree that it is irresponsible and counterproductive to call for the fast-tracking of such an important project without reference to a business plan or to how the project will be funded, as local Scottish National Party representatives have done?

To ask the Scottish Executive how the fishing and fish processing industries in the north-east will benefit from the latest round of funding allocated  through the financial instrument for fisheries guidance programme. (S2O-12360)

I thank the minister for his helpful answer. Does he agree that, although there is much good news in the fishing industry, this investment is especially welcome for people in the fish processing sector, given that a number of fish processors specialising in Scottish stocks have gone of business over the past few years? Will there be continued dialogue between the Executive and processors to ensure that maximum benefit for the industry is gained through the funding, so that it may have a rosier future ahead of it?

To ask the First Minister, in Scottish tourism week 2007, what steps are being taken to grow tourism. (S2F-2784)

Will the First Minister assure me that the Executive's successful tourism strategy will continue to focus on growing tourism throughout Scotland including, for example, the rapidly developing golf tourism industry in the north-east? Does he agree that one of the first mistakes of a nightmare SNP Administration would be to scrap the post of tourism minister, as the SNP announced at the beginning of tourism week?

I welcome this afternoon's debate on tackling alcohol misuse. In the north-east, we are acutely aware of the significance of the problem. It is certainly not one that will be solved over the course of such a short debate, but it is nevertheless important that we take opportunities to discuss an issue that pervades not just Scotland's health but the fabric of our communities, as it affects problems such as crime and antisocial behaviour. Last summer, The Press and Journal ran a campaign to highlight the impact of excessive drinking on crime in the north-east. It was a successful campaign, and I was aware of its importance from my experience of joining Grampian police on a tour of Aberdeen city centre one Friday night into Saturday morning. People should be able to enjoy a pint on a night out and to socialise through drinking sensibly, but I was struck by the sheer number of people pouring out on to Union Street at 3 am. It seemed to me busier then than during some daytime hours. I hope that the Licensing (Scotland) Bill, which we passed earlier in this parliamentary session, will help the situation. What was even more striking was that the people who were detained by the police that night—through what I must say were rapid police responses—were clearly driven to their offending because of binge drinking. Once apprehended, they were understandably contrite. They were asked what jobs they did, and they were often in good employment. When I viewed the process, it seemed clear to me that binge drinking had turned reasonable people into people who were capable of offending. Of course, problems relating to alcohol misuse do not occur only in busy town centres. I know from the too many complaints that I still receive from communities throughout Aberdeen and in rural areas that alcohol misuse blights the lives of too many people. In particular, there is concern about young people drinking, or underage drinking, which even happens in public. The British Medical Association's briefing contains worrying statistics relating to that problem. It is clear that too many young people get access to alcohol at home. We must continue to urge parents to be vigilant about that, but it is also an issue for retailers. The vast majority of retailers sell alcohol responsibly, but I am pleased that the Executive has taken action in the area. When I heard about the test purchasing pilot in Fife that aims to identify retailers who sell alcohol to underage people, I  immediately called for the scheme to be rolled out to the north-east if it proved successful. I am glad that it has now been rolled out nationwide, as it will be valued throughout Scotland. It is important to acknowledge that the Executive has acted to discourage alcohol misuse. The new licensing laws focus on doing so. The Executive has already awarded the relevant powers to local licensing boards in some of the areas that the SNP has mentioned so that the right decisions can be made at the community level. It is important that licensing boards make such decisions. The Executive is, of course, promoting prevention and education through advertising campaigns and through working with organisations such as Alcohol Focus Scotland and with the industry, which has an important role to play. Indeed, the industry is treating its role seriously. At the local level, alcohol and drug action teams are working to help people who are suffering because of their alcohol misuse. The Executive is therefore taking national initiatives and enabling local action to address alcohol misuse, which has blighted our society for far too long. Members should be united in their determination to address the issue. I welcome the tone of Kenny MacAskill's speech in that context, and am confident that the Executive will not relent in continuing to consider new ways to tackle alcohol misuse. I am sure that no serious party will say in the election that the Parliament and the Executive have not addressed the issue. No one should pretend that there are easy or quick fixes to such a long-standing problem for Scottish society. However, concrete measures to tackle alcohol misuse have been taken in this session, and I am sure that more action will be taken to tackle it in the next session.

Does the member welcome the alcohol test purchasing scheme that is being rolled out, after being piloted in Fife, whereby retailers who sell alcohol to underage consumers are identified? Does he acknowledge that there is an issue to do with young people's access to drink at home and that there is a job to be done to educate parents too?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to encourage consumers to buy local produce. (S2O-12129)

I welcome the Executive's recent action to ensure that caterers identify the origin of the beef that they sell. What further measures is the Executive taking to encourage not just individual consumers but local authorities and Government agencies to buy local produce? The procurement of local food is more environmentally sustainable and we know the high standards that local food meets.

I congratulate Nora Radcliffe on securing the debate. Her motion recognises the great importance of the transport debate in Aberdeenshire and Aberdeen. I know that the minister is keenly aware of some of the key issues. I disagree with Shiona Baird. I think that, in NESTRANS, the north-east is fortunate to have such an effective partnership, which is able to highlight the key issues for the development of transport links in the region and ensure that progress is made on those issues. Tonight is a good moment to acknowledge the work of Peter  Cockhead, who has promoted those issues as the co-ordinator of NESTRANS. The motion is right to acknowledge the need for an integrated transport network in Aberdeenshire. We have a great opportunity to work towards that goal as a great deal is being invested in our local transport infrastructure, which will be important for future transport delivery. We have the investment in our roads network, particularly in our western peripheral route, which is a vital project. Addressing congestion in the city is an issue of concern not only to residents of Aberdeen but to the residents of the shire who travel into the city. We want further developments to complement the western peripheral route.

The minister is considering a number of proposals that will address congestion in addition to the western peripheral route. Obviously, we have the plans for the Haudagain roundabout, which I hope moves to its construction phase as soon as possible. Of course, there is investment not only in the roads network but in the rail network as well. We look forward to having a new station at Laurencekirk and I am particularly keen for us to move from analysing the scheme for Aberdeen crossrail to making that vital project a reality. I am not as pessimistic about that as Mr Adam seems to be. I think that such plans have to be scrutinised properly, but I believe that the case will be overwhelming. Accordingly, I have made submissions as part of the local and national consultation processes that are being run on the transport strategy to make the case for crossrail, which I believe to be a comparatively cheap way of making a huge impact on congestion. The motion refers to the Stern report. Of course, it is incumbent on us to invest in promoting sustainable forms of transport, which means that we must continue to invest in excellent schemes such as the community bus schemes and local bus links, bolstered by our agenda for free travel for older people and cheaper travel for younger people on public transport and on new rail schemes, such as crossrail. NESTRANS has made progress on such issues by encouraging, for example, local businesses to urge their employees to take part in lift-sharing schemes. Work such as that must continue and be built on. The Executive is investing record amounts in transport, of which the Aberdeen peripheral route is very much a part. In the next phase of investment, the issues that the motion highlights should be prioritised. I would argue that schemes  such as Aberdeen crossrail deserve their place, alongside proposals for major rail investment in some parts of the country, such as the airport rail links in Edinburgh and Glasgow. I welcome once more this opportunity to raise those issues and look forward to the minister's response.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to reduce congestion in Aberdeen. (S2O-12035)

The minister is aware that the Haudagain roundabout is a key pinchpoint for congestion in Aberdeen. Does he agree that progress must be made expeditiously on that issue? Can he confirm that action to address the issue by the Executive, NESTRANS and Aberdeen City Council will not be delayed until the completion of the western peripheral route?

How could you, Presiding Officer? As we are short of time, I will cut to the chase. All members have welcomed HMIE's reports on schools, so there is no need for me to repeat those remarks, other than to say that I think that the reports are invaluable. Instead, I will speak briefly about HMIE's other work, which has involved commenting on local authorities' school estates reviews. I did not agree with everything that HMIE said about the review in Moray, which would originally have led to the closure of perfectly sustainable rural schools—although there is better news on that today—but it is nevertheless right for HMIE to be concerned about the wider issue of how local authorities maximise educational benefit in our schools. As well as inspections of individual schools, HMIE carries out themed inspections. If possible, I would like HMIE to carry out a themed inspection of consultation processes on school closures, with  particular regard to rural schools. That is not because I think that no rural school should be closed. If a local authority identifies a school as unsustainable because of a falling school roll or other factors; has the evidence to justify that; and has conducted a transparent consultation process, of course the school should close. That will often be sad, because rural schools are at the heart of their communities. However, if the decision is justifiable, the school must be closed. The problem is that, in the past couple of years, swathes of rural schools, many of which received excellent HMIE reports, have been earmarked for closure by local authorities on arbitrary grounds, with poor consultation with parents, processes that are not transparent and, in the worst cases, direct misinformation to parents as justification for the closure. There has been short-termism and a failure to realise that it is often rural areas that are growing rather than urban ones. In some informal consultation processes, the proposals have seemed to be a fait accompli. The result of all that has been campaigns by parents to keep schools open, which I and many other members have backed. I am glad that, as a result, many schools that were earmarked for closure have been saved, but I am sure that everyone agrees that that is not the best approach to the management of the school estate. Those campaigns are a result of poor consultation processes. The processes have stalled rather than encouraged reasonable and rational reviews of school infrastructure. It is very probable that schools that are unsustainable have not been closed because they were bundled in with the process for schools that are clearly sustainable. If possible, a consideration of the consultation process would be an excellent themed inspection for HMIE to take on. The inspectorate could disseminate examples of best practice and ensure that local authorities embark on transparent consultation processes that involve parents fully throughout. That would ensure far better management of local schools infrastructure, while rightly maintaining decisions at a local level, and would enhance HMIE's work to ensure excellent provision through its reviews of individual schools. The motion rightly identifies HMIE's good work. On the issue of consultation and other matters, HMIE can make a further positive contribution to education provision throughout Scotland.

As someone who represents a region with many rural communities, I understand the importance of green procurement and its potential to encourage sustainable local industries. The first issue that often comes to mind is the public procurement of food, because we have such a strong farming industry that is responsible for high-quality produce and high standards of animal welfare. In procuring local food, we make an important contribution to reducing our carbon footprint because of the smaller distances that produce has to travel to reach its point of consumption. It is nonsensical on so many levels that we can go into supermarkets and see meat from South America or vegetables from the furthest corners of the world when there is so much high-quality local produce and such demand for local food from customers. It is right that many members encourage retailers to source more local produce, and it is important that we encourage public agencies to do the same. I welcome the Green party giving us the chance to debate the issue, but although there is broad agreement across the chamber, I do not run with the negative aspects of the motion. It is clear that there is a genuine wish on the part of the Executive to encourage green procurement, and if the European Commission is now moving in that direction too, that is hugely welcome. However, let us not pretend that this is an easy area in which to implement policy.

We have to pursue the most effective delivery route. Sometimes that is  legislation, but other times we have too much legislation. My point is that, for example, the document "Buying green!" states at the beginning that it is an indicative document. Of course there has to be care that the rules are being followed, because otherwise there are consequences, but that is not to say that real progress on green procurement cannot be made and that such progress is not being encouraged. We have already heard from Christine May about the progress that is being made in the kingdom peninsula, and we have the potential to encourage green, local procurement through the establishment of co-operatives. In addition, the Executive has set up the co-operative development agency. Fife is not an isolated example of where green procurement is being promoted locally. We have heard about case studies in East Ayrshire, which showed that it is possible to follow local food procurement policies with benefits for producers and for the quality and freshness of produce while still meeting European procurement rules. The Executive is working with the Association for Public Service Excellence, Scottish Enterprise's food and drink team and NFU Scotland to ensure that local authorities throughout Scotland, as well as food and farming interests, are aware of the findings of the case studies. I will press the issue with Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council, to ensure that they are aware of the case studies and are doing all that they can to engage in green procurement. There is a role for the Executive, but there is also a role for us as local members to work with our own local authorities. In four minutes I do not have time to go through all the Executive's other activities on green procurement, but the minister has referred to them and they are many. Labour's policy states our belief that local authorities have a big role to play in addressing environmental issues, and we want to ensure that effective environmental procurement policies yield direct economic and social benefits to local authorities and communities. We are committed to the policy and are already promoting it through our work in the Executive, so let us recognise that the agenda is shared across the chamber and by the Executive. Not only is it good for Scotland's producers, it is good for Scotland as a whole and for the global environment. I commend the amendment in the name of the minister.

Does the minister agree that not only the new dental institute's training role should be considered in such consultation, but that its treatment role for thousands of patients who have been deregistered by dental practices that went private and who are now receiving NHS services again should be considered? Does he expect that treatment role to develop as we encourage more dental practices to provide more NHS treatment?

Labour's stewardship of the UK economy and our leadership of the Executive have not only meant record levels of public investment but have resulted in sustained economic growth. We have delivered on our pledge to make economic growth our top priority for Scotland. The motion is important, because it recognises that being part of the United Kingdom has been crucial to that success, has brought greater prosperity to more people in Scotland, has improved services and educational opportunities for families and communities in our country, has reduced poverty and has provided better support for vulnerable groups. In recognising that being part of the UK has been crucial to that success, it highlights the importance of the choice that the Scottish electorate has to make in May about whether to prioritise separation or education, and about whether it is more important to continue to grow our country's economy and improve our public services or to put them at risk by focusing instead on constitutional wrangling. With respect, I have to tell Mark Ballard that, in Quebec, the process of having a referendum had an economic cost, so my argument is valid. Being part of a strong UK economy, due to the success of Gordon Brown as Chancellor of the Exchequer, has meant that we in Scotland have benefited particularly from the massive increase in investment in public services throughout the UK, and has provided a firm foundation for the Scottish Executive's own strategy for economic growth.

That is a totally different argument; it is like comparing apples with pears. I do not think that there was an economic cost, but we know that the economic costs of Mr Morgan's party's plans would be massive. The nationalists are fond of comparing Scotland to new states such as Estonia and Latvia—or to whomever they are picking today—and saying that we should compare our growth to theirs, but that is ridiculous. Those countries' rates of growth are high now because they suffered decades or even centuries of economic crisis. We start from a far higher base. We are not struggling to throw off the shackles of communism, though some would have us put them on. Over the history of the United Kingdom, Scotland has been part of an economy that is strong beyond the wildest dreams of those states. Whatever delusions others propagate, we  have no oppressor to shake off and we have benefited from our partnership in the UK. With devolution, we are building on that base to deliver greater prosperity for Scotland.

Our GDP is growing and now, for the first time in many years, we see our growth outstripping that of England. Our economy is moving in the right direction. With the SNP it would go straight downhill. Some say that we cannot have growth while investing more in public services, but the Executive has achieved just that. We have doubled spending on health to more than £10 billion next year, allocated hugely increased funding to local authorities and increased spending on the knowledge economy, with funding for universities and colleges up 50 per cent since 1999 to a record £1.6 billion, and we are reaping the rewards of that strategy's success. While other countries in Europe and throughout the world have slipped in and out of recession, we have enjoyed 20 quarters of consistent growth, record levels of employment and an employment rate that is above the UK rate—and there are more positive economic indicators. Why put all that at risk by taking a punt on independence, unless one is obsessed with that notion? The economics of the argument are unavoidable facts, however much SNP members try to avoid them. They try to dismiss the GERS report, as they have done today, and they say that Labour is too pessimistic about oil reserves, despite the fact that we know there is as much oil to come out as has been extracted, that we are acting to ensure that Aberdeen remains Europe's energy capital into the next century and that, as with so many things, there seems to be some confusion in their own ranks about the issue. In a letter to The Scotsman on Monday, Professor Christopher Harvie predicted peak oil production in 20 years' time. Where would that prediction leave output in the North sea—a comparatively maturing field—and where would it leave the SNP's economic argument for Scotland? The SNP's economic black hole gets bigger and bigger. Was that letter written by the same Professor Christopher Harvie who is the SNP's candidate in Kirkcaldy? If not, I am happy to be corrected, but Kenny MacAskill should be aware that Professor Harvie also writes in support of the Edinburgh tram scheme. I do not share Professor Harvie's pessimism about oil production, but that statement by the SNP's own candidate only reinforces the fact that for any economy to be based on oil revenues in perpetuity is ridiculous  and unsustainable. If the SNP's own candidate will not buy key parts of that most fundamental argument, why should anybody else? The SNP's arguments are often unconvincing, if not deliberately misleading. The SNP argues that it would cost only £100 million to scrap the graduate endowment and pay back all graduate debt, which is, in reality, a £1 billion-plus commitment. That would not improve the quality of our education system one iota, and what would go to pay for it? Then there is the pledge to cap local authority spending—another £1 billion commitment. What would go to pay for that? Would it be thousands of teaching posts, as Labour showed would be only too likely earlier this week? Public services would pay the price of the SNP's plans. Scottish families would too, not only through having poorer public services but through having to pay higher local taxes because of the SNP's plans for local income tax. That would not benefit Scotland's economy. What Scotland's economy needs is growth and investment in public services. With Labour, that is what has been achieved. We do not believe that such things are our priorities alone; they are also the priorities of the people of Scotland. People want not separation and uncertainty but continued growth and investment in health and education. That is why we go into the elections in May confident that in the battle of ideas it is our vision for Scotland that will win again.

A Procedures Committee debate that addresses several reports on parliamentary procedure might be regarded as a tidying-up exercise and might therefore not be awaited with the anticipation that accompanies a report on parliamentary time. However, it is important to ensure that parliamentary processes work effectively and that there are no controversial proposals. The proposal that has perhaps been most debated is in our report on public bills and substitution. The proposed approach will create a level playing field for members who introduce bills and ensure that they will not have an additional impact on the bill's consideration by taking part in private committee discussions simply because they happen to be a member of the lead committee. Of course, it is easier for the larger parties to supply substitutes, but the Procedures Committee has made it clear that the recommendation of a substitute, on a motion of the Parliamentary Bureau, will not upset the party balance on the committee, which is crucial. I hope that members agree that the committee struck the right balance. As Alasdair Morgan and Alex Johnstone said, it is also important that we clarify the general rules on substitution, to ensure that there is a consistent approach.  On parliamentary determinations and resolutions on members' interests, the committee thinks that it is sensible to follow the model that was helpfully proposed by the convener of the Standards and Public Appointments Committee, which will allow for appropriate consultation on relevant proposed determinations. We acknowledge that it is for the Parliamentary Bureau to allocate time for debates on motions that will be lodged under the proposed new rule. The allocation system has worked adequately in the past, so the new approach should not present a problem. Consolidation bill procedure is important, if technical. The Procedures Committee's convener said that the procedure is recondite—I do not know what that means, but I am sure that he is right. I commend Murdo Fraser for his diligence when he was convener of the Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries (Consolidation) (Scotland) Bill Committee and thank him for his evidence to the Procedures Committee. Again, the Procedures Committee has emphasised the need for flexibility by proposing that the rules be changed to make it clear that there will normally be no debate at stages 1 and 3, rather than having an absolute prohibition on such debates. Flexibility also informed the committee's approach to the rule that the Subordinate Legislation Committee must report on statutory instruments within 20 days of their being laid. The Subordinate Legislation Committee said that it needed greater flexibility, not least because of its significant workload. The Procedures Committee's recommendation is to substitute a deadline of no later than 22 days for the previous deadline of 20 days. That sensible change will accommodate the Subordinate Legislation Committee's needs and the demands on the parliamentary schedule. I hope that Parliament will agree that the Procedures Committee has taken a sensible approach and has ensured that, for each of the parliamentary procedures that we have considered, our recommended changes will be improvements and will offer a flexible approach that will allow the procedures to work in the most expeditious way in the specific circumstances with which they deal. I commend enthusiastically to Parliament each and every one of the reports.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to ensure that a skilled workforce is available to the oil and gas industry. (S2O-11544)

Does the minister agree that addressing skills shortages in the oil and gas sector—an issue identified both by operators and by offshore contractors—is crucial to the sector's future growth? I am sure that he will agree that his announcement that Labour is committed to an oil and gas skills academy in Aberdeen is an important boost to the industry. Does the minister further agree that the academy will benefit the industry, in contrast to what would happen under the economic instability that would be caused by the separation plans of the SNP? Those plans would threaten the industry's success in Scotland.

The annual debate that we have ahead of the fisheries council is becoming as traditional as the festive season. The same issues are debated in Parliament every year, but that is not because of a lack of engagement by the Parliament and the Executive on this vital matter for Scotland—we know how important the industry is. The tragedies that have occurred this year, which members have mentioned, remind us of the sacrifices that are made for the industry. The debate occurs because the goal of a successful and sustainable fishing industry is difficult to achieve. Those who think that there are easy answers are kidding themselves and the industry. This year, as in previous years, the negotiations will be challenging, but they are vital for the north-east of Scotland, not just in relation to the economic viability of the industry, but because of the social impact in the area. For example, nine of the 10 most deprived areas in Aberdeenshire are dependent on fisheries. That is why, when discussing the negotiations, we must consider the Executive's work in the area as a whole. Anybody who questions what the Executive has done to support the industry and the areas that are dependent on it should think about initiatives such as the building Buchan programme.

They would of course be much worse off. The member made that point eloquently in his speech and it is difficult for me to follow that. The point is well made. [ Interruption. ] I see that the member has riled the Opposition. Other initiatives, such as support for the Peterhead Port Authority and the harbour slipway improvements at Macduff, are supported through the financial instrument for fisheries guidance. It is right to invest so that Scotland's fishing industry can grow and have a better future to look forward to. That is why, along with others, I made representations to ministers that it is crucial that the fishing courses at Banff and Buchan College continue. Otherwise, vital skills will be lost to the industry locally, which would seriously threaten its long-term future. I was pleased to hear that, along with extra support from the fishing industry and Aberdeenshire Council, the Scottish Funding Council has intervened to ensure that the courses continue. We must now do all that we can to ensure greater take-up of the courses.

I was referring to the great benefits that have come through the financial instrument for fisheries guidance. I would have thought that the member would welcome them, and the many Executive-led initiatives that have benefited the area. The outcome of the negotiations is important to the future of the industry. During the negotiations, it must be acknowledged that Scotland has already made a huge contribution to reduction of effort. Priority should be given to ensuring that other member states are contributing at the same level. I note from the briefing by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds that it is concerned that, despite Scotland's good efforts, there remains fleet overcapacity elsewhere. That issue must be addressed. There is a hugely difficult balance to strike in the negotiations. There is the advice from some, which is genuinely given, that we must heed the scientific advice much more, but it must be recognised that that would have great consequences for the industry—in my view, too great. Others argue that the advice should be ignored, which is simply irresponsible. I support the balance that the minister has sought to achieve in his approach to the negotiations, which is aimed at ensuring that the industry can be sustainable and that when, as we hope, stocks increase the industry can grow from its current position. In some areas of the industry, there are already tentative signs of improved profitability. These are very challenging circumstances, but in just such a context in the past the minister has had a great deal of success in working towards achieving the ambition of a sustainable industry. I welcome the minister's determination in this year's negotiations to argue against some of the proposals on restriction of effort and for increases in TAC for some important fisheries. The minister was right to point out the efforts that we have made to minimise illegal landings. The fact that his position in the talks is clearly evidence based should put us in a strong position and must be acknowledged by the Commission. We have again heard opposition to the very concept of the CFP. The amendments do not call directly for withdrawal, but they are certainly critical of the concept, as if leaving the CFP would be a panacea for the industry. Such calls in the  chamber are simply political opportunism. It is ridiculous to pretend that we could rip up the CFP and renegotiate agreements, and that, as a result, there would be more fish in the sea and we would be able to ignore scientific advice. Such a step would threaten to destroy the industry rather than enable it to build towards a more successful future. Pulling out of the CFP is impossible without withdrawal from the European Union, which would have a devastating impact on our economy—where would that leave the policy of Scotland in Europe? Furthermore, doing so would not benefit the industry. We do not accept that an unreformed CFP is the way forward, either. Reform of the CFP is the only way forward, and the Executive is leading the way on that. Further progress on developing regional advisory councils, which the Executive has promoted enthusiastically, is vital, as they are an important step towards local management of fisheries, further involving those in the industry and their communities in important decisions. That is the right course to take. I am confident that in the short term the minister is taking the right course in negotiations. He has had important successes in the process before, and I hope that he has further success this year, so that we can look forward to a long, profitable and sustainable future for our fishing industry.

The minister will be aware of the great reduction in waiting times at Aberdeen royal infirmary for treatment of conditions such as psoriasis, thanks to the appointment of new staff in dermatology. Can he assure me that the Executive will continue to improve services for patients with psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis by appointing staff such as specialist nurses and by increasing training for general practitioners and nursing staff in handling such conditions?

Anyone who has seen the film "Independence Day" knows what nationalism will mean for Scotland. On a more consensual note, I congratulate Dennis Canavan on successfully promoting his bill in Parliament. It is certainly an achievement for a member's bill to clear all the parliamentary hurdles. I also congratulate him on rightly promoting the work of the pupils of Torry academy and sporting their heather. It is good for the Parliament to have reached a consensus on this matter, because, despite Alex Neil's flights of fancy and the SNP's wearying fascination with separation, we know that members from all parties want more promotion of St Andrew's day as a national celebration. Of course, Mr Canavan's bill has taken a circuitous route. It will not, of itself, create a bank holiday, but the member has taken the somewhat unusual but nevertheless constructive step of introducing a bill that acts as a starting point for the further work that will be required to fulfil its intentions. The bill benefited from further consideration, and its progress has raised important questions, not just about how committees should consider member's bills, but about how early and how deeply the Executive should be involved in any debate on such bills. The Parliament and the Executive can reflect on such points. The fact is that the stance that the Executive has taken has enabled people within and outwith the Parliament to reach a consensus on the bill. Once the bill is agreed, however, we face more important questions. How will we take its aims forward and what kind of event will St Andrew's day be in Scotland? I would not support the bill if I felt that it would lead to a narrow, nationalist celebration. However, I am confident that it will  lead to much more than that and might, in particular, boost Scottish tourism. The tourism hot topic in the north-east is whether the plans for a spectacular golf course and Trump boulevard will become a reality at Balmedie. However, with a holiday and celebrations on St Andrew's day, we could benefit economically not only from people in Scotland celebrating the day, but from encouraging visitors to Scotland at this time of year. We should aspire to make St Andrew's day the kind of international event that St Patrick's day has become. I hope that, once the bill has been passed, the Executive will not only take further steps to promote the celebration of St Andrew's day, but will encourage people throughout Scotland to take the day as a holiday and will participate in the celebrations by taking a lead in organising celebrations and encouraging local people and organisations to organise their own events. We should think carefully about what we want St Andrew's day to mean. For example, in the stage 1 debate, members asked whether, in our multifaith society, a Christian saint should be the focus of a national day and whether St Columba has a better claim on the title of national saint. Although we can reflect on those questions, I should point out that we share St Andrew as a patron saint with other countries in the world. The First Minister has stressed that he regards St Andrew's day as an opportunity for Scotland to celebrate its cultural diversity and membership of the international community. Indeed, for many years, the Scottish Trades Union Congress has used St Andrew's day to celebrate antiracism and internationalism. Dennis Canavan cannot be any more right when he says that we should work towards such a celebration of our national day once the bill is passed. Our national celebration should befit a modern Scotland. It should not simply reflect on our past, but celebrate the country that we are and our aspirations. It should celebrate the fact that Scotland is home to many cultures and people from a variety of ethnic backgrounds. If, once the bill is passed, we can move towards such a celebration, our national day will be embraced by all the people of Scotland.

While recognising the research links between Dounreay and the University of Aberdeen, does the Deputy First Minister agree that, although the Executive is right to focus on ensuring that all Scottish institutions benefit from the initiative, basing the institute in Aberdeen would benefit Scotland as a whole? Does he agree with the Confederation of British Industry Scotland and the United Kingdom Offshore Operators Association that, as Europe's energy capital, Aberdeen is the natural place to situate the new institute?

That approach was agreed by my party and Mike Rumbles's party; it is in the partnership agreement.

Will the member take an intervention?

What is wrong with sticking with the status quo when it delivers a strong Scotland that has consistent economic growth, provides jobs and has record investment in public services?

While the Scottish National Party tries to ensure that the Parliament endlessly debates its powers, Labour is using them to grow our economy and to deliver prosperity for our nation. The SNP wants to debate fiscal autonomy not because it would be best for Scotland's economy but because of the SNP's desire for independence. That was made clear in Jim Mather's response to Brian Monteith. This is not a new discussion but the same old debate. The SNP supposedly wants an open and objective debate, but it has afforded just over an hour's debating time to the issue. It is no wonder that it does not want to subject its fiscal autonomy plans to any real scrutiny because, for SNP members, the debate is not about what works. They do not want an objective debate; they have already made up their minds on fiscal autonomy because they want independence. Although we welcome the debate, those are the real terms of the debate for the SNP.

The people have made that choice in every Scottish election. The choice will be put before the Scottish people again at next year's elections. We will willingly take the debate to the Scottish people and look forward to doing so. Every time that the SNP's independence plans are put to a real test, the Scottish people reject them. Those who want a genuine debate on fiscal autonomy must realise what the SNP seeks from the debate. I find it extraordinary that the Liberals want a whole new constitutional convention after just two sessions of the Parliament. I believe that people would prefer us to focus our energies on using the substantial powers of devolution.

My view is that it is too early to convene another convention after just two sessions of the first Parliament that we have had in 300 years. No one should be distracted from the fact that devolution means that we already have autonomy over our budget and economic strategy. I reject  the viewpoint that, without fiscal autonomy, we are somehow unaccountable for what we spend. Ministers are accountable every week in this Parliament for the budget that they spend. We know that we need to get our budget right because not to do so would have serious implications for crucial areas of public spending. We already have the power to implement our own economic strategy for Scotland. To reject the nationalists' plans, sketchy though they are, is not to ignore the issues, which is what the Tories claim while they try to obfuscate the fact that they disagree with their think-tank's report. The case that we make is that it would be ludicrous to change the constitution for the sake of change when the current system is working for Scotland. While other countries across Europe and throughout the world have slipped in and out of recession, we have enjoyed 20 quarters of consistent growth, record levels of employment and an employment rate that is above the UK rate. Scottish gross domestic product is on course for further growth. Why should we put such progress at risk? A protracted debate on fiscal autonomy might be of interest to some economists and political commentators, but what really matters for the people of Scotland is what this Parliament does to benefit them and their families. Those economists who argue for fiscal autonomy because they hope that it will deliver a right-wing, low-tax, low-spend Scottish economy will be sadly let down by the SNP. Despite the best efforts of Jim Mather and Fergus Ewing, the SNP still promotes costly policies such as scrapping all graduate debt, which would cost many more millions than the SNP has budgeted for. Given such policies, the SNP cannot be trusted with devolution, let alone extra powers. What matters to the people of Scotland is not the constitution but jobs, homes and investment in their communities and public services. Working in partnership with Westminster and as part of the strong UK economy that Gordon Brown has created, we have had record levels of jobs, record levels of investment in schools and hospitals and—a crucial issue for our economy—record spending on universities and colleges.

I would give way, but so little time has been allowed for the debate that I am unable to do so. That record has enabled us to have an effective policy of our own that is contributing to higher levels of economic growth. That is the "union dividend" of which the First Minister is right to speak. Why should we risk that for the sake of a change whose aim is not to improve devolution or  Scotland's economy but to meet the goals of a discredited and distasteful political ideology? In Labour, we prefer to act to bring greater prosperity to the people of Scotland. Why should we have a fake debate on fiscal autonomy when we can get on with the real job of growing the economy and improving people's lives? That is what Labour has done and will continue to do. I move amendment S2M-5055.3, to leave out from "recognises" to end and insert: "believes that the arguments for further fiscal autonomy are being used as a cover for the debate on independence; calls on those MSPs who support a separate Scotland to give an honest explanation of what a separate Scotland would mean for our economy, and further believes that we should continue to use the powers of the Scottish Parliament to deliver better health, education, lower crime and economic growth."

We need to think of the institute as an energy and environmental research institute. Some of the themes that Shiona Baird has been talking about will form part of the institute's work. Aberdeen is not just a leader in oil and gas; it is also a leader in the development of new forms of energy, including offshore wind and wave energy.

I thank colleagues from all parties who supported the motion. Their support shows the wide recognition of the importance for the north-east of the Chancellor of the Exchequer's announcement that the Government wishes to establish a United Kingdom-based world-leading energy and environmental research institute. That is a key decision, not only for the UK industry, but for Aberdeen and the north-east, because such an institute could help to ensure that Aberdeen, which is the centre of the energy industry in the UK, continues to be Europe's energy capital. In turn, Aberdeen, as a focus for the industry and its skills and expertise, will be essential to the new institute if it is to achieve its aims and be the success that we all want it to be. The intention is that the institute will work in partnership with and be jointly funded by business in order to place the UK at the cutting edge of energy science and engineering. The aim is to provide the UK with a pre-eminent world-class means of delivering energy technology research that will underpin eventual deployment and which will be driven by the critical need to develop long-term sustainable and secure energy solutions. Those are key strategic aims for the UK and our energy industry. Aberdeen already makes a major contribution to achieving those aims. The city is home to a remarkable cluster of about 900 energy-related businesses from across the spectrum of the industry, as well as being home to energy-related agencies, Government  bodies and research institutes. The major energy company headquarters that are located in Aberdeen are not just UK headquarters, but global ones. Companies also base their world engineering research centres in the city. No city in the world is better connected to the global energy industry than Aberdeen. It is therefore no surprise that the United Kingdom Offshore Operators Association and the Confederation of British Industry Scotland see Aberdeen as the logical location for the institute. Unions such as Amicus know that Aberdeen provides skilled workers for the energy industry throughout the world. Aberdeen is home to the Executive-funded intermediary technology institute for energy, which already manages research and development programmes from throughout the energy spectrum—from mature oil and gas, power networks and energy storage through to renewables and clean energy. The model of the ITI, which collaborates with partners from industry, academia and the financial sector, is clearly a good one on which to base the operation of the UK institute. Aberdeen is not just a world centre for the oil and gas industry, but is taking a lead in the developing renewables industry. The Aberdeen renewable energy group is an innovative public-private partnership that has been established to help identify and promote renewable energy opportunities for businesses in the city and its shire region. It has nearly 100 members across a range of sectors that are involved with renewable energy. Aberdeen already has a wealth of partnership working across the whole spectrum of the energy industry. The city has academic expertise in that area through our universities; commissioning research is a central part of the proposed institute. The Robert Gordon University's energy centre offers industry-leading MSc training programs in oil and gas engineering, and houses the centre for research in energy and the environment.

Brian Adam makes an excellent point that establishes that there are global connections that we have in academia and the industry, which come through to Aberdeen. We should not forget the University of Aberdeen—its rector, who is here, would not wish us to do so. The institute for energy technologies  at the university is one of the pre-eminent centres of its kind in Europe, with top-class researchers and links to, and funding from, industry. It is involved in a joint project with the UHI Millennium Institute to offer a range of courses that will be linked to the decommissioning of Dounreay. That is an important point, which was reflected in the debate last night that was led by Jamie Stone, which highlighted the research potential at Dounreay. Although I am emphasising the role that Aberdeen can play in the new institute, we are all conscious that throughout the rest of Scotland and, indeed, the United Kingdom, there are a number of centres of expertise in the energy industry. Aberdeen's institutions are collaborating with a number of key partners in the Scottish Executive's team, and are working on maximising the involvement of our centres of excellence, such as Heriot-Watt University and the University Of Strathclyde, in the new institute. The team is keen to work with other centres of excellence in the UK, such as Imperial College. It has never been envisaged that only Aberdeen would benefit. The new institute is bound to commission research and to draw on expertise throughout Scotland, and indeed throughout the UK and the world. That is the model on which the energy ITI that is already based in Aberdeen works. Of course, we hope that our own academic institutions will be key beneficiaries, but the principle has always been that the research will be commissioned from the institution that is best placed to carry it out, wherever that institution happens to be based. It is important to recognise that Aberdeen is absolutely crucial to Scotland's efforts to play a key role in the new institute and that when we are looking for a hub and centre for the institute, where the operation is and where the strategy is developed, Aberdeen is clearly the logical place. The Executive placed the energy ITI in Aberdeen because that is where the cluster for energy is. The same argument follows for the UK institute. As Europe's capital of energy, working with partners throughout the UK, as it already does, Aberdeen is ideally placed to make the Government's aspiration for the institute a reality. I hope that the minister can reassure us tonight that the Executive realises that. I know that the case is being made strongly by my colleagues Frank Doran and Anne Begg at Westminster, and by members from other parties, too. I hope that the minister will accept not just my view but the strongly held view of many members that the new institute should be based in Aberdeen. That is the best way of ensuring that the whole of Scotland, and all of those involved in the bid, will benefit from this exciting new initiative, which has the potential to ensure that not just Aberdeen but  Scotland and the UK will be world leaders in the energy industry for decades to come.

I congratulate Alex Johnstone on securing the debate. I am glad to hear that his sedentary position is down to a bad back, not to practising martial arts with Mr Davies. I am pleased that we are debating such an important subject and I am pleased that the motion received cross-party support. The motion is important because it highlights the need to take a range of measures to tackle the worrying culture of knife crime. As members will be aware, the problem is not confined to certain parts of Scotland. Historically, Glasgow has had particular problems with knife crime—no doubt Charlie Gordon will refer to that—but between January 2000 and June 2005,  Grampian police recorded 428 incidents when children aged between eight and 15 were charged with possession of an offensive weapon. That is a particularly worrying statistic, as it indicates that the problem sometimes involves surprisingly young people. Education on the dangers of possessing knives is clearly crucial—although that is not to say that the other efforts to reduce knife crime are not equally important. The Executive has taken a strong lead in ensuring that more severe penalties are in place for those who are convicted of carrying knives and in giving the police new resources and powers to help them identify people who carry knives. Stricter regulation of sales and measures to ban sales to under-16s have proved popular with people who have expressed concern about the issue to me. More than 400 people signed a petition, which I organised, calling for just such measures. It was handed to the minister last summer. Others have followed the Executive's lead. For example, retailers have chosen to withdraw certain knives from sale. That kind of action is important. The Government alone cannot end the knife culture: that requires action throughout Scottish society and, as Alex Johnstone said, education must be an essential part of that. Mark Davies's briefing to members yesterday about how he educates young people on knife crime, showing them the dangers of carrying a knife, was extremely informative and it showed just what a difference education can make. Mark has certainly found that it has made a real difference to many of the young people whom he has been educating. I hope that the Executive will build on its excellent work on this issue by encouraging more education campaigns to discourage young people from carrying knives, as well as by providing education beyond schools for the whole the community. I hope that schools and education authorities will recognise the great value of education programmes of the kind Mr Davies has pioneered and that they will pave the way for more such initiatives so that we finally achieve the reduction in knife crime that we all want.

I am pleased to close for Labour in a debate that has emphasised a desire across the Parliament for St Andrew's day to be a national day of celebration and a holiday. The fact that so many members signed up to Dennis Canavan's bill showed the great level of support across the chamber for the intentions of his bill, although, as we have heard, those intentions might not be as easy to achieve as we might initially have thought. Iain Smith is right to say that we have benefited from having taken the time to consider the issues around the bill and develop a partnership approach to taking it forward, although the SNP has demeaned that approach today. We come to mark St Andrew's day in a way that is fitting for a day of national celebration. That is why members on the Labour benches warmly welcomed the joint statement by the First Minister and Dennis Canavan. The statement was crucial in ensuring that the effect and intention of the bill will be widely understood. As Susan Deacon said, we must be clear about what the bills that we pass will achieve. Just as important, we must ensure that people outwith the Parliament are clear about the effect of those bills. I think that the experience of the process that the bill has gone through should be reflected on by the Executive and Parliament. The debate around the bill has been helpful in clarifying the fact that it will take more than a bill on its own to achieve the intentions of the bill. Stewart Maxwell was wrong in his criticism of the Executive's position. His strategy would fail to gain the broad support that is required for this measure. I say to him and Michael Matheson that no party or person in the chamber has a greater claim than any other party or person has to taking pride in St Andrew's day. Further, I disagree with Stewart Maxwell and Murdo Fraser's view that the extra time that we have had in which to debate this measure has not been useful. Whatever people feel about the quality of the report of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, the fact that there was further time to consider the issues has been helpful in that it enabled us to reach the point of agreement that we have reached and also to ensure that we are aware of what the bill does and what other measures will need to be taken to make it work. As the minister and Dennis Canavan said, by taking a lead in organising events of celebration and encouraging local people and organisations to organise their own events, the Executive will encourage people across Scotland to take St Andrew's day as a holiday and to take part in events to celebrate it. We should think carefully about what we want St Andrew's day to mean for us. Obviously, we hope  that there will be economic benefits. However, I agree with Shiona Baird that the issue is not only about economics. What is it, exactly, that we are celebrating? As Donald Gorrie and Kenny MacAskill suggested, some people will ask why we should have St Andrew and not, for example, St Columba as our national saint. As Duncan McNeil suggested, some will ask why, in a multicultural, multifaith country such as Scotland, we should celebrate a Christian saint at all. However, as Jamie Stone said, it is in the significance that St Andrew has to many that we may find the answer to those questions. St Andrew is not only our patron saint; he is the patron saint of Sicily, Greece, Russia, Romania and Malta. I was pleased to hear the First Minister emphasise the fact that he regards St Andrew's day as an opportunity for Scotland to celebrate its cultural diversity and membership of the international community. Dennis Canavan, too, endorsed those goals today. For many years, the Scottish Trades Union Congress has used St Andrew's day to celebrate anti-racism and internationalism. It is fitting for a modern Scotland to celebrate not simply by reflecting on our past but by cherishing the new and future Scotland and celebrating the people from a variety of cultures and ethnic backgrounds who have made their homes here. I hope that the Parliament will pass the bill and, with its help, I look forward to a national day of celebrations that will be embraced by all the people of Scotland.

I congratulate Mike Rumbles on securing the debate and all those who are involved in the save Aboyne maternity unit campaign. They have made a compelling case to Parliament and succeeded in bringing what is an important issue to public attention. Given that, I can understand why NHS Grampian's decision has been so disappointing for them. In the previous debate that we had on the issue, I made it clear that I did not criticise NHS Grampian for embarking on a process of consultation on and scrutiny of maternity services in the region. However, at the end of the process, aspects of the final decision cause me great concern. I am aware of the strength of feeling on the issue in other areas, for example in Fraserburgh, but I will focus on the decision about the unit in Aboyne, which raises particularly pressing concerns, including the issues of geography that Mike Rumbles mentioned. The points that he and Nanette Milne made on the geographical issues in west Aberdeenshire were particularly persuasive. Other questions arise. First, I must ask why NHS Grampian has decided that the unit should be shut when, three years ago, investment was provided for a major refurbishment. That is undoubtedly a bizarre approach to forward planning. The second issue is the current use of the unit. In the previous debate on the matter, it was pointed out that the number of births at the unit had increased. We know about the development that is taking place in the locality and that the population in all such areas is predicted to increase. I do not feel that those key questions have been answered adequately. Concerns have also been raised about the consultation process that NHS Grampian carried out, which led to the Scottish health council's recommendation for a new consultation process. I have written to NHS Grampian on several occasions and to the Minister for Health and Community Care to  highlight my concerns. It is vital that those matters are considered properly, as I am not persuaded that NHS Grampian has given them due consideration. I have visited the maternity unit at Aboyne and met the parents who are responsible for the impressive campaign and who have made a compelling case. It is an indication of their commitment that many of them have made the journey down today and will make the journey again next week to meet the minister. I empathise with those of them who had to leave the public gallery earlier—I have a nine-month-old daughter and I understand what it is like to try to entertain and quiet a child at such events. The campaigners are to be commended on their determination to come to events such as this one and to meet the minister next week. When I visited the unit, I could not have been more impressed with the facilities that are provided at Aboyne, the excellent environment in which mothers give birth and the staff's enthusiasm. Those are further reasons why the decision is bewildering and disappointing. It is now up to the Minister for Health and Community Care to scrutinise the health board's decision. Of course he will be aware of the strength of feeling on the issue, not only among those who are involved in the campaign, but among members from all parties. I ask him to take fully into account the points that I and others have made in making the case for the retention of the maternity unit at Aboyne, as I fear that that has not happened so far. The unit is cherished by those who use it and is an excellent facility—that cannot be ignored.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making on the development of a strategy, in partnership with Aberdeen City Council, to address congestion at the Haudagain roundabout. (S2O-10284)

Does the minister agree that an integrated approach is required in order to tackle congestion in Aberdeen, and that improvements are urgently required at the Haudagain roundabout? The roundabout is a key pinchpoint for congestion. Will the minister assure me that the plans for improvement that he has outlined will be put in place expeditiously?

As someone who was a student representative for a number of years—perhaps too many years—I have strong opinions on this issue, and I am proud to support an Executive that has taken a strong stance against top-up fees. That is why I am bewildered by some of the comment around this debate. The Student Fees (Specification) (Scotland) Order 2006 is a necessary response to the policy that was introduced in England. To call it a move towards top-up fees in Scotland is untrue and misleading. I would not support such a move and neither would my colleagues. Top-up fees in England are levied by individual institutions. The order will mean a fee change that will apply to every institution in Scotland. In itself, that is not new. Scottish ministers have set new fee levels like this before, but these will apply only to English students. No Scottish student is being asked to pay a penny more. That is not about penalising English students; it simply means that the cost to them of studying in Scotland will be broadly comparable with the cost of them studying at home. In some cases, studying in Scotland will be cheaper for them. Many students from England who have been welcomed here to study and who will continue to be welcome here to do so come because academically it is the right choice for them; it is not simply a financial decision. I am sure that we will hear evidence from the minister that suggests that we can be confident that if this measure were not taken, there would be an increase in applications from people in England that would threaten to squeeze Scottish students out of courses in Scotland. Even if that evidence can be contested, the idea that we should not act to safeguard access for Scottish students on the off-chance that everything will be okay once top-up fees come in down south is absurd. Not to act would be to neglect our duties as parliamentarians. Our top priority must be to ensure that Scottish students, particularly those  from poorer backgrounds, are given every chance to fulfil their potential in education, to get access to courses in our institutions and to benefit from the system of bursaries that I am proud that this Parliament introduced and increased. It is ridiculous to suggest that we should threaten to put more obstacles to education in their way because we want to give a financial incentive to students from other parts of the United Kingdom.

In some cases, it will be cheaper and I have made the point that the fees will be broadly comparable, so my straight answer is no. Unfortunately, the member finds himself in the same bizarre position as the Scottish National Party. So fond is it of portraying itself as Scotland's party that it finds itself in a ludicrous position on this issue because it is failing our students. To call this measure the thin end of the wedge or the start of top-up fees is not only to misrepresent the Executive's position but to ignore the record funding element that has been awarded to our further and higher education institutions by the Executive precisely so that they can compete with their counterparts in England without the need to introduce top-up fees. I argue that we should act today to ensure that as many of our students as possible can benefit from that investment in further and higher education. I understand where the National Union of Students Scotland is coming from. I know that it is opposed in principle to any kind of fee increase anywhere in any situation. However, when that would lead us into supporting actions that could damage the interests of Scottish students, particularly those of students from poorer backgrounds, its campaign is counterproductive. When I was president of NUS Scotland, I led the Scottish students' campaign for bursaries, so today I will vote for a measure that will ensure that as many of our students as possible receive them. In that role, I regarded it as my job to stand up for Scotland's students, to oppose top-up fees and to campaign for bursaries. As a member of the Scottish Parliament, I know that it is my job to stand up for Scotland's students, to oppose top-up fees and to vote for access to bursaries. That is why I support the order. Colleagues across the Parliament should do the same.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it ensures that local authorities implement plans to provide affordable housing. (S2O-10190)

Does the minister share my concern that, in Aberdeen, developers are being allowed to buy themselves out of their commitment to provide affordable housing on new developments through commuted payments that might never be used to provide affordable homes? Does he agree that there are no barriers to ensuring that such developments include affordable housing now? Does he share my concern that Aberdeen City Council's administration should put into action its stated intention to provide more affordable homes?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made on the Aberdeen beach recharge scheme. (S2O-10113)

I welcome the investment in preserving the future of Aberdeen's beach following a campaign by Lewis Macdonald, who is the local MSP. Will the minister assure me not only that the Executive is ready to make speedy progress on the scheme but that dialogue is taking place with Aberdeen City Council to ensure that it makes timeous progress on putting in place the right consultation and planning processes to allow the scheme to proceed quickly?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to reduce the misuse of knives. (S2O-9930)

Given that between June 2000 and June 2005 more than 400 eight to 15-year-olds in Grampian were charged with possession of an offensive weapon, will the minister reassure me that Grampian police will receive an adequate number of metal detectors to screen for knives? Although today's measures are very welcome, will she assure me that education measures and a licensing scheme are being given careful consideration, so that we may address the dangerous culture of carrying knives and other  offensive weapons?

The bill is a major and highly technical one. The Enterprise and Culture Committee was even more grateful than usual for the presence of an adviser to provide us with the necessary context and information on some of the more complex and detailed points of the bill. As we have heard, the bill is driven by important fundamental principles, which are to modernise our bankruptcy and diligence laws; to strike a better balance between the rights of creditors and debtors; and, as with other legislation from the Parliament, to uphold the can pay, should pay principle, while helping those who, for whatever reason, genuinely struggle to meet the financial demands of their debts. That issue particularly exercised the committee. The committee could not go into the background of the growing culture of debt, which several members have, understandably, mentioned; instead, we focused our report on the extensive provisions in the bill. However, all the committee members were conscious of the importance of a wider approach—not only legislation, but education, advice and support—to encourage people not to get into debt and to help themselves out of it. Of course, the Executive works continually on those issues. The fact that the number of bankruptcies is increasing and that the law has already been changed in England puts us in a situation that demands that our laws be modernised. Another reason why the Executive has introduced the bill is to encourage a more entrepreneurial culture in  Scotland. However, as has been said, the committee received conflicting views on that and believes that the bill will be most effective in that regard in creating a uniform law throughout the United Kingdom. A level playing field makes sense for the business community. However, the bill was never just about the climate for business; it also seeks to modernise enforcement procedures. Therefore, we have the proposals to change the titles of messengers-at-arms and sheriff officers and to establish a Scottish civil enforcement commission. Despite the general climate of considering which quangos we can bonfire, the committee nevertheless thinks that that is the best approach, with the caveat that the Executive should respond fully to the issues that the Finance Committee rightly raised about the costs of the new commission. The key issue for the committee was the way in which the bill will affect individuals who are in the predicament of bankruptcy or who face bankruptcy. That perspective led to important conclusions in our report. We received strong representations from organisations such as Citizens Advice Scotland on issues such as land attachment; bank arrestment; no income, no assets clients; and the debt arrangement scheme. A particular controversy has arisen over the proposals for land attachment. As several members have said, that is the major issue of contention, which is why the committee asked the Executive to consider amending the bill to exclude debtors' main dwelling from the scope of land attachment, with the possibility of an appeal to the sheriff. Earlier, the minister gave assurances about the safeguards that are already in the bill. Further information on those safeguards would be useful, so that we can be confident that the balance is right. It is crucial that that balance is achieved in the bill, however that is done. The committee was exercised by a concern that forced sales of homes might lead to homelessness. We do not see that as sensible in any circumstance and we seek further reassurances from the Executive on the impact of the proposals and their relationship with our general approach in homelessness and housing legislation. Another key aspect of the bill from the point of view of the debtor is the relationship with the debt arrangement and attachment scheme, which was established in the previous session of Parliament. The Executive wants to ensure that the scheme makes an important contribution to enabling people to deal with their debts. During the committee's evidence taking, a great deal was said about the changes that are required for the scheme to become a realistic option for debtors to use. If we are to have more advisers to manage schemes, they should receive the appropriate training. That is needed if debt arrangement is to  prove a real alternative to the measures that the Executive is proposing in the bill. Other members raised important issues such as the proposed reform of protected trust deeds and the impact that that could have on credit unions. Like other members, I urge the Executive to look into the issue carefully and to engage in further dialogue on it. The committee raised a number of areas to which we want the Executive to give further thought so that it can return with amended proposals at stage 2. I stress that the bill was given a general welcome not only by the committee but by the organisations from which we took evidence. The proposals are widely seen as positive. I welcome the committee's endorsement of the general principles of the bill and I commend the report to the Executive and the Parliament.

With the greatest respect to Phil Gallie, only a Conservative could think that the economy was stronger in 1997 than it is now. He should ask the people who are in work today who were not in work then and they will tell him that the economy is stronger today. To come back to the issue of a national consensus, there is no doubt that the committee's report has stimulated debate not just in the chamber but outside Parliament too. Although there might not be agreement on all the report's recommendations and conclusions, the debate is productive as it is focusing minds on the key issues for the encouragement of business growth in Scotland. If there is no national consensus on our every point, there is a great deal of agreement that our economic strategy should prioritise key areas such as encouraging investment in R and D, improving the labour market and targeting key markets in which Scotland can take a lead. No one can accuse our committee of not having been ambitious with the report's scope. It discusses the broad spectrum of issues that affect business growth in Scotland and considers a long-term agenda. By engaging in that exercise, we set ourselves a tall order and we were bound to provoke debate. However, it is vital for the committee to engage in this sort of inquiry if we are to have the kind of economic strategy that Scotland needs. Members have clearly taken different views of the economic context of the report, current trends and the Executive's strategy. I am not prepared to share in gloomy economic prophecies or a refusal to acknowledge the current strength of our economy, with our economic growth now matching that of the rest of the UK and forecasts for stronger growth ahead in challenging global economic conditions.

Respected institutions such as the Fraser of Allander institute are forecasting that our economic growth will become even stronger. The Labour Party was responsible for wages coming up in Scotland through UK initiatives such as the national minimum wage. I am not saying that there is any reason for complacency on our economic strategy. The Executive's response to the committee's report shows the breadth of its activity in the key areas  that we identified. I note that the Scottish Trades Union Congress was disappointed in that response; that disappointment seems to be based on its desire for further consultation on economic policies with stakeholders. I hope that the Executive can respond to that. There is much to be welcomed in the Executive's response. There is fundamental agreement that encouraging business growth is not just about more Government spending but about encouraging greater private investment to expand businesses. The committee identified that as crucial and the Executive response states that it is expected that investment in the Scottish seed fund and the venture fund will lever in £500 million of private sector funding over a 10-year lifespan. The ITIs will have a vital role in encouraging more research and development and linking that to successful business creation and growth. We can see the impact that that is having in areas such as the life sciences, with the ITI in Dundee and Wyeth's new investment in our universities. It is right that the Executive should monitor the success of our efforts in the three areas in which the ITIs currently work before identifying other areas in which Scotland could engage in similar activity. While the Wyeth investment is great news, it is clear that we have much more to do to encourage further private sector investment in the areas in which Scotland already has an academic lead and to encourage commercialisation by building on that knowledge base. Whatever else we debate in relation to business growth, it is clear that Scotland can flourish only as a knowledge economy. That is why investing in research and development and ensuring that we have a skilled labour market are crucial. While we welcome the fact that the work of the business gateway has been guaranteed despite Scottish Enterprise's current budget difficulties, similar action is required to guarantee protection for important local skills programmes. Scotland cannot compete with low-skill, low-wage economies, and with the rapidly developing economies, particularly in Asia, that are expanding their higher education base; we need to work harder to stay ahead of the game in skills and research—in which the report identifies Scotland as performing well—and in developing leadership skills. As Susan Deacon rightly said, we are talking about investing in people. In that, as in many areas, the key message of the report is that much is working well in our economic strategy, but there is no room for complacency. We must never stop considering what obstacles to business growth can be removed and what more can be done to support businesses in Scotland and to encourage the entrepreneurial spirit that we need when people  start their own businesses or have the skills and innovation to turn small businesses into medium-sized businesses and grow them from there. In gathering evidence for our report, the committee heard excellent examples of where that is happening in Scotland. More must be done to ensure that other Scottish businesses can learn from those experiences. Support must be there so that that can happen more often. The Executive has an economic strategy for Scotland; it is working, but it is always right to review and refresh it, as happened earlier in this parliamentary session. As a contribution to the debate on that process, the committee's report is to be commended to Parliament.

What impact does Jim Mather think that introducing a third-party right of appeal would have on business growth and economic growth?

I am pleased that we have the opportunity to hear the case for the development of Aberdeen crossrail. I thank my colleagues from across the north-east and across the parties represented in the chamber who have supported my motion, which urges the Executive to build on its support for the feasibility studies of the project by committing to its construction. I am aware that there has been long-standing support from many people in the north-east, as well as in the chamber, for the development of Aberdeen crossrail. The proposal is being actively promoted by the north-east Scotland transport partnership. It is not surprising that it has such widespread support, given the clear benefits that the scheme would bring to our region. If our part of Scotland is to have the kind of integrated transport network that we want to see throughout the country, Aberdeen crossrail must be an essential part of that. Aberdeen crossrail is a project that is designed to upgrade, improve and extend rail links between Aberdeen and communities both north and south of the city. It is an innovative and ambitious part of the strategy to provide more public transport options for commuters and to cut congestion in the centre of Aberdeen. It is widely agreed that there must be concerted efforts to address that issue. An incremental approach to delivering crossrail is proposed. First, services from the south, which currently terminate at Dyce, would be extended to terminate at Inverurie. In the medium term, a half-hourly cross-Aberdeen service would be achieved,  with more services to Inverness, too. There would also be a new station in Kintore. In the longer term, a new, dedicated local service with trains every 15 minutes between Inverurie, Aberdeen and Stonehaven would be introduced. That would enable further new stations to be opened in the city and in Aberdeenshire. The 2003 Scottish strategic rail study even looks to the possibility in the long term of expanding the crossrail network to other destinations to the north and west. The timescales for completion of the stages range from the end of next year to beyond 2012, for the full scheme. However, I hope that we can have a more ambitious timescale for implementation. There is no doubt that action is needed if we are to tackle the problem of congestion in Aberdeen in the years to come. Even with the construction of the western peripheral route, traffic forecasts suggest that car usage is set to increase, which will impact on congestion. Measures such as improved rail services in the area are crucial. We have sustainable transport schemes to encourage car sharing and cycling, but we need to give commuters more options—specifically, a rail service that complements the bus network. That works in other parts of the country, and I have no doubt that it will work well with Aberdeen crossrail. Improving passenger numbers could lower the costs of travelling by rail, which would significantly increase the use of public transport in the north-east. The crossrail project could involve park-and-ride facilities, bus stops and access for cyclists and walkers beside each station. We need to take that kind of approach if we are to have a multi-modal, sustainable and integrated transport policy that will tackle congestion. One might ask why I have raised the need to go ahead with the construction of crossrail before the feasibility studies have been completed. Although those studies are important, I believe that there is an overwhelming case for crossrail to go ahead, and the Executive is consulting right now on its national transport strategy. It is vital that we flag up the importance of this project at an early stage of that process. I will certainly be making a submission in support of the crossrail project, and I have today launched a petition that I hope will command a high level of support for the scheme. When I asked a question on crossrail recently, people queried whether the minister's response showed a weakening of the Executive's commitment to the scheme, as he said that crossrail would have to compete with other transport projects for priority in the transport strategy. That seemed a perfectly reasonable answer. As the Executive embarks on its consultation, it is up to us in the north-east to  make the case for Aberdeen crossrail. The strength of our argument is clear. In other parts of Scotland, the Executive is making the biggest investments in new rail services for decades. I know that from my own happy experience on the private bill committee that considered the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine Railway and Linked Improvements Bill. There are also the new stations in Edinburgh, the airport rail links and the Borders railway, to name just some of the projects. The Executive knows the value of investing in new rail services in other parts of Scotland. It is very clear that new rail projects are proving to be very successful, as can be seen with the new services in Edinburgh, where passenger numbers on the crossrail service have risen by up to 72 per cent on last year. The stations at Newcraighall, Brunstane and Edinburgh Park have taken hundreds of cars off the roads, with 42 per cent of people who use the trains saying that they used to drive to work. That indicates that the level of investment that would be required to construct Aberdeen crossrail would have an excellent return. I believe that Aberdeen crossrail will be hugely successful. Not only will it make a valuable contribution to the development of the transport infrastructure in our part of Scotland, but it will be crucial to our ensuring that we have an effective transport network in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire. That is vital to the people of the area and to our economy. For many people in the area, commuting by rail is too often an unrealistic option. I believe that if they had that option, people would welcome the service and make full use of it. That is why I believe that developing an improved rail service should be not only a local transport priority, but a priority for the Executive. I commend Aberdeen crossrail to the chamber and to the minister, and I hope that we can look forward to the Executive pledging to make it a key part of Scotland's national transport strategy.

Today's debate has been hampered by time constraints, not only because of the fire alarm but because the SNP allowed us only half a session to discuss such a huge issue. Some cynical people might think that the SNP were more interested in their press release than in genuine debate. I will not join Jim Mather's cross-party group on fiscal autonomy; as Karen Gillon rightly said, the debate should not continually be reduced to constitutional matters. Although there is undoubtedly genuine concern about the budget situation at Scottish Enterprise, some of the Opposition comments ring hollow; they come from the very people who went into the previous election demanding cuts in Scottish Enterprise's budget. Opposition members have described as indispensable key areas of the agency's work that they have rightly identified as crucial local projects. Those projects were, however, clearly dispensable to the Opposition parties at previous elections. Labour members regarded the projects as indispensable then and we regard them as indispensable now.

I am sorry, but I do not have time to take an intervention.  We are now entering a period when we can see how great an impact the Executive's economic strategy is having. Of course we want economic growth in Scotland to be stronger, but already our rate of growth has caught up with the rest of the UK and there is significant new business investment in Scotland. The huge new investment by Wyeth is exciting and I am pleased that the University of Dundee and the University of Aberdeen will play vital roles in that project. A number of indicators show that our economic strategy is working. Questions have been asked this morning about how Scottish Enterprise arrived at this situation. It is right that those questions are asked, but people in Scotland are not as interested in a fruitless hunt for a smoking gun as they are in knowing that Scottish Enterprise will continue to do its job and support key local projects in their area. I am sure that the minister is aware that reassurance must be provided. It is good that the business gateway is being protected, but along with other members I have received letters from individuals and organisations that are concerned about funding for vital skills programmes. I have received letters from companies in the oil and gas sector in Grampian that state that funding for their skillseekers and modern apprenticeship programmes "is being severely restricted with immediate effect". That follows similar contact about get ready for work programmes in the area. As Christine May and other members have said, it is crucial that urgent action is taken to ensure that the projects are protected and that they continue. They are a key priority for this Executive. Members have also referred to the restructuring of Scottish Enterprise. Much of the new strategic approach is welcome. I, for one, also welcome the fact that there is still a role for local enterprise companies. However, although the Deputy First Minister took action on the local enterprise companies, I question why there was a need for Scottish Enterprise to draw the work on all the key strategic areas to its headquarters. The energy team being moved from Grampian to HQ is a prime example; that team is being moved away from the majority of companies that it services. In a world of information and communication technology, it strikes me as bizarre to physically centralise operations in that way. The key issue is not only to agree a new budget for Scottish Enterprise but to ensure that, in the longer term, the new strategy evolves and works for Scotland's economy. The true story is that the Executive's overall economic strategy is working. Labour, at Westminster and at Holyrood, is delivering for Scotland's economy. We will  continue to ensure that Scotland's economic growth is even stronger in the years ahead.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many cases have been pursued in relation to the grooming offence established by the Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2005 and how many risk of sexual harm orders have been made. (S2O-9679)

Barnardo's have pointed out that the act accepts that the purchase of sex from under-18s who are involved in prostitution must be considered as abuse, but that 16 and 17-year-olds who are abused through prostitution can still be arrested for soliciting. As the forthcoming sentencing bill will change the laws on prostitution, will the Executive consider giving 16 and 17-year-olds in that situation the same legal protection as under-16s?

To ask the Scottish Executive what further progress it is making on the Aberdeen crossrail project. (S2O-9544)

Does the minister agree that the north-east would benefit hugely from the  successful completion of the crossrail project in terms of both economic impact and the development of an improved and sustainable transport infrastructure? Given the welcome new investment that is coming to Scotland's rail network, does the minister agree that a final decision backing the scheme with a clear timetable should be a priority in the Executive's national transport strategy?

We always want our economy to do better—Alasdair Morgan is right about that—but to say that the predictions are gloomy is to overegg the pudding somewhat.

Alasdair Morgan referred to R and D in business. He cannot, however, hide the fact that our economy is growing and that we are delivering on whatever calls he has made for investment in higher and further education and the key sectors that will create a knowledge economy. We are not just speaking about it; we are doing it. Today's debate comes at an opportune moment for those who are concerned that progress be made in the knowledge economy in Scotland that will guarantee our country future prosperity and high achievements. In the past few days, the Executive has taken key actions to ensure that we can compete in the global economy as a nation of excellence and skills. Indeed, this morning, the Deputy First Minister told the chamber about the record funding for our further and higher education sector, which will ensure that our academic institutions can continue to punch above their weight and lead the world in key areas of developmental research. The First Minister has also led the way by building the  global connections that will enable us to capitalise fully on our growing knowledge economy and by actively promoting the very best of what Scotland has to offer China and other rapidly growing economies. That work continues two great Scottish traditions: growing the economy through new ideas and embracing new countries and markets. The scale of the challenge presented by the new major economies, particularly those in Asia, is clear. However, it is not only undesirable but impossible for Scotland to compete as a low-skilled, low-wage economy, and the evidence suggests that we will have to work even harder to maintain our edge in academic expertise and to ensure that we can exploit new concepts and technologies ahead of a growing number of competitors. The Parliament has taken action to address the structure of and investment in our tertiary education sector. In the previous spending review, universities, colleges, students and trade unions called for increased investment in the sector and for greater co-operation and joint working between further and higher education institutions. In response, the Executive introduced legislation, which was passed last year, to merge the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council and the Scottish Further Education Funding Council. The single Scottish funding council is working towards better articulation and greater joint working between the two sectors, which will ensure that more people have more points of access into higher and further education. Moreover, our strategy for economic growth, which is increasingly based on high skills and expertise, will be designed not to exclude certain people, which might have happened in the past, but to include people from all backgrounds. Of course, this is not just a question of structures; resources, too, are crucial. I take the point that the funding council needs to scrutinise how resources are targeted across the sector, to ensure that not only urban colleges but rural colleges are represented. More needs to be done to ensure that those colleges receive the necessary resources to provide education in their areas. However, overall, there can be no doubt that the Executive has put its money where its mouth is. Indeed, I believe that we are already reaping the rewards of that investment. For example, the 22 per cent increase in further and higher education funding that was announced in the previous spending review represented a ground-breaking commitment to the sector. Of course, a significant amount of that money was directed at ensuring that academics in this country were not poached by institutions south of the border that were  benefiting from top-up fee income, and I urge Scottish institutions to allocate a fair proportion of that generous funding settlement to ensure that our university and college staff are paid fairly for their vital jobs. Colleges and universities in my region of north-east Scotland are confident about their future. For example, Aberdeen College and Robert Gordon University have recently announced very ambitious plans for their own development and, today, significant new funding has been announced for the University of Aberdeen and RGU. In contrast to the Executive's ability to find vital additional funds, Opposition parties have too often come up with bizarre spending plans that would do nothing to benefit our knowledge economy. In line with their previous commitments to scrap Scottish Enterprise or starve it of funding, they have criticised the agency again this morning. It is interesting to note that the very members who raised questions about the funding crisis in Scottish Enterprise would themselves formulate policies that would create such crises. However, whatever debates are going on about the future structure of Scottish Enterprise, it is clear that we are making significant investment in the new research and technologies that could be hugely important to our future economic success. That is particularly evident with the ITIs, whose key feature is the projects in which they choose to invest.

I do not think that such a target is unreasonable. In fact, I believe that we will accept the Scottish National Party's amendment, which calls for such measures, and I am sure that the Scottish Executive and Scottish Enterprise are continuing to work on how we measure such targets. It is not always easy to measure everything that we would like to measure, but that is not to say that we should not try to do so to the best of our ability. I am sure that the Executive and Scottish Enterprise are doing that. The ITIs are delivering exciting new projects with academic and business prospects that we can capitalise on. Given that ITI Energy is in Aberdeen and ITI Life Sciences is in Dundee, such initiatives are crucial in the north-east. Our economic future lies in flexible, highly skilled industries that will require a highly educated workforce. Scotland has the talent to meet the challenges of the global economy, and I know that  our world-class colleges and universities are ready to nurture that talent if we give them the support that they need. The Executive has shown its willingness to give that support. Its ambitious strategy to ensure that Scotland has a world-beating knowledge economy means that we can look forward to the significant challenges that the country faces, confident that Scotland and its people are well placed to succeed.

I challenge the member on that point. The Executive has reintroduced bursaries, particularly for students from poorer backgrounds, which has led to an increase in applications from and places for such students. This year, the Executive increased the bursary again.

I congratulate Stewart Stevenson on securing the debate. I apologise for having to leave early, but I want to take part in the debate because I agree with the sentiments of Stewart Stevenson's motion, particularly that we should congratulate the Banffshire Partnership and the Buchan Dial-a-Community Bus scheme. Their importance has been well highlighted. They are another example of innovative action being taken in Banff and Buchan to address the particular needs of rural communities. Access to transport is a key concern in rural communities and very important for people who have problems accessing public transport due to mobility problems or age. The Dial-a-Community Bus scheme tackles precisely those problems, which makes it invaluable. Such schemes show the real benefits that have already been reaped over the past years from the Executive's rural transport fund, which should be welcomed, although I acknowledge some of the wider funding issues that should be considered in future. I also highlight, as Shiona Baird did, the immense contribution that is made by all those who are involved in running the schemes—from the volunteers who started the Dial-a-Community  Bus scheme to those who make the scheme so successful today and contributed to Aberdeenshire Council's A2B dial-a-bus service winning the rural transport award at the Scottish transport awards last year. The value that local communities place in such services is evident from the great fundraising efforts that they make to support them. We should reciprocate and equal those efforts by providing support centrally. As I worked for Help the Aged, I am keenly aware that lack of access to transport is a significant cause of exclusion in rural communities, particularly for older people. The Executive is trying to address the issue through the rural transport fund. I argue that it is succeeding. We would all like to have more services in rural areas, but the concessionary travel scheme is a great boost for those who use existing services. I hope that we can investigate how to give further support to community bus services through that scheme, which has evolved into a nationwide scheme. I am sure that there is room for further evolution. Because dial-a-bus services are responsive, they are invaluable in addressing issues around people's ability to access the usual bus routes. I entirely agree that Transport Scotland should examine new ideas to increase access to public transport in rural areas, to ensure that current services are both well used and correctly directed, and to ensure that schemes such as the Dial-a-Community Bus scheme and the Banffshire Partnership continue to be supported. We should be thinking innovatively about these issues. I recently met representatives of the north-east Scotland transport partnership, which is gearing up for the new structure. I am very confident that NESTRANS is well placed to meet the challenge. The Dial-a-Community Bus scheme shows what can be achieved. It is a success that we should learn from and build on. I am sure that we all agree on those issues across the parties.

Although discussions on our legislative processes are not always great crowd-pullers, nothing can be more important than how we make law in this chamber and this afternoon's very constructive debate has highlighted many good ideas. This debate and, indeed, previous discussions, have been marked by a general recognition of key areas where we must improve our legislative process. Some contentious debates have highlighted the current pinchpoints. Although the process has been improved, we will no doubt have to make further improvements, which is why this debate is so useful. The Executive has worked hard on measures that have already improved the process, particularly with regard to pre-legislative scrutiny, which some members have referred to. Chris Ballance touched on how we consult wider Scotland, not just those whom other people have referred to as "the usual suspects". I have to say that I think those usual suspects feel that they suffer from consultation overload. We can address that problem by trying to reach beyond the usual consultees, to those who traditionally have not been consulted enough. John Swinney was right to say that committees could concentrate more on that. Our consultation on the Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Bill and on the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill, which involved communities throughout the country, showed that we can secure views from a far wider section of the population. Another area of progress with regard to pre-legislative scrutiny is the publication of draft bills. At first, people, particularly those outside the chamber, feared that by choosing to publish a draft bill the Executive would limit the frame of debate on proposed legislation. That has not happened. Indeed, it has improved legislation. For example, the draft Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Bill attracted a great deal of debate. That interest helped to inform the overall debate and, because ministers were prepared to listen to comments about the draft, it resulted in better  legislation. The Executive should expand and build on that practice. It has been suggested to the Procedures Committee that members who are not directly involved with bills should receive more information on their progress after stage 1. That would be useful, as indeed would some kind of ministerial or committee report after stage 2, to outline the progress of legislation and how it has changed. The debate has tended to centre on stage 3. When I first took part in a stage 3 debate, I was, like other members, hugely surprised by the brevity of the debates on crucial issues. I had assumed that, as it was the last chance to amend the bill, there would be adequate time to do so. The Procedures Committee has already proposed to give the Presiding Officers greater flexibility in, for example, allocating time for discussing amendments and stipulating an hour for the open debate. As members have said, this is not just a matter of the Parliament's procedures; it is a political issue about the allocation of chamber time. We need further progress in this area. I realise that, more often than not, a full day is allocated to stage 3 debates, but I hope that the Parliamentary Bureau and the parties will consider how further time can be allocated to ensure that vital debates at stage 3 are given the necessary time. On post-legislative scrutiny, I hope that committees can be afforded time to examine the impacts of legislation once it has been passed and that the Executive can report to them on such matters. We all know that committees are already under huge work and time pressure. Perhaps the Procedures Committee will examine this issue in its inquiry on the structure of the parliamentary week, which will, after all, impact on stage 3 debates. However, I take Carolyn Leckie's point that any extension of stage 3 need not go into our family-friendly hours, but could be carried over into the next day. The situation is evolving, and this kind of debate shows how well chamber time can be used. I hope that, as the legislative process evolves, we can have further such debates to give all members the opportunity to inform the process and reach the stage that we all want to get to.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is encouraging local authorities and police forces to make full use of their powers to address antisocial behaviour. (S2O-8472)

Does the minister agree that, as well as taking other measures, it is vital that councils make full use of their new powers to protect communities? I welcome the fact that Aberdeenshire Council has recently employed those powers to counter antisocial behaviour in Westhill, but it is surprising that that appears to be only the second time that the council has applied for an antisocial behaviour order in recent years. Will the minister reassure me that the Executive supports and encourages councils in using their new powers and that there are no political reasons for their not being employed?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will support Aberdeen airport in achieving the goals set out in its new 25-year master plan. (S2O-8374)

Does the minister agree that the Executive should actively support progressing the master plan for Aberdeen airport, as it is crucial to building on its success as Scotland's fastest-growing airport? In particular, will he tell me what the Executive can do to assist development of improved surface-transport links to the airport, as it is rightly doing in other parts of Scotland?

The key to recovery in our fishing industry that will allow it to have a sustainable and successful future will be a strategy that manages our fisheries effectively by protecting stocks while securing for the industry a more profitable future. Those goals must inform the quotas that are agreed under the CFP for the coming year. Each year we wish the minister well in his negotiations in Brussels, and each year it is clear that the negotiations will be challenging. Despite that, the minister has had substantial success in advancing the case for the Scottish industry and in securing important agreements for Scottish fishermen's benefit, such as last year's increase in the haddock quota. There is no doubt that this year's negotiations will take place against the backdrop of difficult scientific advice, but I am confident that the minister will secure the best possible outcome. That is, of course, vital for the north-east of Scotland not just from the point of view of the economic viability of the industry but because of its social impact. Nine of the 10 most deprived areas in Aberdeenshire are dependent on fisheries. Fish processors in the region and in Aberdeen city, which still face challenging market conditions, will also be looking keenly for ministers to achieve the right outcomes from the negotiations. The minister was right to highlight that the Executive will not put viability of stocks at risk or support reductions on healthy stocks that would threaten the industry's viability. It is important that we heed the scientific advice, but I am pleased that the minister has made it clear that any major reduction in the haddock quota as a result of the reassessment of the 1999 year class will be resisted, because that would not be justifiable in sustaining the industry. The SFF points out that five of the seven stocks that are central to the industry are currently assessed as being safe or healthy. We all want to see improvements in that, but quotas should reflect the condition of the stocks. It is also important to ensure that an adequate number of days at sea are allocated to fish quotas. It should be acknowledged in this year's negotiations that the Scottish fleet has already had to undergo substantial restriction of effort in the reduction of days at sea.

Ross Finnie's experience in leading for us in the negotiations is substantial and his track record is successful. I also know that the minister is in constant negotiation with organisations such as the Scottish Fishermen's Federation. I am sure that their points of view and opinions will be well represented by Mr Finnie in the negotiations and that they will be in close contact with Mr Finnie about the negotiations, which is right and welcome. In general, whatever the final agreement for next year's quotas, it must be acknowledged that Scotland has already made a huge contribution in reduction of effort with regard to vital stocks such as cod. Priority should be given to ensuring that other member states are contributing at the same level. I very much welcome the minister's strong words on that issue. As the Scottish Fishermen's Federation said in its briefing paper, after five difficult years, in recent months we have seen a degree of stability and cautious optimism in the industry. I hope that the minister is able to come back with agreements on quotas that will sustain that progress. It is also important to plan for the longer term, in which the Executive is leading the way. The sustainable framework for Scottish sea fisheries is being implemented in collaboration with the industry and maps out a successful and sustainable future for it. The Executive is continuing to press for reform of the CFP, which I believe is the right strategy. We have heard again calls for Scotland to pull out of the CFP, as if that were a panacea for the difficulties of the industry. Such calls are simply political opportunism; I do not feel that it serves the debate to return endlessly to such arguments. Of course we need reform of the CFP—the establishment of the regional advisory councils is a welcome development in creating the kind of localised management that we want. Given that they are just starting up, it is pre-emptive to be cynical about their progress.

I am happy to speak to those people about that. With the establishment of the regional advisory councils we see the beginning of the progress that we want. They have only had their first meetings. Mr Brocklebank wants them to fail, which is why he makes those points. It is ridiculous to pretend that we can rip up the CFP and renegotiate agreements and that, as a result, there will suddenly be more fish in the sea, so we will be able to completely ignore scientific advice. That is a recipe for destruction of the industry, not for its successful future. It is not simply that pulling out of the CFP is impossible without pulling out of the European Union; it would not benefit the industry to do so. Reform of the CFP is the only way forward and the Executive is leading the way on that. In the short term, we need a good deal for the industry in this year's negotiations. The minister has delivered that before and I know that he will do all that he can to deliver it again. I hope that his efforts are successful and that we can look forward to a profitable and sustainable future for our fishing industry.

What we have known as the Sewel convention has often been controversial and the use of Sewel motions has often been criticised and been the subject of much media coverage—although the press gallery is not exactly packed this afternoon. However, the Procedures Committee's inquiry into the issue has resulted in proposals that will undoubtedly improve the operation of the convention and it provides some helpful perspective on the debates about its operation thus far. Lord Sewel himself has said that the convention has been used more than had been envisaged. The fact is that, as Henry McLeish told the committee, no one could be sure exactly how the process would work once the Parliament was established. That is why it is right that we should introduce reforms to the convention to improve the way in which it works. However, I argue that the inquiry received evidence that the convention had worked well in the past and that the fact that it might have been used more often than had been envisaged had to be put into perspective. Dr Paul Cairney pointed out to us that, in many cases, Sewel motions had been used to deal with relatively minor issues. It is important to acknowledge that if Parliament agrees that it is desirable to have legislation that will apply UK-wide and be implemented UK-wide at the same time, with the right kind of scrutiny, application of the convention can be appropriate, even on what might be seen as an important issue—although, of course, the presumption should usually be for our own legislative process to be used. It is also important to note that, as other members have mentioned, the inquiry has established the principle that the use of the convention can in no way be interpreted as the Parliament handing powers on. In fact, the use of the convention establishes our right to legislate on an issue. In such cases, Westminster is given the right to legislate on an issue only once. The Scottish Parliament retains the power to make different laws on the same subject whenever it chooses. Some of the criticism of the convention has arisen from the way in which it has operated in the past. Although the committee heard that there have been improvements in its operation in recent years, there is no doubt that further development of the system will help to instil greater confidence in it. The committee agreed that it was vital for the  Executive to flag up to Parliament as soon as possible when it intends to use the convention. There have already been improvements in that regard. Anne McGuire gave useful and encouraging evidence about the early contact between the Executive and Westminster departments on planned legislation that could result in the convention being used. Recently, an inspired parliamentary question that was asked at the time of the Queen's speech indicated when the Executive intended to use the convention. We believe that that information should be put in a letter to all members. In addition, we want greater emphasis to be placed on the Executive memorandums, which should be formal parliamentary documents that are laid within two weeks of a bill's introduction. The key issue is that the Parliament is given adequate opportunity to consider and discuss a measure. That is why the committee recommends that when the convention is to be applied, that is flagged up as soon as possible to the relevant lead committee, which should publish its report five days before any debate on the motion. The inquiry frequently highlighted the need for adequate time both to debate such motions and for scrutiny in general, so the report contains recommendations that motions should be debated by the Parliament and that the Parliamentary Bureau should pay heed to the committee reports when deciding how much time to allocate to those debates. Finally, it is important to note that, through the changes that we recommend, we are seeking to embed some of what is now protocol in the Parliament's standing orders because, in future, more than protocol and convention might be required to ensure that the vital relationship between our two Parliaments can be managed effectively. It is important that this crucial legislative process is improved and that there is greater confidence in it. By implementing the committee's recommendations, I am confident that that will be achieved, and I commend them and the committee's report to Parliament.

I congratulate Mike Rumbles on securing the debate and I congratulate in particular all those who are involved in the save Aboyne maternity unit campaign on their success in bringing this important issue to public attention and to the Parliament. I apologise to Parliament for having to leave for a prior engagement before the minister responds to the debate. I will read his response with great interest and I am sure that he will consider carefully the points that have been raised. In no way do I criticise the national health service in Grampian for embarking on a process of consultation on and scrutiny of maternity services in the region. It is right to ensure that maternity services are structured in the best way to meet patients' needs. I look forward to discussing the issues with some of the people who are involved in the community health partnership when I meet them to follow up a letter that I wrote to NHS Grampian and to the Minister for Health and Community Care to highlight concerns that my constituents have expressed to me about some of the proposals for reorganising maternity services, particularly in Aboyne and Fraserburgh. I also look  forward to meeting representatives of the save Aboyne maternity unit campaign tomorrow. I have yet to have those meetings, but I am aware of the strength of the campaign's arguments, to which Mike Rumbles and others have referred. I will dwell on a couple of those arguments. First, it is bizarre to implement what is termed the most radical option—closure of the unit—only two years after a major refurbishment. That is not sensible planning. The second issue is current use of the unit. As the motion says, the number of mothers who gave birth at the unit increased from 34 in 2003 to 60 in 2004 and the number of bookings has increased by 71 per cent. That should be compelling evidence for the health board and should dispel the idea, to which others have referred, that a facility that is located in a rural area will not be well used and will not experience an increase in use. Tonight's debate reminds me of the discussion about closing rural schools, when councils say that schools should close because their rolls are likely to fall, despite the fact that rolls are increasing. Agencies such as health boards must consider the fact that many people are moving from urban to rural areas. Some trends suggest that demand for such rural facilities will increase, rather than subside. The figures suggest that that is the case with the Aboyne maternity unit. I have no doubt that we will raise the issues again with the health board when we meet it next week. I look forward to the other meetings that I will have on the issue and I hope that the minister will do all that he can to ensure that NHS Grampian gives thorough and serious consideration to the points that have been made by those who have argued strongly the case for retaining the maternity unit in Aboyne.

It is a mark of the Executive's commitment to creating better access to improved dental services that the minister has brought the issue back to the chamber in a year in which we have had a number of debates on dentistry and the announcement of the Executive's £295 million dental action plan, which represents an historic level of funding. I have regularly taken part in these debates with other colleagues from the north-east and the issue is undoubtedly one of concern throughout Scotland.

That is a sweeping and inaccurate generalisation. Mr Lochhead should listen to my speech and be informed for once. I will not take any lectures from him on media strategy. Grampian has one of the lowest rates of dentists per head of population, as Mike Rumbles has said. The time that is spent on NHS dental work is below the average and a number of dental practices have recently gone private. The situation has been vividly portrayed in television pictures of queues of patients snaking round dental practices as they wait to reregister on private dental payment schemes. As a result, many of us have called for local action to improve access to dental services. It is important to highlight that there has been a significant response to that call. Plans are now in place to build a dental outreach training centre in Aberdeen that will recruit dentists to our area and treat patients. Salaried dentists are already being appointed by NHS Grampian to provide NHS treatment and there has been immediate local investment through the dental action plan. We also called for national action, which there has been. Not only has there been the action plan but, before it, increased grants for dental practices were made available. Since then, bursaries for students have been introduced to encourage them to practise in the NHS and the number of people applying to study dentistry has increased. In that context, it is bewildering to see dentists still opting to end the provision of NHS treatment. We hope that today's announcements are the beginning of the end of that. We must recognise in the debate that many dentists are committed to the NHS and provide excellent treatment through the NHS—I have always been keen to highlight that—but more people in the profession must play a greater role in improving access to NHS services and ending the pictures of patients queuing at  practices. It is extremely disappointing that dentists have continued to go private. Only two months ago, in Woodside, in Aberdeen, a long queue of patients waited outside a practice to sign up to a private plan. Many of them, including elderly patients who had been with the practice for decades, started to queue from 7 o'clock in the morning. Before I am criticised for attacking the behaviour of practices, I say that I know that other dentists—whatever their views of the general situation in the past—do not approve of patients being forced to queue in such a way. That is shameful behaviour by those practices. I spoke to people in the queue at Woodside about the situation and was confronted by a dentist who was not from that practice. He told me that he was there as a friendly colleague to assist the dentist. In fact, he was a director of a firm called Isoplan who has actively encouraged practices to leave the NHS. He has advised dentists who do so to send out letters telling patients that their children will be deregistered if they do not sign up to the payment plan and that the dentists are leaving because of the erosion of funding for NHS dentistry. That is a deceit because, leaving aside all the other grants that are available, fees that were set by an independent panel have risen year on year. It is no wonder that when I held a public meeting in Aberdeen on the issue in the summer, people questioned the commitment of some dentists and their professional bodies to NHS provision, especially when we hear that so much of the funding for the action plan will go to high street dentists. I hope that we can turn things round. I agree with the professional bodies that the type of work that dentists can do in the NHS, the length of time that they have to do it and the bureaucracy that they have to deal with should be reviewed. However, although dental treatment for children is a priority, many people will find it bewildering that dentists are arguing for more NHS funds for practices that do not have adult NHS patients. NHS funds should be invested in practices providing NHS treatment. We have called for action from the Executive and we have got it. Dentists have asked for more funding and are being offered it. Now we need the profession to engage seriously in constructive negotiations with the Executive and to show that it, too, wants there to be improved access to NHS services. We want to work with the profession; let the profession show that it wants to work with us. The top priority for dentistry in Scotland must be to address the great need that patients have for improved dental health.

On the tone of the negotiations, does Shona Robison share my concern that Robert Donald, who is negotiating with the Executive on behalf of the BDA, is also the chairman of a company called Independent Care Plans UK Ltd and actively promotes private plans around Scotland?

As well as ensuring that Executive guidance is properly followed, will the minister ensure that there is a careful reconsideration of the advice to councils by the Accounts Commission to review the future of schools that are operating at under 60 per cent capacity? Schools are now used in a variety of ways. That can affect capacity, as can a number of other issues. As a result, the advice is now out of date.

Will the member give way?

The member rightly mentions fuel prices but, at the recent SNP conference, Richard Lochhead called for eco and carbon taxes to be put on the agenda. Surely that would have an impact on taxes for companies and, potentially, on fuel prices, too.

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Executive is responding to the latest developments in respect of avian flu. (S2F-1879)

Does the Deputy First Minister agree that we must have not only the right supplies of drugs but the right delivery mechanisms to deal with any possible pandemic? Does he agree that the public should be reassured that our investment in and reforms of the national health service mean that we are better able to deal with such an emergency?

The SNP has lost this morning's debate on the economy, just as it loses every debate that we have on the economy. It has lost the debate on the motion because my colleagues have successfully shown that, when it comes to promoting economic growth and rising living standards and addressing demographic trends, it is the Executive rather than the SNP that has the right strategy. We are building on eight years of economic success, record employment and consistent growth, thanks to our being part of a strong UK economy under the stewardship of Gordon Brown.

Scotland has had consistent growth at a time when other parts of Europe have gone in and out of recession. That consistent growth has been a great reward for Scotland. It is the SNP's lack of a coherent strategy that is based on growing the economy, rather than the frailty of its arguments on the economy, that has been the overriding factor in the failure of the people of Scotland to trust the nationalists with their prosperity. The emphasis of Kenny MacAskill's speech was rather different, but Charlie Gordon was right to say that, instead of being perceived as being obsessed with the constitution, the SNP should aim to deliver on the economy. Alas, that was a forlorn hope, given that the SNP motion again focuses on the powers of the Parliament. Alex Neil closed a debate on the economy that we had earlier in the year with the words, "freedom, freedom, freedom." That was rousing stuff, I am sure, but it is because the SNP tries to bend its economic strategy to the goal of what it mistakenly calls freedom that it ends up with no real strategy at all. We initiated and refreshed the smart, successful Scotland strategy with the goal of economic development in mind; that is why it is working for Scotland. What the SNP proffers as its strategy is hopelessly confused. I do not doubt for a second that Jim Mather wants Scotland to perform effectively in the global marketplace, but the concept of economic patriotism that his deputy leader came out with implies that we could have a new policy of protectionism, when that would cut us off from the rest of the global marketplace. We cannot adopt such a policy under devolution and we could not do so under independence; to pretend that we could is to deceive the Scottish  Power workers. Other Scottish companies that are succeeding abroad would find it a costly policy.

I am sorry, but I cannot. We now know the SNP's policy on oil as the oil overdraft. The nationalists revel in high prices one day, as they say that they would mean that an independent Scotland would be economically viable after all, but the next day they say that high prices are bad for Scottish business. That is a policy of confusion and hypocrisy. The SNP's favourite game is to pick a single aspect of an independent small nation's economy and to hold it up as a beacon, but that approach is flawed, too. We have heard a huge amount about Norway and its oil fund from Mr Maxwell and others, but The Economist —which I am sure that Mr Mather must read—writes: "many of Norway's 3.4m-odd voters do not share the view that they live in nirvana. With all that oil wealth, they cannot understand why the welfare system has so many defects. There is a shortage of kindergartens, hospitals are understaffed, taxes are high, petrol costs as much as in non-oil countries and pensioners have problems making ends meet." It is no wonder that the Labour Party won the election in Norway, that Scotland beat Norway 2-1 in the football or that, with such an obviously flawed economic policy, the SNP performed so pitifully in the election that Charlie Gordon—who gave an excellent maiden speech earlier this morning—won for Labour in Cathcart. The SNP has lost the argument on the economy this morning, just as it lost that argument in Cathcart. It is clear that, when it presents its woeful excuse for an economic strategy to the rest of the people of Scotland in 2007, it will be roundly rejected again.

I congratulate Brian Adam on securing the debate. I support his motion, which expresses grave concern about the Met Office proposal to close its Aberdeen office. I met staff at that office soon after the proposals were announced. I visited the office along with Aberdeen's two Labour MPs, Frank Doran and Anne Begg. The staff made a compelling case to us. Members have heard some of those arguments from Brian Adam. The Aberdeen office is already a centre of excellence in the Met Office. The fact that the shipping forecast service has improved since it moved to Aberdeen shows how well it is working and the expertise that has been built up among the staff in Aberdeen. The commercial case for retaining the centre is also compelling, because it provides invaluable services for the offshore industry. There is no doubt that many contracts are with the Met Office because it has an office in Aberdeen. The business case for retaining that office is clear. This is not only about the commercial case, though. The Aberdeen office plays a crucial part in the Met Office's role of providing public service forecasting. Aberdeen produces forecast services to provide security for the public, business, infrastructure and emergency services in Scotland. It also provides weather warnings and services to local authorities and others. It is vital that that  information benefits from the local expertise in Aberdeen. That expertise will be lost—if not immediately, then certainly in the long run—if operations are centralised in Exeter. Local geographical knowledge, for example, can be crucial in determining a forecast's accuracy. If the only office that provides civil forecasting services in Scotland closed, that would have a worrying impact on the crucial services that it currently provides to the whole of Scotland. It is also crucial that we do not just seek to criticise and attack proposals during this process. We must not only publicise our opposition to the proposal to close the Aberdeen office but engage in the consultation process constructively. The trade union Prospect is doing that and making a strong case to the Met Office management. I am sure that it will make progress through that. We can also be confident that Don Touhig, the Westminster minister responsible for the Met Office, understands the strong case for the Aberdeen office. His decision to reopen the consultation process shows that he wants to take a fresh look at the whole process. It is vital that we work with our Westminster colleagues on the issue, because that is where the final decisions will be taken. Frank Doran has had a number of meetings with Don Touhig, the most recent of which was only last week. I believe that we should be optimistic that the minister will make the right decision. I am pleased that the Deputy First Minister responded to my previous questions on the issue by stating his determination that a clear message would go from the Executive to Westminster that we want the Aberdeen office to remain open. I hope that we will hear that message again during the debate. The message is coming out loud and clear from the Parliament. The staff at the Aberdeen office do a fantastic job. The only right decision is one that ensures that they carry on providing such a vital service for Scotland.

The Scottish arts have had so many successes since devolution—I do not recognise Brian Monteith's distortion of the past six years—that they are almost too many to mention. Of course we all want more. That is why I believe that the starting point for debate for both the Parliament and the Cultural Commission is how to ensure that all Scots have opportunities to engage in cultural and artistic activities. There is no point in having new structures to govern the delivery of the arts, new schemes to promote them or new entitlements to enjoy them without providing people with more access to the arts. In my view, that access needs to be spread more evenly throughout society and the country. There is no reason why access should come at the expense of excellence. Although the question to be asked of the Cultural Commission's proposals is how they will increase access to the arts, increasing access is not just about providing more opportunities for people to take part in the arts but about creating a cultural change in Scotland. Parts of Scottish society still view certain types of artistic endeavour as being not for them, but simply an indulgence for others in our community. Hence, it is no surprise that, when arts funding is being debated, some people argue that funding our national arts companies is not the best use of resources because they benefit only a small section of Scottish society. Those arguments can be challenged if we work harder to create better access for everyone to the whole spectrum of the arts. I am interested in the commission's concept of cultural rights, but I am more interested in how we make those rights relevant. The commission has made some proposals that will help to inform how we go on to do that. A report of this length is problematic when it comes to encouraging more people to be involved in this important debate. Like other members, I think that it places too much emphasis on structures—not just at national level, but at other levels. I would have liked to have seen an even greater focus on delivery. I do not intend to focus on structures, other than to agree with what others have said. Given the views that were expressed in the cultural conference, to which Chris Ballance referred, there is clearly no consensus in Scotland's artistic community in support of the report's preferred option. However, there is a consensus that, following the publication of the report, it is time for us to take action to address the issues with which it deals. That action will be informed by some constructive proposals in the report. The report makes many recommendations, but in the time that is available to me I would like to  mention just a couple. Today we have heard much about the success of the role of culture co-ordinators. I hope that the idea can reach beyond schools and more widely into communities, to encourage more people to be involved in cultural and artistic activities. I am pleased to hear that the minister will meet COSLA to discuss that. I hope that progress will be made in that area. The report also calls for best-value reviews for national companies. A key standard by which we should measure the companies' success is that they are truly national. By that I do not mean just they should perform throughout Scotland, rather than in Edinburgh and Glasgow, although that is a key issue, but also that they should be encouraged to engage in even more outreach work, building on the success of their existing education work, to which Linda Fabiani rightly referred. Some of those principles can also be applied to the national collections. The report discusses another key issue in creating greater access to the arts—how we can encourage greater parity in local authority arts spending. Almost all speakers have mentioned that, and I agree with everything that has been said about it. The minister referred to it, and we are all aware that progress needs to be made on it. That challenge raises the general issue of investment. Some of the numbers in the report seemed to me to be rather arbitrary, but that does not mean that we should not consider carefully issues of central funding, as well as how we can encourage more private investment in and sponsorship of the arts—an issue to which Jamie Stone referred. I concede the difficulties in setting up a culture fund in exactly the way in which the report recommends. Michael Matheson was right to point out some of those difficulties. However, some of the functions that were proposed for the fund are genuinely good ideas for helping arts organisations to access wider sources of funding, and hopefully they can be taken on board. They should certainly be incorporated in any action plan. Action is a theme that runs throughout the report. It may not have provided us with the final blueprint for the future of the arts in Scotland, but it contains many suggestions that should inform such a blueprint. As the minister reflects on how to take forward proposals, she will undoubtedly be assisted by the work of the commission. I urge her again to put the general theme of access to the arts at the forefront of her thoughts as she considers the way forward. We have had the time for contemplation. Now is the time for actions that will ensure that we have a thriving artistic culture that all Scots can take part in, benefit from and enjoy.

To ask the First Minister what steps can be taken to ensure that there are restrictions on the sale of air-guns. (S2F-1816)

Does the First Minister agree that, although there have been successful campaigns to encourage people to hand in air-guns to the police, those campaigns are not enough on their own to ensure that communities across Scotland are free from the intimidation and danger that are caused by those who misuse air-guns? Further, does he agree that restrictions on the sale of air-guns are now required, including the introduction of a licensing scheme and the raising of the legal age for their purchase?

Does the First Minister agree that thorough and adequate negotiations with trade unions are essential to securing single status agreements? Will he urge councils to act in such a way, unlike the Lib Dem-Tory administration in Aberdeen, whose actions have greatly distressed the workforce?

Is the minister aware that NHS Grampian has the highest number of patients in Scotland who must wait for more than two months for breast cancer treatment? What action is the Executive taking to ensure that NHS Grampian addresses that situation effectively?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in improving the international competitiveness of Scottish aquaculture. (S2O-6996)

How will the Scottish Executive ensure that the anti-dumping measures that have been proposed to create a fairer market in fish farming will provide not only a level playing field for indigenous Scottish companies, which is vital, but a context in which multinational companies that are located in Scotland can continue to thrive?

rose—

Again, it is not a case of targeting young people—the boy racers are over 35.

Does the member accept that the order was made to deal not with traffic offences, but with boy racers gathering in the community and creating nuisance while they were gathered?

It is a pleasure for me to open for Labour in the debate. As the motion recognises, the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, which was spearheaded by Labour ministers, is already having an impact in tackling the blight of antisocial behaviour and will have an even greater impact in the future. Tackling the problem of antisocial behaviour has been at the heart of Labour's agenda, as our party is tired of the communities that we represent having their quality of life destroyed by the selfish, antisocial behaviour of a few. We are determined to stand up for the vast majority of people who want to live in safety and peace. That is why, at the last election, Scottish Labour stood on a platform of tackling antisocial behaviour, which was endorsed by the people of Scotland; it is why Labour put that issue at the heart of the partnership agreement; and it is why we should congratulate the Scottish Executive—especially the ministers who ensured that the act was passed—on introducing legislation that is already making a difference. As someone who represents the north-east, I am keenly aware of people who have had their quality of life improved as a result of the act. I am sure that we will hear from other members how the application of antisocial behaviour orders is making a difference throughout the country, from tackling vandalism to allowing vulnerable older people to live in their homes free from the blight of noisy neighbours. In the north-east, especially, the new law is bringing about change for the better. Local agencies are putting the powers in the act to good use, and others around the country should follow their example. I welcome the fact that the number of antisocial behaviour orders that have been granted by the local authority in Aberdeen is among the highest in Scotland—not because the problems that we have in Aberdeen are different from those in any other community in Scotland, but because the council has a long-standing track record of success in implementing ASBOs.

I have addressed that issue. As I said, the problems that we face are no different from those that are faced in other parts of Scotland, and the council has been right to issue those ASBOs. I have met people who have benefited as a result of that; that is evidence of success, not failure. The council's ability to use the new powers successfully has been enhanced by Executive  funding for local authorities to make the new legislation work. Over the next two years, Aberdeen City Council will receive more than £3.5 million, and communities are already benefiting as a result of that. I have met those who have benefited. It is not only the local authority that is using its new powers; Grampian police have been leading Scotland in tackling antisocial behaviour through the new law. In particular, the residents of Beach Boulevard in Aberdeen—who, for years, have had to put up with noise and nuisance from boy racers who have gathered in their community—have benefited from the new law by the police putting in place a dispersal zone there. That shows that Labour is leading the way in tackling such issues not only nationally, but at local level. It was after local Labour representatives Lewis Macdonald MSP, Frank Doran MP and Councillor Jim Hunter, working together, met the community and the police that the dispersal zone was established. There have been well-publicised disagreements between me and Mike Rumbles over the issue, and I am aware that his opposition to dispersal zones is shared by some of his Liberal colleagues at Westminster. We have also heard doubts about the policy from Mike Pringle. However, the fact is that the measure that was taken at Beach Boulevard was exactly what the new legislation is for. I also say to Miss Goldie that there is no evidence of the problem moving elsewhere. It is clear that the measure has been a total success.

That is a paradoxical statement because the measure is working, as the statistics show. There has been a 53 per cent drop in the number of incidents of antisocial behaviour that are reported to the police in that area in the past three months, which has led the police to extend the duration of the dispersal zone for a further three months. The police think that it is working, and I think that we should take their advice on the issue. Crucially, local residents who, for far too long, have been disturbed by the activities of the boy racers have said that their community has been transformed for the better as a result. Those who criticise the actions that have been taken by Grampian police should speak to the local residents—who have benefited hugely from those actions—and change their minds. We have heard opposition to the powers from the Opposition parties, but they have clearly been proved wrong. I hope that more police forces in Scotland will follow the excellent example of Grampian police.  Addressing antisocial behaviour is not just about punitive measures; that is why the motion that I lodged earlier this year on antisocial behaviour highlighted the give the Broch a break initiative, of which Stewart Stevenson will be aware. That initiative, which was run by Grampian police, not only tackled vandalism and underage drinking, but organised events that were aimed at providing alternative activities for young people in particular. The new legislation is being backed up by the Executive with dedicated antisocial behaviour teams and community wardens working in our neighbourhoods alongside extra police officers. There is no excuse for the powers in the act not to be used effectively throughout Scotland to tackle a wide range of antisocial behaviour. Many people—from national groups such as the Scottish Retail Consortium to local communities who believe that the powers could make a difference to their lives—want the powers to be used more often, not less. The north-east is proof that, when the new legislation is used, it is effective in tackling antisocial behaviour and improving people's lives. That is why Labour led the Parliament in introducing the 2004 act and it is why we are championing it in our communities. In doing that, we can ensure that our communities are better places in which to live.

I congratulate Richard Lochhead on securing the debate. Obviously a cross-party element has already generated some movement on the matter. I want to focus on the two issues that have been causing parents concern: rural school provision in Aberdeenshire and services for children with special needs in the area. I, too, acknowledge that it is right for local authorities to review the way in which they provide education to ensure that maximum value for pupils is gained through local spending on education. However, we must remember that there are sustainable rural schools whose rolls are not falling, whose teachers are providing excellent education and whose pupils should not be disadvantaged because of an overall restructuring strategy. Those issues have exercised campaigns in Aberdeenshire such as that run by the successful Garioch schools action group, and the local authority must pay careful heed to them. I welcome today's news about that campaign and  hope that there will be further acknowledgement of some of the other campaigns. Of course, Aberdeenshire Council's proposals to close St Andrew's and Carronhill schools have caused parents great anxiety. Indeed, a petition against the closures has gained enormous support and has attracted 25,000 signatures, because parents have been unclear about the alternative provision that is being proposed for their children and are now concerned at what some of the alternatives might be. I very much welcome the fact that new proposals are being considered. Like other members, I have met parents, particularly those associated with St Andrew's School and the Raeden centre, who are worried about the proposals and I have written to Aberdeenshire Council to express my concerns about the plans. I am particularly concerned by remarks apparently made by some local councillors that the local authority has to pursue plans to close St Andrew's and Carronhill because of Executive guidelines. At a previous question time, the minister helpfully clarified for me that such a view is wrong. Rightly, these are local decisions that are based on local need. Not only are local authorities not forced to put children with special needs into mainstream education, but Executive guidelines state that there must be the facility to review the progress of children with special needs in mainstream education. If the system is not working for a child, the capacity must exist to put them back into a special school setting. I sincerely hope that in future such a misconception—indeed, misrepresentation—of the guidelines is not relayed to parents, who are now aware of what the guidelines in fact say. In his reply to my letter, the council's director of education makes it clear that the proposals, including the proposal for co-located units that are linked to schools, abide by Executive guidelines. However, parents are concerned that the proposal for co-location is not an adequate alternative to the mainstream provision that Executive guidelines refer to. There remains a need for further dialogue with parents. That dialogue will have to be more useful than the earlier dialogue and it should, as the motion suggests, recognise "the strength of the arguments put forward by parents". It should represent genuine consultation. This is not the first time in the chamber that I have discussed services for special needs children in the north-east. It is important that those services improve. There is concern over the proposals for the Raeden centre. Along with Lewis Macdonald and Anne Begg, I visited the Raeden centre to hear the concerns of staff and parents. Lewis Macdonald has put the issue on the agenda for the next meeting between Grampian NHS Board  and local MPs and MSPs. Again, the decision is a local one and I am bewildered that people are saying that the Executive is forcing the changes. It certainly is not. The Executive is determined to have excellent services for children with special needs and the Raeden centre has in the past been excellent at providing such services. Grampian NHS Board should bear that in mind when making any further decisions. When we next discuss these issues, I hope that the goal of providing improved services for children with special needs will have been achieved. That will mean that the local authorities and Grampian NHS Board will have to have listened to parents and responded to their concerns. The parents, after all, are the ones who are most keenly aware of and concerned about the needs of their children. I am sure that the local authorities and Grampian NHS Board want to provide excellent services in education and health. Through the right partnership working, they can achieve that.

The provision of a high standard of health care is important to everyone in Scotland but particularly to our older people. The starting point for this debate should be a commitment to an excellent and well-resourced health service that can deliver that quality of care. Labour's track record—not only in this Executive but at United Kingdom level—is of record funding for the health service and of a commitment to a strong and successful NHS. Of course it is important to highlight examples of age discrimination. Sadly, age discrimination exists in various parts of our society—for example, in employment. The Help the Aged Scotland briefing for this debate highlighted such discrimination; the point was brought home to me when I worked at the charity. Not only Government but society in general should do all that they can to root out age discrimination in all its forms. This morning we have heard of worrying cases. There have been reports of patients who are not receiving a satisfactory level of care and there have been allegations of age discrimination. Investigations have been launched into those allegations. That is right and proper. Age discrimination must be rooted out. Of course there is no policy to discriminate on the ground of age in our NHS. Debates such as this must take place in the right and responsible context.

I am sorry, but I have only four minutes. Older people are the most frequent users of NHS services. Day in and day out, hundreds of thousands of older people receive an excellent standard of care from our national health service. Although we have to highlight cases of bad care, it is not right to highlight only those cases, or to allow them to overshadow the very many excellent experiences that older people have of the NHS. I hear about the good experiences every day, and I am sure that others do too. It is unfortunate that those experiences are not talked about more often in this chamber and in the media. We have taken action to improve services for older people. We set up the care commission to ensure that we had national standards—the first  ever—for care for older people in Scotland; we introduced free personal and nursing care for older people; and, in planning for the future of the NHS, we ensured that older people were involved. I see from the Kerr report that Irene Sweeney of the Scottish Pensioners Forum was a member of the advisory group. It is important to acknowledge, as Help the Aged Scotland acknowledges, that NHS QIS took a strong stand when it said that it "does not, and would never, exercise age discrimination." I welcome that. Access to health care services should be based on clinical need and not on age. The problem with debates that are couched in terms such as those in the SNP's motion is the perceptions that they create. For example, older people often live in fear of crime because of the way in which the issue is covered in the media. However, they are less likely than other sections of society to be the victims of crime. There is a similar issue to do with perception in relation to the health service, and it is vital that older people have the confidence in the health service that they should have. When they go into hospital, not only should they expect to receive a high standard of care, but they should know that they are likely to receive that high standard thanks to the thousands of hard-working people in our health service. We should not be complacent; we should continually strive to have not a single incident of unsatisfactory care. However, by couching this debate in the terms used in its motion, the SNP is in danger of misrepresenting the NHS and lending ammunition to those who would break it up—namely the Tories. I firmly believe that the best way to fight discrimination against older people is to ensure that we maintain a national health service that is free for all, whatever their resources or needs. We will fight for and defend such a health service, because that is the way to ensure the best care for older people in Scotland, free from discrimination.

Tourism in Scotland is already a success story, but our aspiration in Parliament is that it should be more successful. The target of 50 per cent growth in the industry is ambitious, but with a 20 per cent  increase in the number of overseas visitors last year—greater than in the rest of the UK—and the £14 million extra that has been provided by the Executive to market Scotland abroad, we can afford to be optimistic. Jamie McGrigor does not seem to be keen to share in that optimism, but the rest of us are. To achieve the success that we want, those positive signs and the extra investment must be backed up by successful reform of the way we market Scotland and support our tourism businesses. It is four years since ministers took the first steps to begin the process of reform and the Enterprise and Culture Committee has monitored the process closely during that time. As with most change and reform in major organisations, lessons can be learned from how it has been carried out. However, the committee report rightly focuses on the questions that are of overarching importance: How will the new integrated network promote Scotland better abroad? How will it support tourism businesses better in every part of Scotland? How will it bring more people to Scotland to enjoy an excellent tourism experience that will bring them and others back? One concern that was expressed by the committee was about how moving to a national integrated network will help to deliver local tourism strategies, which was referred to by Jamie Stone. I am confident from what we have heard that the reforms will deliver for every part of Scotland. We heard about a gateway strategy to encourage tourism from the cities into other parts of Scotland; that has encouraged tourism outwith the cities, but a gateway strategy alone will not deliver the increase in tourism that we want in each part of Scotland. That is why it is so important that the new network will take into account regional needs, with specific service agreements with local authorities, and that VisitScotland hubs will be based throughout the country. They will deliver services that are tailored to local tourism businesses and will continue to work on regional strategies—the local tourism action plans. That kind of service is vital for the network to attract the buy-in and investment that it needs from councils and local businesses, whose support and funding are key to its success. As we have heard from the minister, that buy-in is taking place, and we can be confident that it will continue in the future. There is evidence that such an approach can work. One example is EventScotland, which has been successful throughout the country. For example, in my region the seniors golf tournament has come to Aberdeen. VisitScotland itself has now twice brought its own expo event to the city and Aberdeen has Scotland's fastest growing airport. People will have to be reassured that the new marketing strategy will incorporate more than just a few of our most famous landmarks, but the  building blocks are there for it to work for the whole country. VisitScotland is well placed to deliver on its national goals, some of which the previous Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee identified in its work on tourism over a number of years, for example to encourage high quality throughout the industry, to provide support for businesses to develop—including, as Chris Ballance said, developing staff skills in the sector—and to share best practice throughout the network, which we clearly could do much better. I have spoken to many people in the industry who welcome that approach and who believe that a new organisation will be easier for them to work with, that it will provide them with services and that it will cater more to their needs. As VisitScotland is already having notable success—for example, its website is doing well and the increase in tourist numbers suggests that it is making a contribution—it is well placed to provide the leadership and unity of purpose that will ensure that the tourism industry in Scotland reaches its full potential and plays its full part in delivering the objective that Labour members have for economic growth in Scotland. The Enterprise and Culture Committee will, rightly, monitor progress closely, but it is no surprise that other countries are now looking to how Scotland has reformed its tourism sector to see how they can improve theirs. I point out to Jamie McGrigor that one of those countries is Ireland, which is examining our reforms to see how it can improve tourism.

Sorry, but I am in my last minute. Ireland realises not only that we are having success now, but that we have put in place the right structures and strategy to achieve our goal of even more people coming to Scotland to enjoy excellent visits and all that our great country has to offer.

Does the minister agree that a key part of Executive guidance is the requirement to review the progress of children with special educational needs who enter a mainstream setting, so that if that does not work, they have the opportunity to return to a special school? Does he share my concern that Aberdeenshire Council should take that fully into account and should reconsider proposals that are, understandably, causing parents anxiety?

I congratulate Nanette Milne on securing the debate. Members in the north-east have received many representations on the issue, which is reflected in the cross-party concern that has been expressed during the debate. There is concern not only about the congestion on the A90 between Tipperty and Balmedie and the potential for further congestion with developments in Ellon, but about meeting the Executive's aspirations for safety on our roads—Nanette Milne was right to highlight that. Like other members, I have received communications from people who have been exasperated by lengthy journey times on the roads, and I wrote to the minister to highlight some of the concerns that have been expressed to me, and of which other members have spoken tonight. The minister's response pointed out that the Executive had previously advised NESTRANS that it would fund a multimodal assessment of the Balmedie to Tipperty section of the road, with £100,000 being invested in that. The study was to examine a range of options for improving the road. We have heard about the preferred options, which have been mentioned by people who have been in touch with us and by members. The latest NESTRANS progress summary states that an Executive response is still awaited to its submission on possible trunk road schemes, in which the A90 between Balmedie and Tipperty is discussed. It strikes me that the debate comes, therefore, at an opportune time, as the minister weighs up what action should be taken to address this important issue. The concerns that are being expressed tonight reflect the widespread desire for the Executive to make a timeous decision on how the situation can be resolved. The minister is well aware of the many demands for improved transport infrastructure in that part of the north-east, and it is right that members have reflected on the needs beyond Aberdeen, in the north and in Banff and Buchan. However, although there are other important issues around the need to improve the infrastructure, especially north of Aberdeen, the A90 between Balmedie and Tipperty needs to  be addressed and has been waiting to be addressed for quite some time. It is important to acknowledge the significant progress that has been made so far in developing transport in our part of Scotland, with the western peripheral route and the proposal for the crossrail scheme. I hope that we are making progress on that, too. I hope that the welcome commitment that the Executive has shown to improving transport in north-east Scotland indicates that it will take action to address the concerns that have been expressed about the A90 not only in this debate, but by many people over a considerable time. I look forward to hearing the minister's response.

It is a pleasure to close for the committee in what has been a largely consensual debate, even if it got a bit spikier towards the end. It has been good to hear thought-provoking contributions on what the committee recommended. The committee has focused on the process for dealing with infrastructure proposals. We want the process to be efficient so that proposals can proceed expeditiously with parliamentary involvement. The committee has said that the Parliament should consider not the nitty-gritty and issues that members do not have the time or expertise to consider in great detail but the overall outcome of the proposed projects. The process that we are recommending should not exist in isolation, away from Parliament's ability to consider the cross-cutting aspects of the transport agenda or the overall feasibility of projects.

Yes, but perhaps the points that we are making are not as much in conflict as Mark Ballard thinks. We need a private bill process for private initiatives. However, for projects with public backing, by the time the private bill committee is set up, the argument for the financial viability of the project should have been established. By maintaining parliamentary involvement at other stages of the process, we will ensure that Parliament not only has the final say but oversees constantly the viability of all the proposals. We have not suggested merely streamlining the current process. We want the current process to work more effectively but, having been a member of a private bill committee, I would not be satisfied with just streamlining what we have. It was clear to us all on the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine Railway and Linked Improvements Bill Committee—and indeed to members of other private bill committees—that fundamental reform is required.  The committee heard from a number of people who had concerns about the flaws and inadequacies in the current process and the burden that it places on the Parliament's resources, to which many members, including Tricia Marwick, referred. In gathering evidence, we realised that to justify that burden we would have to find the best possible system. As members have pointed out, it is clear that the current system is not the best possible system. The inadequacies of the current private bills process have been highlighted because of the strides that we are making, particularly in developing new transport schemes that require private bill committees to be established. The committee has identified changes that need to be made urgently, including having a clearer definition of what constitutes an interest that would preclude a member from sitting on a committee. That would be an important move towards ensuring that membership is not decided on a flimsy basis. We have also highlighted the need for flexibility in determining the number of members who sit on a committee, the notice that is required for environmental bodies—the committee agreed on that section of the report—and the need for improved rules for lodging late objections and handling a change of promoter. More flexibility will achieve extra clarity, so that the process can run more smoothly. Of course, the committee recognised that more fundamental reform of the system is required and that merely amending the current procedures will not be sufficient. It is right that we review the procedures. We considered what has been done in Westminster, which has amended its process through the Transport and Works Act 1992. However, in recommending the TWA-plus model—or whatever we might call it—we sought to retain greater parliamentary involvement, for the reasons that Mark Ballard highlighted. The fact that private bill committees have gone out to communities in which transport projects will be undertaken is good, but that does not represent better parliamentary scrutiny than the model that we are proposing, which would involve an independent reporter who would bring the expertise that is required, which Jamie McGrigor highlighted, and the potential for greater local consideration and further public inquiries, which Bruce McFee talked about. The committee heard the case for having more in-depth local consideration, which is why it made proposals to change the system substantially. We look forward to the Executive's response. Of course, we are not wedded to the proposals that we have made and have listened to the concerns that members have expressed about cross-cutting agendas and the need to consider  outcomes rather than the process, which is what we must consider first and foremost. Obviously, we hope that the Executive will take on board the points that have been made today when it comes up with its response. Whatever happens, the committee is of the clear opinion that the status quo is not an option and that the process that we have recommended can provide informed, thorough and local consideration, while maintaining a key role for Parliament in the decision-making process. I hope that that will enable the scrutiny and reflection on the overall transport agenda that other members have talked about this afternoon. I commend the motion to Parliament.

In north-east Scotland, access to dental services is an issue of key concern. There are real problems in registering with a dentist and particularly in accessing NHS dental treatment. Recently, there have been further instances of dentists making the regrettable decision to cease NHS treatment. The problem in the region is highlighted in the report that was commissioned by the committee, which shows not only that Grampian has the second-lowest number of dentists per head of population but that dentists in Grampian are below the average in terms of the percentage of time that they spend on NHS work. The concern that is felt in the region is perhaps evident in the fact that Grampian NHS Board had the highest response rate from dental practitioners to the questionnaire for the report, with 90 per cent responding. Too often in this debate, members have complained about the problems and bemoaned the situation rather than offering practical solutions. That is why the Executive's announcement last month was so important. The action plan is comprehensive and will make a real difference in improving access to dental services in Scotland; of course, it is backed by the investment of an additional £150 million over three years, which shows Labour's commitment to tackling the problem. This debate, which was brought forward by the Health Committee, and the report that the committee commissioned into access to dental services are invaluable. Not only do we have the opportunity to highlight the concerns, but the depth and quality of the research in the report should inform the Executive's decisions on how its action plan will ensure that the significant extra funding is spent effectively. The report is important because it offers clear data on how assessment can be made of where need is greatest and how the impact of investment in more services and staff can be most accurately assessed. That wealth of data must be used by the Executive to ensure that the right priorities are chosen for investment through the new action plan. The report highlights the fact that on measure after measure—I outlined only two—Grampian is assessed as having particular needs and particular problems with access to services. The report also emphasises the extra hurdles to access that can affect those who live in rural areas; again, that is an issue in the north-east. It would be churlish of me not to note that the Executive has already identified Grampian as an  area that requires special and immediate action to improve access to dentistry. When I met the minister in Aberdeen earlier this month as she visited the GDENS service, I was pleased that she announced that there will be an immediate award of £500,000 to the health board to improve dental services and that some £2 million will be awarded to the health board for that purpose over the next two years. Such action follows the appointment of salaried dentists by Grampian NHS Board. Further new appointments are planned and there is a comprehensive action plan to improve dental services, a key part of which is the establishment of a dental outreach training centre. The centre will treat thousands of patients, as well as helping to recruit dentists to work in the area. Grampian has been singled out as requiring investment and action to address problems with access. The report highlights why such action needs to be taken and why that focus will continue to be required. I welcome the report's acknowledgement that the determinants of oral health extend far beyond access to dental services, because that is a key point. Education and prevention are also vital issues. I am pleased that some of the extra funding is linked to requirements providing prevention. I was pleased that Rhona Brankin visited a toothbrushing scheme at a nursery in Aberdeen. Expanding that kind of provision and emphasising to the young that they need to look after their dental health are crucial in improving oral health and thus reducing the pressures on services and helping to improve access. Another issue that the report raises is how we encourage dentists to continue, or return to, NHS work. It is unfortunate that the report indicates a lack of willingness in parts of the profession—a minority, as the minister said—to engage in NHS provision. I hope that the minister's recent announcement of increased remuneration for dentists for NHS work will help to address the situation. The profession and its representative bodies must engage in constructive dialogue with the Executive to play their full role in improving access to NHS services. We have an opportunity through the action plan and the new investment to make real improvements to access. Using the data, the report gives us an even better opportunity to ensure that the investment and the action plan work and provide the kind of access to dental services that we all want.

The fact that the Tories cannot support the bill on the basis that has been outlined is regrettable and short-sighted of them. The reasons that they have given show that there has been a misconception. The bill is an important step forward for tertiary education in Scotland. It means that the new record levels of funding that the Executive is providing for our colleges and universities will be matched by a new structure and an ability to support institutions in establishing an ambitious strategy for higher and further education in Scotland. We have focused on the power of ministers to fix a different fee level after consultation with stakeholders, but it is important to consider the bill's overarching principle of having a joint funding council. There is great consensus on that principle that should not be ignored—indeed, ignoring it would be to let down the sector. The proposal to have a single funding council was first promoted by the National Union of Students Scotland in the early 1990s and it was first promoted in the Parliament by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee in its report on lifelong learning. There is wide support for such a measure across the spectrum of those who are involved in tertiary education. There was an effective consultation process for the bill. There was heated debate on the draft bill and ridiculous suggestions were made that we  wanted to merge colleges and universities. However, the important point is that ministers listened to concerns and made the appropriate changes, which led to the good bill that is now before us and the broad support that there has been for it. That is a tribute to the consultation process. The bill is important and will help to encourage greater articulation between further and higher education institutions. It will give students in Scotland more and different points of access to education and will help to encourage collaboration and the sharing of best practice between colleges and universities. As we have heard, it will encourage skills, progress on academic freedom and excellence in research. Through the measures that we have agreed today, it will secure access to tertiary education for Scottish students. The bill will ensure that the record levels of investment are used in the context of a clear strategy, which is vital to achieving our wider goal of creating prosperity in Scotland that is based on a knowledge economy. That goal is at the heart of Labour's ambitions in Scotland. We want continued high employment and prosperity in Scotland through partnership with Westminster—through successful management of the economy there and economic development here that is driven by a skilled workforce. With the record funding to our colleges and universities—£100 million extra over three years—we are putting investment behind our ambition. The bill will ensure that there is coherence and strategy so that universities and colleges play their full role in making Scotland a nation of prosperity and skills. The bill will ensure that Scotland retains its current vital status as a world leader in academic excellence. That is why I support the motion that the bill be passed.

What Frances Curran says is nonsense. I support inclusive policies and remain opposed to top-up fees. I speak in support of Mike Pringle's amendment 17 and against the amendments from Fiona Hyslop and Chris Ballance. The proposals to allow ministers to set a different fee for medicine are necessary to address issues of cross-border flow and ensure that students in Scotland are not disadvantaged their ability to study here. The proposals are also necessary to safeguard the recruitment of graduates of medicine to our NHS. Those are the goals, and it is important to state them, as there has been misinformation about them from the Opposition. Scottish students are not being asked to pay more to study under the proposed mechanism; its purpose is simply to make the cost of studying in Scotland to students from south of the border comparable to what they have been paying in England. It means that there will not be a financial incentive for English students to study here, which  could threaten the ability of Scottish students to take up places at universities here as well as their ability to access our system of bursaries, which was recently made more generous because of the Executive's policy on the inclusion of students from certain parts of the country. It would be unfair for those students not to have that opportunity for want of our asking English students to contribute here just as they would in England anyway. To have such a specific mechanism described as the introduction of top-up fees by the back door is nothing short of ludicrous, and it would be dishonest for any member to accuse members of the Executive parties of supporting top-up fees on that basis. That would be dishonest, and our constituents would know about that dishonesty. Top-up fees are a measure to allow universities, not central Government, to set fees. Indeed, the proposed power to enable ministers to set fees is nothing new in Scotland. Universities Scotland made it clear to the Enterprise and Culture Committee that its interpretation of the bill is that it does not permit the introduction of variable top-up fees in Scotland, but that it permits the reintroduction of banded, fixed-level fees, which were used only a few years ago.

That commitment was held to by the Labour Party in its manifesto, as Murdo Fraser can see. I understand why he wants to remove the debate from here to another place—it is because the Conservatives are losing the debate here on this issue. We have talked about other ways of addressing cross-border flow and recruitment in medicine. Of course, those could still be considered; however, the Executive's proposal is the only mechanism that we can be sure will be effective. Fiona Hyslop talked about Shona Robison's raft of proposals, but they equate to a series of unworkable ideas. Because of that, and because we are promoting a fair and practical procedure, I cannot support the amendments from Fiona Hyslop and Chris Ballance, which would remove this important option and not replace it with anything practical. There are real issues to address, as we have seen from recent statistics that show an increase in the number of applications from students from England. The outline of the procedure that is proposed by the Executive has been improved since it was considered by the committee, as other members have said. First, orders made under the power will be subject to the affirmative procedure; secondly,  there will be a requirement for consultation with student organisations. I am pleased that the NUS has been specified as one of those organisations. The bill does not exclude student organisations, unlike the Tories, who excluded the NUS—on the basis of a misconception of the organisation—from consultation on issues such as the Dearing and Garrick committees. That is important. I support amendment 17, in the name of Mike Pringle, which will secure an additional round of consultation on any order that is made under subsection (6) or (7) of section 8. Whether or not we call such a procedure super-affirmative, the fact is that the amendment will add another important round of consultation with the key stakeholders, ensure that those stakeholders are part of the process and help to allay their concerns. Amendment 17 is sensible, as it will ensure that the process of addressing cross-border flows involves consultation with all the key stakeholders before matters proceed. It will also ensure that as many Scottish students as possible continue to benefit from the excellent education and support that the Executive has secured for them.

At this time, it is inevitable that political debate is  focused on Scotland's future economic prosperity. Labour members welcome that debate, because we have succeeded in encouraging prosperity and creating record employment. Economic growth is the Executive's top priority because, although we have achieved a great deal, there is no room for complacency, as significant challenges lie ahead. As we have heard, there are many opinions—some more informed than others—on how continued economic growth can best be achieved, but we all agree that Scotland cannot prosper or compete if it has a narrow, low-skill economy. That is why it is right that the Executive's strategy for skills is based on creating an enterprising culture and a knowledge economy. The debate has rightly highlighted the success of the lifelong learning strategy, the skills fund, the investment in further and higher education and initiatives such as the modern apprenticeship scheme, all of which give people the skills that they need to succeed in the workplace. It is also right to consider other ways in which the Executive has sought to expand our skills base, such as the measures that it has taken to encourage skilled people from around the world to come to Scotland to live and work, which include the fresh talent initiative. As the Executive motion acknowledges, that work must be complemented by doing yet more to improve the range of skills that people who work here already possess. Although Des McNulty was right to point out that in Scotland overall there are relatively few skills shortages, in my region of the north-east there are specific skills gaps in the local workforce—for example, in construction and in the oil and gas sector. In those fields, there is a lack not of excellent employment opportunities, but of people with the skills to take them up. We must address that situation, not only because in doing so we will encourage better growth in those sectors, but because in failing to do so we would lose an opportunity for our economy and for the people who could be trained to do those jobs. We are well placed to succeed in taking on that challenge, given the Executive's record levels of investment in further and higher education and its lifelong learning strategy. We must remember that there has been a 23 per cent increase in investment. Addressing skills gaps should be a major part of the work of the new joint funding council for further and higher education. That is why I welcome the fact that the Executive has lodged amendments to the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Bill to ensure that the council will establish a skills committee. A range of agencies need to be involved in the task of ensuring that the right workforce skills are provided in every area of Scotland, but local colleges and universities are particularly well  placed to work with local employers to identify and address skills gaps. I have seen evidence of that in the north-east, where Banff and Buchan College and the University of Aberdeen developed a new course to train teachers in technology, after it was found that local schools were experiencing great difficulty in recruiting technology teachers. Investment in tertiary education is vital to ensuring that we have future economic growth that is based on a knowledge economy and a skilled workforce. As Christine May said, in the first evidence session of its inquiry into business growth, the Enterprise and Culture Committee had an excellent presentation from the economist Donald MacRae, in which he outlined some of the issues that we must tackle if we are to create stronger growth. He pointed out that, in an international context, Scotland is well ahead of the game in producing graduates and in investing in colleges and universities. He was right to suggest that we should have an even greater focus on earlier years education, as other members have indicated, but I counsel that there is no room for complacency about our levels of investment in tertiary education. In the future global economy in which we will compete, developing nations will have more and more graduates and ever-increasing levels of academic capital. We must respond to that prospect if we are to remain ahead of the game as a knowledge economy. We will certainly not develop skills or our economy by abandoning already successful schemes, as the Tories would do under their proposal to scrap the new deal. Only nationalists could truly believe that constitutional reform is the key to economic prosperity and distort their economic arguments to fit that overarching, misguided goal. Unlike the Tories, Labour invests in people rather than in unemployment. Our new commitment to create even more employment is a key part of our strategy for an economically successful Scotland. When we talk about increasing skills, that is not just about setting an economic target; it is about transforming people's lives. More than 30,000 people are being trained through the modern apprenticeship scheme. Those people are not just a statistic—each of them is being given new and better opportunities thanks to our focus on skills and jobs. The Executive has the right strategy to allow us to meet the challenge of giving even more people new skills and making Scotland an even more prosperous society in the years to come.

To ask the Scottish Executive how its oral health proposals will facilitate access to dental services in remote and rural areas. (S2O-5992)

The new strategy and investment are welcome, especially in rural areas of north-east Scotland, where there have been problems with access. What dialogue will the Executive engage in with the relevant professional bodies to ensure that they actively support initiatives such as the 50 per cent increase in the remote areas allowance and play a key role in encouraging dentists to provide services in rural areas, including NHS dentistry?

To ask the Scottish Executive how the additional funding announced for affordable housing will benefit rural areas. (S2O-5876)

We heard yesterday how the Chancellor of the Exchequer has helped first-time buyers. Will the minister ensure that all the measures that he announced this month will provide more affordable housing in rural areas as well as in urban ones? Will he also ensure that the welcome participation of north-east housing associations in some of the new schemes will alleviate the situation in Aberdeenshire, where the waiting list for council rented property has risen by 20 per cent?

I was going to start my speech by saying that I was sure that this would not be a contentious debate, but I had not reckoned on Alex Neil who could make a debate on motherhood and apple pie contentious. The Procedures Committee's report addresses many of the concerns that he holds and has expressed—rightly or wrongly. The proposals are to ensure that the commissioner can carry out her duties effectively by the introduction of standing orders that relate to those duties. We agree that it is vital that those important duties be carried out effectively because they are about ensuring confidence in our public appointments by monitoring appointments processes and establishing a code of practice for ministerial appointments. The report reflects effective joint working by the parliamentary authorities and committees, which is further reflected in the cross-party support that we have heard today for the proposals in the report. There is consensus that we want the right structures to be put in place to ensure that the public have full confidence in the proceedings of our Government and Parliament and, of course, to ensure transparency and fairness in the way that appointments are made to public bodies. In order to arrive at specific proposals for changes to standing orders, the committee heard extremely useful evidence from the commissioner on what procedures should be put in place; the report reflects that. The committee recommended that statutory consultations be laid before or otherwise provided to Parliament, and that statutory consultation documents be referred to a lead committee prior to  their consideration by Parliament as a whole. That reflects the importance of such documents. The committee also recommended that the remit of the Standards Committee be extended to include public appointments, and that reports on non-compliance with the code of practice be referred to the standards and public appointments committee, as it will be called. It recommended that when there is debate on non-compliance, that committee should prepare a report to inform a debate in the chamber. Perhaps the most significant change that the committee proposed was the additional role for the Standards Committee. The committee considered the possibility of a separate or subject committee to consider reports of non-compliance, but in the light of the expected workload and because reports will focus on processes, I agree that the most practical way forward is for the Standards Committee to be responsible for such matters. What is proposed in the report is not only an efficient procedure for ensuring that reports that are referred to Parliament by the commissioner can be considered thoroughly and expeditiously, but it will be of real assistance to the commissioner in ensuring that her work can be carried out effectively. That we have debated the report shows that it is important to instil confidence among the public about how people are appointed to public bodies and, more generally, the debate is part of the important job that we need to do to ensure that people have confidence and trust in people in public life and in the procedures of our Parliament and Executive. When one examines the legislation that we have passed, I for one believe that we have made great strides on such issues and I commend the report to Parliament as another part of meeting that important challenge.

The challenge of ensuring access to dental treatment for all has been a growing concern in the north-east, and particularly in Grampian, for many years. Indeed, my first members' business debate and my maiden speech—like Nanette Milne's—centred on the problems of accessing dental treatment, particularly NHS dentistry. There is no doubt that concerns can only have been heightened by the picture of the lengthy queues that formed at the dental practice in Oldmeldrum when two of the dentists at the practice decided not to continue NHS dentistry. As the motion and amendments point out, that is a problem not only for Grampian. However, there  are particular difficulties in our part of Scotland. Of course I want the Executive to take further action to resolve the situation and I look forward to seeing what happens in that respect. That said, the suggestions that have been made by some in the north-east that the Executive has not sufficiently acknowledged the issue are unfair and misleading, because serious action has been taken and substantial investment made. This debate would have been better informed not only if it had taken place after next week's ministerial statement but if more time had been spent on discussing the further measures that could be introduced instead of on bemoaning the situation.

It was quite right to bring forward constructive proposals for this debate, but we would have had a better debate in the full context of next week's ministerial statement. After all, in a half-morning debate each member has only four minutes to discuss this serious issue. As I have said, I simply believe that the right thing would have been to have the debate after the ministerial statement. We can debate this matter in a truly informed way only if we properly acknowledge the great efforts that have already been made to meet this challenge. Many of the measures that have been introduced, including the doubling of the remote areas allowance, the doubling of the allowance for trainees in designated areas and the doubling of grants for new and existing practices, have been aimed particularly at the situation in Grampian and show that substantial investment has been made. There have also been appointments of new NHS salaried dentists in NHS Grampian. Great efforts have also been made to recruit dentists from overseas to the area and Wendy McCombes and her team at the dental postgraduate school in Aberdeen deserve much credit for their success in attracting postgraduate students to train in the city. Such an important initiative encourages recruitment to the region. I should also mention that not only short-term but long-term strategies have been introduced in Grampian. For example, as Mike Rumbles has pointed out, the partnership agreement to establish a dental outreach training centre in Aberdeen is an important commitment to help recruitment in future. We need such an approach. I must say to our Conservative colleagues that we cannot underestimate how much their rush to encourage the use of private treatment has led to many of the current problems. Only now will more dentists be trained in Scotland since the closure of Edinburgh dental school in 1996.  It is tempting to consider extreme solutions to force a resolution to this problem, but the SNP's golden handcuffs policy for those trained in medicine in Scotland is noticeable by its absence from the motion. It is clear that the Executive and others must make further efforts to tackle the problem, and I welcome the wide partnership working that the Executive has highlighted as necessary in its amendment. I hope that there can be a constructive liaison with the BDA on how it can encourage more dentists to take on NHS work and on introducing incentives for dentists who carry out preventive treatment as well as remedial dentistry. I think that there is a broad agreement throughout the chamber on that matter and I am aware that the BDA has also said that it wishes to see such action. Dentists are highly trained and deserve to be remunerated highly—indeed, that is a pertinent issue—but we need to have a dialogue with professional bodies that has a more meaningful focus than fee levels. The profession must be able to play the full role that I know that it wants to in encouraging better access to treatment and promoting dental and oral health in the country. I agree that more needs to be done, but we can have an informed debate on what should happen next only if we acknowledge what has been done so far. It is only through taking an approach that fully includes everyone who is able to increase access to dentistry, including NHS provision, that we will be able to take full advantage of the Executive's measures to achieve the kind of access to dental services that we all want.

Will the First Minister join me in congratulating Grampian police on their use of the new powers of dispersal to tackle antisocial behaviour by a minority of the drivers who congregate on Aberdeen's Beach Boulevard? Does he share my surprise at comments by Mike Rumbles in yesterday's Evening Express , in which he described the measure as "bordering on illegality"? His comments will perplex and upset residents of the area who met police—

Residents overwhelmingly back the proposals to tackle the behaviour of boy racers that is wrecking the peace of their community.

It is a pleasure to speak for Labour in this debate on the Procedures Committee's final review of oral questions. The process has been long and those members who suggest that we should revisit it before 2007 should acknowledge the blood, the sweat and the large amount of negotiation that have gone into finalising our recommendations and concluding our report with such a great deal of consensus. The review was initiated to ensure that our parliamentary process for questioning the Executive was refreshed and renewed. It was appropriate for the review to take place so that we had the best possible system to use in the new session of Parliament. The initial shorter review was productive in developing a system whereby Executive question time could establish an identity of its own that was separate from that of First Minister's question time. I believe that the introduction of themes has enabled closer scrutiny of the work of ministers and their departments. There is no doubt that the new format took time to bed in, but it has now done so and it is clear that it has created opportunities for more and different people and groups to watch question time in the chamber. I am talking not only about media coverage, to which Mr Lyon referred, but about visiting groups. The new format means that two different sets of visitors can come to the chamber—the first can watch First Minister's question time and the second can come along after lunch to watch questions to the Executive. That is an important factor. I realise that BBC coverage is valuable and important, but the BBC is only one broadcaster of question times. The fact that other broadcasters provide lunch-time coverage offers the potential for the Parliament to reach a far bigger audience than that of 40,000 that George Lyon mentioned. That consideration formed part of the debate that informed the committee's discussions and  decisions. It is important to note that such a debate took place. Whenever one introduces a new system, scope for it to be modified and improved becomes apparent. The committee anticipated that by introducing the system for a trial period. The committee's final report is the result not only of give and take between the parties to achieve some consensus, but of our having had the chance to assess how the new system could be improved. I was always interested to find out how a system that meant that every member could have three questions would work. Our experience of occasions on which members have had three questions selected for answer one week and have then gone for a long time without getting any of their questions selected shows that there was need for change. The proposal in the report, which will mean that members will have only one question each, is far better. Another big improvement is that members will know that they have been selected to ask a question before they need to submit the question itself. That means that members will be able to focus on asking one question and will have more time to put into preparing it. I believe that that will result in better questions, improved scrutiny and a more rewarding process for members. The move to hold general questions before First Minister's question time is important for those members who felt that the atmosphere of general questions would benefit from its being part of the build-up to FMQs, and that general questions would, in general, be a good way to move into FMQs. I do not have time to highlight all the useful issues that are covered in the report, but I will flag up the concerns about the lack of time that is provided for back benchers at First Minister's questions, which is of great concern to a large number of members, particularly in the Executive parties. It is important to address that issue so that there is more equity of opportunity for all members to raise issues at that important forum. The report also supports the Presiding Officers as they take action in other areas, such as ensuring that questions concern areas on which ministers are competent to answer. The debate follows a great deal of discussion of the report. I have no doubt that, as we have heard today, the issues will provoke even more discussion in the future, but I believe that the committee's proposals for the timing and format of our question times will bring improvements to those question times, help them to be more effective and address the wishes of members from all parties by ensuring that oral questions are not  only a vital, but a productive, part of the business that the Parliament carries out. I endorse the motion.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in reducing fuel poverty and delivering its central heating programme to older people. (S2O-5489)

That is excellent progress and the minister will be aware that, as well as being effective, the free central heating scheme has been hugely popular among older people. Is she aware of the small number of contractors in the scheme with whose standard of work there have been repeated problems? Is the performance of contractors subject to regular review to ensure that they meet the standard of work that we should be able to expect from them, so that each and every older person involved in the scheme can receive its full benefit?

The Deputy First Minister will be aware that it has been estimated that up to 20,000 jobs could be created in Scotland in a successful wave and tidal energy industry. Those jobs would be vital to the north-east and to his constituency. Does he agree that the review of the renewables obligation certificate system, as well as the welcome continued investment in research and development, could be key to developing a renewables sector that includes a successful wave and tidal energy industry?

I welcome the fact that Brian Adam has raised the issue that we are discussing, as I am sure that we all agree that access to benefits advice is crucial—Mark Ruskell mentioned that. All of us in the north-east want there to be adequate access to such services in our region. I want to focus on two aspects of the debate. First, I want to discuss what the Executive has done to ensure that benefits take-up is maximised—again, Mark Ruskell touched on that matter. Secondly, the motion strays into reserved areas and I want to tell members about the work that our local members of Parliament have done. In general terms, the Executive has invested in more money advice services—Mark Ruskell spoke about that, too. An extra £4 million was invested in such services last year and Aberdeen shared in the £2 million of Executive funding for extra services that was announced in October. I am sure that the minister will tell us more about that. Of course, local MPs at Westminster have been concerned about the matter. I assure members of the Scottish Parliament that MPs have taken their concerns about the reorganisation of services by the Department for Work and Pensions to that department and have successfully negotiated with it to maintain jobs and services in their areas. In Dundee, Iain Luke and Ernie Ross have pressed ministers on the issue. Following that, the Minister of State for Pensions, Malcolm Wicks, announced that Dundee will be the location for one of the 12 pension centres in Britain, which will receive additional investment to provide customers with better and more efficient services by 2008.

I have mentioned the work that the Executive is doing on front-line advice services. I will move on to the issues that MPs have taken up. I am glad that Brian Adam welcomes what is happening in Dundee, as it is a positive announcement of jobs and services for the area. There has been progress in Aberdeen, too. As Brian Adam knows, the benefits staff in Aberdeen do a great job, with particular successes for jobcentre plus. The dedication of the jobcentre staff was shown in the wake of the closure of Richards of Aberdeen. Brian Adam will know all about that, as the company was in his constituency. When workers were told that they were going to lose their jobs, Frank Doran, the MP for Aberdeen Central, was in touch with the jobcentre to find out what assistance could be given. Members of staff from jobcentres throughout the north-east, not just from Aberdeen, gave up their time at weekends to give jobs advice, arrange crisis loans and organise a jobs fair. Nobody would disagree that we are talking about excellent staff and excellent services. Aberdeen MPs have been active in liaising with ministers at the DWP on the service reorganisation, relaying some of their concerns. Anne Begg and Frank Doran met Alan Johnson, the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, to discuss employment for staff in the benefits advice service in Aberdeen and maintaining the excellent provision of benefits advice services for people in Aberdeen. At that meeting, Alan Johnson recognised the high quality of work that is carried out by benefits advice staff in the city and agreed that there will be a significant transfer of jobs to front-line benefits advice services in Aberdeen. That will significantly reduce the number of likely redundancies. We should congratulate Frank Doran and Anne Begg on their successful efforts to maintain benefits jobs and services in Aberdeen. I welcome the opportunity that the debate has given members from all parties to congratulate benefits advice staff on their excellent work and to highlight the great need for those services and for more awareness among people in Scotland of their benefits entitlements.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to counter the anticipated economic slow-down in global growth in 2005. (S2O-5252)

As the minister knows, organisations including the Institute for International Economics predict a global slow-down in growth in 2005. The Executive obviously cannot prevent that, but what steps is it taking to ensure that Scottish Enterprise and local agencies are prepared to help Scottish businesses to rise to the challenge of a possible slow-down? Has his recent visit to promote economic links with China presented opportunities for Scottish businesses to offset the impact of a possible global economic slow-down?

Meanwhile, back on planet earth, we have once again spent our time during Opposition business discussing independence and matters that are largely reserved to Westminster, rather than discussing issues on which this Parliament can decide policy. As is normal in every area of debate and in every area of policy, the only idea that we have heard from the SNP to address the nation's challenges is independence, its one so-called solution. In the interests of finding fresh pastures of political engagement, let me welcome the opportunity that the SNP has given us to debate our economy and the vital role that the oil and gas industry plays in it. However, the SNP has failed to point out that the Scottish Executive is playing a key role in encouraging success in the oil and gas sector and that, working in partnership with the industry and with the UK Government, it is creating the right environment for the industry to prosper. It is the SNP's determination to destabilise our relationship with the rest of the UK that would do the industry most damage. I agree with the SNP that we want a successful oil and gas industry for a long time to come. That is vital for the prosperity of Scotland, in particular for Aberdeen and the north-east. I welcome the Executive's role in Pilot. With the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning as its vice-chair, Pilot was created to bring together the Government at the UK and Scottish levels and the industry and to act as a spur for investment in the sector, with goals for success by 2010 including the encouragement of more jobs, more investment and more production than would otherwise be the case. It might gall the SNP, but that strategy is working. The United Kingdom Offshore Operators Association's activities survey shows that oil production in the rest of the decade will be higher than was previously estimated, and that spending on exploration and capital will be up 15 per cent. There will also be a shallower decline in production, which means that there will be a prolonged life for the industry in the North sea. That is not to say that we cannot make even more progress. In the past, I have argued that we must step up efforts to encourage more exploration, particularly by the new independent operators, as other members have said. I commend to ministers a recent Amicus report on that matter, which excellently highlights some of the challenges.

Unfortunately, the Green party's intention seems to be to bring the industry to a halt, which would be disastrous for the north-east. Poverty is the worst thing for the environment. It breeds environmental damage. Shiona Baird's party's policy would be disastrous for the north-east. The SNP's motion inaccurately argues that we in Scotland have not capitalised on our oil and gas reserves as others have. It compares our situation with that of Norway and calls for an oil fund to be set up. Even if we could invest in an oil fund, such a fund has not been the unqualified success in Norway that the SNP has said that it has. It is simply wrong to suggest that Scotland has not significantly benefited from the increased tax revenue that has been collected by the UK Government from the oil industry. As Maureen Macmillan and Murdo Fraser said, even if oil revenue is taken into account, Scotland benefits financially from membership of the UK and would be in fiscal deficit without such membership.

To be fair, I will give way to Richard Lochhead.

The fund has not always had an easy history and is not achieving what the Norwegians set it up to do in respect of pensions investment and the like. That is the reality and I will happily supply Richard Lochhead with more information about the matter. In a recent debate on the economy, Alex Neil—despite the fact that he is an excellent convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee—told us inaccurately that, based on our oil revenue, we could be fiscally independent. When he was rightly cautioned that long-term economic prospects cannot be based on fluctuating oil prices, he said that the situation was like a person winning the national lottery and saying that they did not want the money. The wit of his remarks was not matched by their wisdom, as the strategy would leave Scotland economically high and dry. We want oil to have a long-term future, but oil revenue is ultimately finite. It will not continue for ever, just as no one wins the lottery every week. If Mr Neil  has found a way of winning the lottery every week, I wonder why he is here. One need only consider Aberdeen and the north-east to see that we have reaped the benefits of the oil and gas industry in a far more responsible way. Some 100,000 jobs in Scotland depend on the industry and, of course, Aberdeen benefits from much of that employment. The Executive is putting in place the right economic strategy to sustain those jobs and to allow Aberdeen to continue its role as the energy capital of Europe in the future. As I have said previously, I firmly believe that the SNP's strategy for fiscal autonomy is not based on what is economically right for Scotland—it is about independence and the SNP's obsession with the constitution. It is predictable that the SNP has ignored the general success of the Executive's economic strategy in the debate. That strategy has achieved record jobs and economic growth in Scotland and is the right strategy for capitalising on the skills and technology that have been developed through Scottish research and industries such as the oil and gas sector. The establishment of the energy intermediary technology institute in Aberdeen—which will capitalise on expertise and new industries such as renewables—shows that the Executive has the right long-term vision for economic success in the energy industry and, indeed, for all Scotland's economy. That is why we should reject the SNP's strategy, which is based only on separation from England and the rest of the UK, and embrace the Executive's policy, which is based on long-term success for Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to eradicate instances of racism and bigotry in Scottish sports grounds. (S2O-5138)

Does the minister agree that to combat instances of racism and bigotry in football, continued support for initiatives such as the Show Racism the Red Card campaign is vital, particularly in the light of the successful education event at Aberdeen Football Club in December? That event was run by Show Racism the Red Card, hosted by Aberdeen Football Club and attended by 100 young people. How will the Executive ensure that racism is countered not only in football grounds, but in every sporting arena?

There is an established consensus in Scotland  that our further and higher education sectors should take steps to work closely together to ensure a unity of purpose and give our people the knowledge and skills to allow Scotland to prosper. I am pleased that we come to this stage 1 debate at a time when there is broad agreement on the details of the bill. It has been said that the bill has had a rollercoaster journey on its way here in terms of the reactions that it has provoked. That we are now at a stage of broad consensus is a great compliment to the consultation process in which ministers have engaged. I say to Fiona Hyslop that that is what consultation is about—the fact that the bill that we are discussing today is different in important areas from the draft shows that ministers have listened to different points of view. That is a clear example of Executive consultation working. I am pleased to open for Labour in the debate because, throughout our party's history, we have promoted education as being key to empowering people and giving them new opportunities and skills. A new merged funding council will be perfectly placed to support colleges and universities in their collaborations, which will mean even more points of access so that more people from a wider section of society have better educational opportunities. It is worth looking at some of the early history of the bill because a lot of work has been done to get to where we are today. The proposal to have a single funding council was a policy that was first promoted by the NUS in the early 1990s. That shows that the policy is embraced by students and not only by those who form education policy. The policy was first promoted in the Scottish Parliament by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee in its report on lifelong learning. It is a tribute to the work of that committee and that excellent report in particular that this initiative is now becoming a reality. It strikes me that part of the reason why there was some heated—at times overheated—debate about the draft bill was because the tertiary education sector expected it to be a tidying-up exercise. The two funding councils were already sharing staff and offices and had a joint chief executive. The sector believed that the bill would simply bring the organisations together as one council with one membership. However, the draft bill ended up proposing more than that and legitimate concerns were expressed about the proposals for new definitions of institutions and powers that could be seen to impinge on areas that were properly matters of institutional autonomy. However, those concerns were listened to and acted on and the bill has widespread support in the education sector today.  A total absence of debate over a bill is an unusual occurrence in Parliament and there remains one area of contention in this bill. The NUS has objected to the limited power proposed by ministers to vary fees for medicine in order to address potential issues of cross-border flow of students. As always, the NUS has stated its case eloquently and strongly, but for once, I do not agree with my erstwhile colleagues. I am sure that the Executive would prefer that we did not have to deal with the consequences of a new system down south, but we do. In the context of some calls for drastic measures to ensure that Scottish universities are not overwhelmed by applications from south of the border, that power is very limited and it should be subject to affirmative resolution. The power is included to ensure that we are able to train enough doctors for the NHS in Scotland. I have to say that I have grave reservations about some of the alternative proposals that we have heard to address that issue.

I do not think that the power is so unreasonable. However, we should consider other issues, which I will mention in a few moments. It is greatly unfair for some people to imply that the power will lead to top-up fees by the back door. Indeed, ministers are not the only people who claim that such a presentation is unfair. I ask Fiona Hyslop and even Murdo Fraser—who, I have to say, was much more measured in his questioning of the proposals—to respond to what David Caldwell from Universities Scotland had to say on the matter. On 2 November, David Caldwell told the committee: "It is important to say that our interpretation of the bill is that it does not permit the introduction of variable top-up fees in Scotland and that, instead, it means the possible reintroduction of banded fixed-level fees that might be different for various courses. It is only a few years since we had band 1 fees and band 2 fees that were different for various courses of study."—[ Official Report , Enterprise and Culture Committee , 2 November 2004; c 1157.] Fees will be set by ministers and not by institutions. The proposed system is nothing like the system in England and any suggestion that the proposal means top-up fees by the back door is irrational and, at the very least, over-egging the pudding. The provision is neither unfair nor unreasonable, particularly given that it means that no Scottish or Scotland-domiciled student will be asked to pay any more for tuition.  However, as Chris Ballance mentioned, the committee has asked the Executive to find other ways of addressing this issue. For example, the NUS has made some suggestions that should be considered. That said, I should repeat that I do not find the proposal itself unreasonable. During the process, some misinformed reporting of the proposals unfortunately suggested that the Executive wished to merge individual universities and colleges. Of course, the bill contained no such proposal. Indeed, that issue did not form any part of the debate between universities and colleges, which have for a long time embraced the idea of articulation between the two sectors. They have sought ways of enabling people to enter universities and higher education courses not just from schools but from colleges and a variety of other access routes. In fact, Scottish universities and colleges have led the way not just in the UK but in Europe in developing agreements between institutions. For example, an increasing number of two-plus-two courses are being introduced, in which students spend the first two years at a college and the second two at university. Moreover, the Scottish tertiary sector has led the way in developing a credit and qualifications framework. A new merged funding council will give extra impetus to such developments. It will give further encouragement to finding a united approach to strategic planning in tertiary education. Most important, it will help to support the institutions in the cross-sectoral initiatives that they have developed. When combined with record funding for higher education and increased bursaries for students from poorer backgrounds, the bill shows that the Executive is developing an important unity of vision in higher education and is giving universities and colleges the necessary resources and support to allow them to play their vital role in creating a skilled knowledge economy and a vibrant, successful Scotland.

Will the member give way?

What discussions has the Executive had with Grampian NHS Board and the British Dental Association on additional measures that might be introduced to encourage dental students who will, in the future, graduate from an outreach centre in Aberdeen, to stay in the area and enter NHS dentistry? Is there continuing dialogue with NHS Grampian to ensure that its dental health programme successfully complements the Executive's action to increase access to NHS dentistry?

Is the minister aware that Grampian police are likely to be among the first in Scotland to take action  against boy racers through the new antisocial behaviour provisions, after Lewis Macdonald and Frank Doran MP asked them to deal with the problems of racing at Aberdeen's beachfront? Does he agree that that action, along with possible education measures, will make a difference in tackling the danger and the noise nuisance that can be caused by aggressive driving?

I was pleased to join the minister in a very productive visit to the Craiginches prison; I know that she had a useful meeting with the visiting committee. Will she ensure that the Scottish Prison Service timeously produces proposals to address some of the problems at Craiginches and that it will consider innovative solutions that make use of cross-regional services in the area?

To ask the Scottish Executive what role it envisages for the royal colleges in national health service workforce planning. (S2O-4669)

When north-east members have meetings with Grampian NHS Board, the role of the royal colleges is always to the fore in our discussions on recruitment and workforce planning. In the minister's dialogue with the royal colleges, will he ensure that the colleges consider taking positive action to address recruitment issues and to review their approaches to service delivery proposals so that such issues are not rigidly fixed to population in a way that fails to meet the needs of remote and rural areas?

What the member says is a very nice fiction. I should point out that the European Commission has stated in a letter to Catherine Stihler MEP that one cannot be a member of the EU and withdraw from the CFP. I have simply stated the current position. Is the member saying that he would sacrifice all the benefits of EU membership just to withdraw from the CFP?

Every year at this time, we gather in the chamber to wish the Minister well in his negotiations in Brussels on next year's fishing quota—at least, that is what most of us do, if with differing levels of enthusiasm—and every year it seems that that year's negotiations are particularly crucial. However, in the context of the controversial debate about the sustainability of stocks and of the particularly radical measures being proposed by the European Commission, it is clear this year's negotiations are especially key. For the north-east of Scotland, it is vital that the industry's future is secured, not just from the point of view of the economic viability of the industry,  but because of the social impact that it has. Nine of the 10 areas with the most deprivation in Aberdeenshire are places that are dependent on fisheries. Fish processors in the city of Aberdeen, who face particularly challenging market conditions, will also be looking keenly for ministers to achieve the right outcomes from these negotiations. That is why it is essential for the positive signs of stock recovery in some key fisheries to be accounted for in the new quotas. That is also why I was heartened to see the statement yesterday by the minister in which he restated the Executive's opposition to closing to fishing activity areas of the North sea in which there is no evidence of conservation benefit. The minister is right to state that proposals on closed areas have already been overtaken by the advice from the Commission's technical advisers and that they fly in the face of representations by the newly formed North sea regional advisory council. I am pleased that it is from this position that the minister goes into the negotiations because, as always, the Commission's proposals are only a starting point. Of course, some of the proposals are not unhelpful, particularly the proposal on increases in the whiting and herring quota. I am pleased to see that the minister will be pressing the case for increased quotas on monkfish and prawns. Other sensible measures include the controls in mixed fishing grounds to avoid the taking of cod as a bycatch. Indeed, progress on minimising bycatch is another reason why closing off grounds is not necessary. Sensible measures to ensure that stocks are kept at sustainable levels are, of course, not only justified but necessary. Those measures have been painful but have been aimed at securing a long-term future for the fishing industry. I want to stress that such measures have to be taken while preserving the viability of the industry, which is why I welcome Ben Bradshaw's response to the report of the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution. He made it clear that he does not agree with all of its proposals for closures and argued that more time should be given to allow the measures that have already been imposed to have an impact. There should be a shared view that we need to balance the conservation and recovery of stocks with the maintenance of a viable industry following the reduction in effort that the industry has already had to undergo. Once again, it is members on the Executive benches who have taken that approach while others, for a variety of political motivations, have taken views at the extreme ends of the spectrum in the debate. Yet again, the SNP has managed to contradict itself in the space of one amendment. It  says that it supports sustainable fishing policies but opposes the CFP, when achieving that is exactly what the CFP seeks to do, and constantly goes out of its way to ignore scientific advice.

Mr Lochhead is distorting the reality of the situation. The SNP has no proposals that will provide a framework for the sustainable management of fisheries. The CFP is the best solution—in fact, it is the only workable solution—to the problem of creating sustainability in the market.

I do not agree with Mr Brocklebank. We are saying that reform of the CFP is the only show in town because it is the only way in which we can create a viable industry in the future. Having a free-for-all in the North sea will kill off the industry, which will do nothing to help the people that Mr Brocklebank pretends to represent in the chamber. The Tories, who, if anything, have an even more reckless approach to sustainability and the future of the industry, now advocate withdrawal from the CFP, but on this occasion their original position was the correct one. Their new-found opposition to the CFP is based on opportunism and anti-Europeanism rather than on creating a sustainable fishing industry; it is an utterly unrealistic policy that would require our withdrawal from the European Union, which no doubt would please some of their members. However, it is disappointing and staggering to see them now aided and abetted by the SNP in that agenda, under which the parties would oppose the new constitution on the basis that it simply confirms Europe's existing powers on fishing policy. Towards the other end of the spectrum, there were a lot of positive things in Mark Ruskell's speech. However, I sound a note of caution: when we consider further proposals we must always balance measures for faster stock recovery with ensuring that we can sustain a viable fleet, so that when stocks have recovered, there is a fleet to fish  them. It is important to strike the right balance, which I think the Executive has done. I welcome the support that Mark Ruskell said that the Greens would give the Executive motion. The Executive is taking the rational position in this debate by working for the best deal for fishermen, which will come through the CFP. The framework enables us to take the measures needed to ensure that we have a thriving fishing industry in generations to come. Of course, the framework can be improved; that is what we are working towards and what the Executive is doing by successfully arguing for greater local management of fisheries. We have now had the first, successful meetings of the regional advisory councils. I hope they have an influence on decision making. What they said recently will influence the decisions in Brussels in December, which would undoubtedly bolster the minister's arguments in the negotiations. From what we have heard this afternoon it is clear that the minister has exactly the right aims and approach to the negotiations as he sets out to get the best deal for the Scottish fishing industry. Of course success in the talks in Brussels is crucial. I offer best wishes to the minister as he embarks upon them and I commend his motion to Parliament.

We have heard from other members about the great importance of the aquaculture industry, especially to remote and rural areas of Scotland—the very areas in which we in the Executive face the greatest challenges in fulfilling our goal of achieving economic growth. An aquaculture industry that is not only safeguarded and sustainable but thriving and growing must be a key priority for the Executive if our ambitions for economic growth are to benefit Scotland as a whole and if every area is to reap the rewards of the increased prosperity that is our goal. The industry is of course important for the north-east, as farmed fish are supplied to fish processors throughout the region. It is vital that  there is confidence among the public about the impact of the aquaculture industry on the environment and about the product itself. Although that confidence has been knocked at times, it remains the case that consumers see the produce of the Scottish aquaculture industry as quality produce. I believe that the strategic framework for aquaculture is vital in ensuring that that remains the case. The fact that there is now more research, more efficient regulation, more progress and more support for the industry in general is key to creating confidence and gaining what we hope will be an expanding consumer base. We are already making significant progress through the strategic framework. I did not recognise the description of the framework in the Conservative amendment as lacking in progress, because 23 targets have been achieved, significant progress has been made on the rest and there is a commitment to future action on other targets. Crucially, that has all been achieved through collaboration with the industry, which I believe is more important than timescale. We have heard that the establishment of the Scottish aquaculture research forum is another step forward in commissioning research and advancing education relating to aquaculture for the public benefit. The extension of planning controls will ensure that marine fish farms are subject to a more effective, transparent and democratic system of regulation led by local authorities—not over-regulation, as the Tories imply about everything in every debate, but the kind of regulation that will create the confidence in the industry that is necessary for it to prosper. The Executive is not only working to create the conditions here in Scotland that will enable the aquaculture industry to thrive; yet again, we are benefiting from effective partnership working between our Executive and the UK Government, which is resulting in joint efforts being made in Europe to create fairer market conditions for our aquaculture industry. The motion highlights the issue of trade defence. The UK Government is taking a robust line to ensure that the European Union takes action through a definitive safeguard measure, with the threat of using anti-dumping and anti-subsidy measures in the event of agreement not being reached with Norway on those issues. Those efforts for our aquaculture industry are greatly bolstered because they are being advanced through the strength of the UK's negotiating position in Europe. We benefit from the influence that that brings, which would be rubbed off by the SNP—with the Tories there would be even less chance of success, because we would not be in Europe at all.

Our negotiating as part of the major UK bloc makes our position stronger. It is important to dwell on the point that we should have success in the negotiations. It is vital for our aquaculture industry that our efforts are successful. The industry deserves fairness and a level playing field, and success in the negotiations is essential for the sustainability of Scotland's smaller indigenous aquaculture businesses. Sustainability is the key word. With the strategic framework, the Executive is tackling each of the key areas that are essential to a sustainable aquaculture industry and addressing the issue of the industry's future economic prosperity, one aspect of which is having a level playing field in the market. Another aspect is ensuring that consumers continue to view the product as being of the highest quality and that it is promoted successfully as such. That will require effective management of the aquaculture industry so that it is environmentally sustainable and generates consumer confidence. The strategy acknowledges the industry's huge social importance. If we are to talk about creating economic prosperity for all and closing the opportunity gap in every part of our country, we must acknowledge the importance of the aquaculture industry to our more vulnerable rural areas. It is even more important in such areas than it is in Scotland overall, because the economic impact of jobs that are created there is huge. The Executive motion talks about working towards a sustainable aquaculture industry through its strategic framework. It really is tackling every aspect of that—economic prosperity, environmental sustainability and, crucially, the positive social impact on rural communities in Scotland. Through the strategy, the Executive is showing the right commitment to the industry and showing that it acknowledges the crucial role of aquaculture in bringing economic growth to every part of Scotland. I commend the motion in the minister's name.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity that the debate presents to discuss how the Parliament is making a real difference for the better to older people's lives in Scotland. Scottish Labour's amendment focuses on what our party and our Executive are achieving for older Scots in health, transport and social justice. We are giving more older people better opportunities to enjoy a more active and healthy life and we are giving back to many older people the dignity and opportunities in retirement of which Tory Governments robbed them. We are forging a society that provides our older people with security and care. Once again, Labour members seek to discuss issues on which the Parliament can make and is making a difference, whereas the SNP seeks to discuss matters that are outwith the Parliament's competence to affect and that are—rightly—issues that are decided in Westminster.

Not at all. I am saying that we in the Parliament should focus on what we can do and on what we can make—and are making—a difference on to benefit Scotland's pensioners. It is surprising that the SNP persists in discussing matters that are outwith the Parliament's competence when its leadership is based in Westminster. I have no doubt that it has ample opportunity to raise reserved matters there. It will benefit Scotland to be part of a UK strategy to address the needs of future pensioners. We will of course be likely to need greater investment from the Government and from society as a whole to meet the financial challenges that the demographics not only of Scotland, but of the UK, present. The economic prosperity and stability from which Scotland benefits as a result of being part of the UK economy—especially from a long-term perspective—will be a key advantage in meeting those challenges. In any event, I disagree with the assessment that the pension credit, which is designed to encourage saving, should be scrapped, or that we should abandon prioritising investment to provide more help to the neediest pensioners. It would be wrong to abandon the minimum income guarantee, which has been a vital financial boost to many of our most vulnerable older people.

Such prioritisation helps millions of older people. It is fundamentally wrong and bizarre to make take-up—which we are trying to increase—an argument for giving older millionaires a financial boost. Of course, important points of agreement exist on meeting our older people's needs. The SNP motion talks about facing up to the challenge of pensioner poverty, which is exactly what we are doing and on which we should all be able to agree. Our Executive has done a huge amount to tackle pensioner poverty and to help our most vulnerable older people. I am angered when I hear from some members the totally misleading and misinformed accusations that the Executive has forgotten Scotland's older people and has not done enough to help pensioners. Nothing could be further from the truth. Older people have probably benefited from devolution more than any other group in our society.  When I worked at Help the Aged in Scotland, we always campaigned for a better deal for older people, but the charity—along with other older people's groups—acknowledged the progress that had been made. That progress has been made through the Executive, working in partnership with the UK Government. Of course we have more to do, but it is vital to recognise that we have reduced the number of pensioners who live in relative poverty by a quarter since 1997 and that absolute pensioner poverty has reduced by two thirds. That means that 170,000 of our poorest pensioners are better off. That is Labour working for poorer pensioners. Fuel poverty has been halved and we have a free central heating scheme. Older people have benefited from Labour's massive investment in the NHS and from free personal care. The list of achievements for Scotland's older people goes on and on. The Executive and Labour at Westminster have made important progress. We have more to do but, in looking to continue to improve pensioners' lives and to ensure that the older people of the future also benefit from the progress that we have made for older people today, members are wrong to reject the Government's strategy of focusing investment on the neediest older people while creating incentives to save. Most important is that we in the Parliament should focus on what we can do for our older people. It has been made clear in the debate that Labour is doing that. That is how the Executive has made life better for older people and why we will achieve our goal of a better quality of life for all Scotland's older people.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to ensure that more energy is provided from renewable sources. (S2O-3621)

Will the minister outline what action is being taken to ensure not only that developing renewable energy industries are incentivised but that, through initiatives such as the intermediary technology institute in Aberdeen, they capitalise on the skills, expertise and infrastructure that are already established in the energy sector in Aberdeen, so that the city will remain the energy capital of Europe in the long term?

The minister will be aware that the extra £2 million funding that Grampian police received as a result of the review process has been widely welcomed. Does she agree that it is essential that the outdated funding formula is revised to ensure that, in future, it takes fair account of the issues that she has mentioned, such as population and crime rates in Grampian, and that it enables Grampian police to tackle particular local problems such as drugs crime?

The spending review not only means continuing improvement in Scotland's public services, but shows that the Executive will deliver on its promises. When the First Minister set out Scottish Labour's stall as Scotland's party of enterprise, that was a bold challenge to our party. When the coalition partners said that enterprise was the Executive's top priority, people said, "Great, but how are you going to show that it is?" Opposition politicians and commentators can demand every kind of initiative and investment, but they know that they do not have to make hard choices from a range of causes that are worthy of funding so that investment is targeted to make the most difference. The Executive has not only talked about enterprise, but taken action to encourage enterprise in Scotland, with concrete proposals and targeted investment. I was one of those who said that if Labour was to prove itself as a party of enterprise, we had to invest in our universities and colleges. Like others, I argued that that investment was vital to enable our universities and colleges to take on the challenge of top-up fee income down south so that they could be drivers in creating the knowledge economy that Scotland needs. Today, the minister responded positively to that challenge. Of course, we must engage in longer-term thinking about how we will sustain high levels of investment in tertiary education in the years ahead, but the settlement is just the boost that the sector needs. This is the first time that there has been £1 billion in support for the sector. That support means that the sector can retain the top academics who put Scotland at the forefront of new and developing industries such as biotechnology and renewable energy. Labour's proudest boast in Government is that we have lifted hundreds of thousands of Scots out of the misery of unemployment and given them jobs and the opportunity for better and more  fulfilled lives. The spending review is another step forward in our drive for full employment. It is not just investment in the knowledge economy that makes this a spending review for enterprise. Once again, we are investing in infrastructure and a key element of that is transport. In the previous spending review, transport spending rose to more than £1 billion for next year. That increase was welcomed by business organisations because they know how business benefits from spending on transport infrastructure. I know that the extra investment that the minister outlined today—we will spend £1.4 billion by 2007—will be welcomed in the north-east. I hope that it will allow speedy progress with the construction of the western peripheral route, which is vital to the region's development, but I also hope that we will see progress on other projects such as the proposed Aberdeen crossrail project. The extra investment in health services that was outlined today is important for every area of Scottish life, including the economy and economic prosperity. If Scotland is to be a more successful nation, it must be a healthier nation. The Executive has forged a groundbreaking health agenda in the action that it is taking not only to treat illness but to promote healthy living, and I believe that we will reap the benefits of that in the coming years. The Executive is also ensuring that we have record investment in hospitals and in nurses and doctors. We are all aware of the concerns in some communities about the reorganisation of health services, but it must be clear to people that the Executive is spending more than ever on NHS services, and certainly more than was spent in the Tory years. The Tories' opportunism in the health debate in Scotland is breathtaking. If the Tories were in Government, there would be no debate on where patients should access NHS services because they would not be able to access such services at all. We should be clear that the Tories' agenda is to break up the NHS and force everyone to rely on private health care schemes, which would be disastrous for the most vulnerable people in society. Those are the real terms of the health debate in Scotland. Thanks to Gordon Brown's excellent stewardship of the UK economy, the Executive is able to announce today continued, record investment in public services. That shows the huge benefit to this nation of being part of the UK economy.

Jim Mather should read the recent report from Lloyds TSB, which shows that Scotland's economy continues to grow at its fastest rate for almost seven years. It is a rather inopportune time for him to make his point. In comparison with the euro zone, our economy is growing at a favourable rate. Unlike Mr Mather, the Executive has not been obsessed with debates about fiscal autonomy, which are geared to the hopes of separatists rather than to the needs of the economy. Instead, it has taken action to create growth in our economy and to put in place the building blocks for economic success. Of course challenges lie ahead, but the spending review means that we are better placed than ever to meet them. The spending review shows that the Executive is playing its part in creating a thriving and enterprising nation. When the question is asked who the big winners are in the spending review, the answer is clear: they are the people and the future of Scotland.

The keys to continuing sustained growth in the Scottish economy are enterprise, innovation and skills. Those themes were central to the renewed economic strategy that the First Minister and the Deputy First Minister unveiled two weeks ago. Because of that emphasis and Labour's determination to be Scotland's party of enterprise, we are debating how to build on progress. Predictably, we have heard baleful pronouncements on the Scottish economy, but those ignore the progress that has been made. Such pronouncements echo the great soothsaying of doom a couple of years ago when people were predicting a significant recession. Instead, today's debate is not on whether we can achieve economic growth but on whether we can achieve even greater economic growth. As Wendy Alexander pointed out, growth has been strong and significant. We can now be confident about much in our economy. For example, retail sales last month rose by 3.9 per cent in Scotland but rose by only 0.6 per cent in the rest of the UK. That trend is continuing. We all want more research and development; however, figures reveal that R and D in Scotland—

My figures for the increase in expenditure on research and development are over a six-year period, which is not the short term. In any case, we are talking about long-term strategies. As a result, I reject the member's point. The Executive is investing to create a more successful economy. For example, it is investing in infrastructure, particularly in transport projects; in a skilled work force through such successful schemes as modern apprenticeships; and in innovation through our universities and colleges and our technology institutes. I would fervently hope that those institutes would be spared from the cuts in the Scottish Enterprise budget that the Opposition parties recommend. I was pleased to find that the refreshed economic development strategy places an emphasis on ensuring that all regions enjoy the same economic opportunities. The intermediary technology institutes in Dundee and Aberdeen are key to the north-east's prosperous future and it is vital that we turn Scotland's world-class expertise in research and skills into commercial success. In Aberdeen, ITI Energy will turn skills in the oil and gas sector into new business for Scotland and will help to sustain and renew that vital industry. It will also help us to capitalise on the city's academic expertise in renewable energy development, which is a key area for future industrial success. Moreover, I hugely welcome the news over the summer that £50 million Government support will be made available for developing renewable technology, as it will help to develop wave and tidal power. That said, I again urge the Executive to consider a more generous renewables obligation certificate for wave and tidal power to help to create a market stimulus for an industry that could create 20,000 jobs in this country. Our universities and colleges must also be at the heart of our economic development strategy. However, they now face the challenges created by the introduction of top-up fee income for universities in England. Although we do not want to go down that route in Scotland, our universities and colleges must be able to compete. I hope that that issue will be addressed in the short term when we hear the outcomes of the spending review. We must also be aware that our universities face competition from further afield. For example, graduate numbers in India are expanding at a  huge rate. Indeed, we face such challenges not only in the higher education sector but in the service sector, in which certain jobs, particularly those in call centres, have been offshored to countries where costs can be lower. I know that the Executive is doing something about that situation and, in that respect, I welcome the establishment of the financial services group to work on the issue with trade unions and employers. Moreover, I welcome the Executive's establishment of a manufacturing advisory service, which I trust will also involve key partners including the trade unions. Such actions and the economic strategy as a whole show that our Executive has been working to build our economy and that it already has the ability to introduce important measures to encourage growth. Inevitably, these debates focus on what the Executive can or cannot do to stimulate our economy and this particular debate has focused on fiscal autonomy. I welcome the recent calls for further examination of what fiscal autonomy would involve, because I do not think that we have heard enough about how it would be administered, which powers should be devolved and what it would mean for business. I do not accept it as a foregone conclusion that we should focus on fiscal autonomy as a means of delivering growth. We must be clear that any decision to go down that road must be based on hard economic facts and not on a political desire to give the Parliament greater powers. No doubt some would be tempted by that not simply as an economic argument, but as a step to separation. However, that would mean separation from economic partnerships that have served us well. At a time when economies across Europe are seeking to harmonise, we in Scotland need to be cautious about seeking greater divergence on strategy. By being part of our UK economy, we are benefiting from low inflation, still low interest rates and the lowest unemployment for a generation. We also need to put a health warning on giving greater tax-varying powers to this Parliament. Of course, we are perfectly able to manage such powers, but those who might be tempted to support fiscal autonomy because they want lower taxes must be aware that taxes can go up as well as down. It can never be a foregone conclusion that future Scottish Administrations will always seek to cut them. I am puzzled by those who say that only by having such powers would the Parliament feel accountable for spending decisions. I am sure that we are all well aware that we not only feel accountable for such decisions but are—and are held—accountable for them. We already have important powers to enable us not just to form the right economic strategy for Scotland but to build our economy in other key areas such as health,  transport and education. Let us not focus on debates about the Parliament's powers at the expense of making our economic strategy deliver for Scotland. It is the right strategy for growth; it will help us to achieve a more prosperous economy; and it is already working for Scotland.

I congratulate Brian Adam on securing the debate. It is one that has been contentious at the local level. I want the minister to go away in the knowledge that we are building consensus in Aberdeen. An indication of that was given not only in Brian Adam's speech but also in Nanette Milne's contribution. Of course, all politicians in the city agree that, following the awards that were made by sportscotland and the Executive, we want the plans for the excellent sports facilities to go ahead. We want to work with the bid partners, sportscotland and the Executive to make the proposed facilities a reality. Brian Adam referred to the negotiations that took place on the bid. As he said, the crucial thing is that everyone is now working to improve it. I assure the Executive that all partners in the bid, including the city council and the university, are determined to work with sportscotland to improve it. I am sure that the partners have our support in doing so. I agree with the motion and its reference to the need to have "top-class facilities in the north and north east of Scotland"— as indeed is the case in other parts of Scotland. I have spoken to sportscotland about the situation. It emphasised that one of the reasons that it rejects claims that it has a central-belt bias is that its strategy promotes the need for such facilities in every part of Scotland. Allegations of central-belt bias have not been helpful for anything—and I am afraid that they have come in particular from councillors of the administration of Aberdeen City Council. We must be careful not to cry wolf on such subjects, particularly when any such claims are totally unjustified, as is clear in this case. At the same time, we now have to go forward and ensure that, in future, such claims are even more clearly unjustified. It is important to emphasise the consensus to make progress towards having such facilities in the north-east. The case deserves ministers' reconsideration of what central support can be given to the new and better bid that will be made by the city. The fact that Dundee and Inverness have, so far, not had awards makes it even more vital that we get in Aberdeen the facilities for athletics, football and other games that the new project will  create. We have to give sporting opportunities to all, in every part of Scotland, and we should seek to give young people in every part of our nation the chance to become the athletics stars of tomorrow. I urge the minister to ensure that the Executive does all that it can to help those ambitions become a reality and to help Aberdeen's bid in identifying whatever additional sources of funding and support may be available. I hope that the strenuous efforts to do more to make the project happen in the city might be reciprocated with additional support from ministers and sportscotland. It is vital that the project goes ahead for the sake of regeneration in an area of Aberdeen that needs such support and investment. People from that community are here today. They know how vital it is for their area that the project goes ahead. It is vital to allow young people in the city, in its universities and throughout the north-east the chances that they deserve to enjoy and succeed in sport. That applies not just to people in Aberdeen, but to people throughout the north-east—indeed, people from the whole of the north could benefit. If we are to promote healthy living in every part of Scotland it is essential that such facilities are created, and particularly in Aberdeen. I stress to the minister that the main focus of our energies in Aberdeen when it comes to the sports facilities project should be to build consensus and partnership at all levels, because we all want to make it happen.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to prevent crimes that are associated with aggressive driving. (S2O-3033)

The minister will be aware of the problems in Aberdeen that are caused by cars being raced in some of the city's streets, particularly by young men in vehicles that are altered for the purpose of racing them. In the past, the police have had difficulty securing convictions for such offences. Will she assure me that the Executive is considering further measures to deter that reckless type of car crime, which endangers lives?

At the core of the legislative programme that the First Minister outlined this morning are the right goals, underpinned by the right principles and big ideas, creating a Scotland of prosperity, social inclusion and ambition—themes that run throughout the programme. We have moved away from the bad old days of sacrificing the welfare of the many for the wealth of the few and we are creating a nation typified by qualities that are embedded even in this new building in which we now sit—enterprise, ambition and innovation. The building might signify a new start for this Parliament, but the Executive has been putting in place for some time the building blocks to rid us of a lack of ambition and self-confidence, which is why I am pleased that the First Minister has set out the stall of Scottish Labour as being Scotland's party of enterprise. The Executive's programme reflects that ambition, not just for our party, but, most important, for our nation. I have always believed passionately in the empowering force of education. Today we have heard the First Minister and the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning outline the Executive's plans for creating choice within schools, but not between them, and for raising the standards of Scotland's pupils, ensuring that they can contribute to a prosperous and socially just Scotland. I was also pleased to hear the First Minister make an announcement about further legislation for our universities and colleges. They are an engine room of our economy and we are right to be proud of them. To allow them to continue to be among the best in the world we have to allow them a level playing field with other institutions in the UK, as Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said. The  advent of top-up fee income for universities in England means that we have to think about how we fund our further and higher education in the long term. The First Minister also referred to the forthcoming budget bill and I hope that we will see another good settlement for our universities and colleges to allow them to continue to be world beaters. They are not only working every day in our communities, encouraging social inclusion, but creating a skilled work force—key aspects of our party's success in reducing unemployment to the lowest levels for a generation. They are addressing skills gaps and giving Scottish workers the skills that they need to work in the industries of the future. As I represent the north-east of Scotland, I am bound to look, as other members have, to the renewable energy industry as an area in which, through engaging and developing industries, we can reap economic rewards. The announcement of £50 million of Government funding for wave energy technology and the Executive's funding for the wave device testing facility in Orkney mean that we are at the forefront of what will be a major industry. It is not right to say that we are not encouraging such industry and innovation.

No. The technology at our institutions in Scotland is far beyond that in Portugal. However, I support the recommendation on the matter in the Enterprise and Culture Committee's report on the issue, of which I am sure Shiona Baird is well aware. The technology institutes, two of which are in the north-east—in Dundee for biotechnology and in Aberdeen for energy—are exciting and bold initiatives that are vital for our region. Although we have just as much oil to take out of the North sea as we have already extracted, Aberdeen should be the energy capital of Europe even beyond that, through being a centre for renewable energy. That is vital, not only for prosperity, but for social inclusion, because it will ensure that we create jobs in every part of Scotland. A strong transport infrastructure is key to economic growth, which is why I welcome the proposed transport bill in the Executive's programme. The Executive already recognises the importance of transport—investment was at £1 billion by the end of the previous spending review. The new transport bill is welcome because it typifies the Executive's agenda of encouraging prosperity on the one hand, while on the other hand delivering social inclusion. Business will benefit from an improved and better-managed transport system and pensioners will benefit from  the nationwide concessionary travel scheme. The people who say that the Parliament has not done anything for older people have not been paying much attention for the past five years—in fact, older people make up one of the groups that has benefited the most. Prosperity, social inclusion and ambition are at the heart of the Executive's plans and the new ambition for Scotland. I do not accept the criticism of the fresh talent initiative, as I do not accept some of the lacklustre predictions that are made about it. It is a workable approach to attracting new talent to Scotland and, vitally, it is a change of culture that the First Minister has introduced in Government. For decades, Government in this country has been preparing to manage decline in our population; now we are gearing up for growth. That is not the only issue on which we are changing cultures. We are encouraging a more enterprising Scotland through our economic development strategy and programmes such as enterprise in schools. We want to encourage people to get into business and to be more confident about their talents, because we want to have a more confident nation. Members who think that we can achieve that confidence only by divorcing ourselves from our closest neighbours are not only wrong, but are impoverishing political debate in Scotland. If we really start to have a new politics in Scotland, we can move away from the political myopia on the constitutional settlement and focus debate clearly on the issues that make a difference to the lives of the people of Scotland: jobs, homes and public services. Those are central themes of the Executive's and Labour's plans for Scotland, as are the goals of prosperity and social inclusion, which are not in opposition, but which complement each other. I commend to the Parliament the new legislative programme and the Executive's ambition for Scotland.

In this final debate on the bill, we have already heard members using phrases such as "coming to the end of a journey" and "reaching a destination". In many ways, it has felt as though the journey has been challenging and long. However, it has certainly been worth while and the fellow passengers have been great. I congratulate Bill Butler, the whole clerking team and my fellow committee members on their efforts. It became clear to me from examining the evidence as a member of the bill committee that the reopening of the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway line will be a huge boost to the community in Clackmannanshire and to all those who will use the new service. Of course, the line will benefit not only them but, as the minister said, everyone in Scotland. By freeing up paths on the Forth rail bridge, it will benefit rail services on the whole of the east coast line. We heard strong evidence from Clackmannanshire Council and Scottish Enterprise on the substantial benefits that will come to the local economy as a direct result of the construction of the line. I certainly appreciate the council's argument that the lack of such a facility in the past has meant that the area has not developed as it might otherwise have done. In agreeing that the line should be built, we not only benefit passengers but give a green light to more business in the area—that has been a vital consideration. Ultimately, we agreed that the line should go ahead, and we agreed with the promoter on key aspects such as the route, because the overall benefit of the line will be so great and we were persuaded that that should be the overriding concern. It is important to stress that we took the concerns of the objectors to the bill very seriously, as others have said. We visited many of the people who are concerned about the impact of the  new line on them and their homes, and we visited them in their homes to get a clear idea of what the line would mean to them. They were vocal and clear about their worries and about the potential for the line to impact on their lives. We carefully considered what they had to say. Ultimately, we have not been able to accede to their requests where we firmly believe that those requests threaten the economic viability of the project. I know exactly why Tricia Marwick said that this feels like the end of the line, but it is not the end of the line for the promoter, who will act on the committee's report and provide mitigation in a number of ways for those people who will be affected by the line. Those measures are outlined in the report. Mark Ruskell referred to compensation, and we have made it clear that the promoter must be better at informing people who live near the line about the compensation that they might be entitled to. There is no doubt that in the evidence-taking on the bill objectors were given substantial opportunities to put forward their points of view, both in writing and in oral evidence, and the process allowed their views to be well aired. Of course, the promoter had more resources with which to put its case, but I do not believe that that hampered the committee's ability to weigh up the evidence. It is important to point out that although there are perhaps some benefits in the private bill process for the consideration of transport infrastructure proposals, there are significant drawbacks—that comment echoes what others have said and follows on from Alasdair Morgan's comments. At times it seemed odd for a planning proposal to be handled by parliamentary procedure and in many ways it was an onerous task in terms of parliamentary resources. Westminster no longer considers such planning proposals and I am pleased that the Procedures Committee, of which I am a member, has decided to review the Parliament's future involvement in such processes. For me, the most important aspect of being involved in the process is that it will result in a new railway line being built. In terms of the Scottish Executive's transport policy, that is a good thing. The reopening of the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway is a good thing not only for the economy of Clackmannanshire and the people in the local area who will be passengers on the new line—I hope to join them in a crowded train on the first journey—but for the whole of Scotland. I commend the bill to the Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to improve Scotland's marine environment. (S2O-2960)

The answer was comprehensive and it shows that the minister is aware that improving our marine environment is vital environmentally and for those whose livelihoods depend on it. One approach that has been taken in other countries to achieve that aim is the establishment of marine national parks. Does he agree that the establishment of a national coastline park in Scotland could help to ensure the proper management and improvement of the marine environment?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is taking forward the findings of the Prime Minister's strategy unit's report on the UK fishing industry. (S2O-2845)

I welcome that answer. Does the minister agree that the Scottish Executive, in consultation with our fishing industry, must take the lead on decisions to ensure a profitable and sustainable fleet? Will he reaffirm that the Executive is not contemplating any further decommissioning, but is considering the suggestions in the report that are useful, such as  those on ensuring transparency in the catching figures and those on the use of different options for restricting effort?

The Procedures Committee's report on "Two Minor Changes to Standing Orders" recommends changes that are just that: they are minor and uncontroversial. I cannot envisage their causing any huge controversy, as the committee report makes it clear that they will do nothing more than tidy up and update standing orders. Therefore, I have little to add to the remarks of the committee convener, who has accurately reflected the report and the committee's opinion. On the proposed change to rule 2.7.1, it is only sensible that the default meeting place of the Parliament should be changed to Holyrood. After all, having spent all that time and money on the building, we should at least try to make use of it. Furthermore, the Church of Scotland will no doubt  want its Assembly Hall back. However, I also welcome the fact that, although the default venue for the Parliament will be changed, no amendment will be made to the following paragraph—rule 2.7.2—which allows the Parliament to meet in other venues. The huge success of the Parliament's meetings in Aberdeen two years ago shows that temporary relocations whereby the Parliament is taken out to other parts of Scotland can be hugely beneficial, albeit that they may be administratively challenging. The proposed change to rule 5.8.1 will simply bring the timescale for budget scrutiny that is set out in the rule into line with current practice. Again, that is a sensible move, which I cannot imagine will cause controversy. The changes that are recommended in the "Suspension of Standing Orders" report will merely create flexibility and make standing orders more effective in light of the current practice of parliamentary business. I have nothing more to add to what the committee convener has said, so I hope that the Parliament will agree to the motion.

I welcome the Deputy First Minister's confirmation that the threshold for repayment of the graduate endowment is to rise. Earlier, the Deputy First Minister referred to decisions made by Westminster. Can he confirm that appropriate consultation took place between the Scottish Executive and the Department for Education and Skills before this decision was made, as consultation was an important issue that was raised in the committee report? Does the minister agree that, while the proposals outlined today are part of the solution to the problems created by England's introduction of top-up fees, the major way of resolving the issues would be to find ways of putting extra resources into our universities to create a level playing field? Does he agree that that would resolve some of the issues relating to cross-border flows of students?

I congratulate David Davidson on securing the debate, which has raised important issues and concerns. I associate myself with his remarks and with those of Brian Adam. I am sure that the  Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will confirm the Executive's support for the excellent facility at Newton Dee for 200 vulnerable people and their carers. As has been said, the real issue that we are discussing centres on transport and the construction of the western peripheral route, which is why I am pleased that the Minister for Transport is here to listen to the debate. The people who run the centre at Newton Dee are concerned about the impact that the construction of the route will have on the community, as are the carers and families and those who benefit from the centre and from all the excellent resources and facilities, which have been referred to and outlined eloquently. Those concerns must be taken seriously, because we are talking about a facility that caters for some of the most vulnerable people in our society in the north-east. I am sure that a peaceful environment is of huge benefit to the community at Newton Dee. However, as others have said, we must strike a balance between the benefits to the community of that environment and the benefits of the western peripheral route, which will be an important strategic, economic and transport benefit for the north-east. I do not want a delay in the construction of the route, but within the present timescale, there must be time for the Executive to engage in consultation, negotiation and close co-operation with everyone who is involved in the community. The Executive should listen to the concerns that have been outlined effectively and in such a high-profile way and minimise the impact that the construction of the western peripheral route may have. Brian Adam talked about noise reduction measures, which are a possibility, and David Davidson mentioned some of the route issues. I hope that we get detailed responses, which I hope will be positive, to the issues that have been raised in the debate. I also hope that the Executive will consider the issues seriously. I am sure that it will do so, because—as we heard from David Davidson and Brian Adam—the centre provides a much-needed, valued and excellent facility that deserves our support. Within reason, every action should be taken to ensure that the resource can continue to work to the best of its ability and can be as valued, productive and constructive as it is now when the new route is constructed.

To ask the First Minister how the new ScotRail franchise will help develop an integrated transport system. (S2F-931)

FirstGroup's success in bidding for the ScotRail franchise is welcomed in the north-east as a huge achievement for an Aberdeen-based company. However, does the First Minister agree that what would be most welcome throughout Scotland is a new franchise that delivers a public transport system that is better integrated through routes and schedules and, as a result, is more efficient for passengers?

There should be unanimous agreement in the Parliament on the idea that we want to play a leading role in the European Union. Of course, such unanimity is lacking and it is perhaps a forlorn hope that it will ever be obtained. There should also be unanimity on our desire to have a prosperous fishing industry that has a long future ahead of it. There is agreement in the Parliament on that goal, but there is genuine disagreement on how to achieve it. The SNP's motion seems to create conflict between those two goals when there should be none. The UK can adopt the EU constitution as it stands, including the part of it on the CFP, and support a successful Scottish fishing industry that has a prosperous future. That is what our subscription to the CFP is about. We always seek to get the best possible deal for Scottish fishermen within the CFP and we will press for changes that achieve that. However, if we had no CFP at all, we would have no relative stability, no Hague preference and no Shetland box. We should remember the progress that we can make through CFP negotiations. Progress was made this year with the improved haddock quota and, through further negotiations, progress was made on increasing the flexibility to catch it. We are making progress on increased local decision making within the CFP, with the establishment of regional advisory councils, which have been welcomed in the industry.  The CFP exists because we need international management of our fish stocks; it also encourages the necessary conservation of our fish stocks. We have to take a responsible attitude to those stocks, or there will be no industry in the future. The SNP argues that withdrawing from the CFP would be a panacea for the problems of the industry, but to do that is to visit a cruel deception on our fishermen. If there were no CFP there would be a free-for-all, or we would have to negotiate new agreements with every neighbouring country, because fish migrate between waters. Such agreements would have to deal with exactly the same problems and issues that the CFP does, and I do not foresee them resulting in a better arrangement. On the basis of false arguments, the SNP would threaten our position not only at the heart of Europe and in signing up to the constitution, which is necessary, but in the European Union itself. As the Commission has made clear, countries cannot withdraw from the CFP and remain members of the EU. The SNP would threaten our signing up to the vital new constitution—which will be key in creating a new Europe that includes the new member states—on the basis that the constitution simply reiterates the current position on the CFP. The constitution does nothing new. It does not change anything. It simply confirms existing agreements that were established in the 1950s and which we signed up to in the 1970s. Nicola Sturgeon confirmed that. For a party that says that it is so much in favour of the European Union and which tells us it wants an independent Scotland in Europe, opposing the constitution on that basis is bizarre. The policy positions that the SNP has taken would mean that Scotland would be out of Europe. The SNP would threaten our membership of the EU, when 287,000 jobs in Scotland are dependent on exports to the EU. SNP members' pledges of being pro-Europe ring hollow when they say that they will vote no in a referendum on the constitution simply because it confirms the existing status of the CFP. Any members of the SNP who are genuinely pro-Europe must be bewildered by the stance that their party is taking. That stance will do no service to the fishing industry, no service to people who work in every other industry in Scotland, and no service to the vital goal of achieving a thriving European Union with new members. Anybody who genuinely wants to achieve that goal should endorse the constitution. I look forward to taking part in the yes campaign in the referendum, whether the SNP is part of it or not. Perhaps the SNP's true colours will be exposed if it joins the no campaign on the basis of political opportunism. All genuine pro-Europeans will be part of the yes campaign and will be doing the right thing, not just for the people of Europe, but for all the people of Scotland.

The Executive's targets to increase electricity generation from renewable sources are ambitious but achievable, and we are making progress towards them by investing in and encouraging the renewable energy industry and some of the technologies to which Shiona Baird referred. The industry has huge potential not only for creating a Scotland of cleaner energy production, but for allowing us to reap the rewards of its development in economic benefit and job creation if we continue to provide the right support. Of course, a wide-ranging debate will take place about the right mix of future energy production to ensure a secure supply and lower carbon emissions. As I am sure that we will hear from other members, an important role remains for more established electricity generation methods. We have heard before in the chamber from those who are worried about reliance on wind power because they fear that its energy supply may be intermittent. I have heard during the Enterprise and Culture Committee's inquiry that our future mix of energy generation will be able to deal with intermittency. More concerning is the intermittent support from some Opposition parties for renewable energy developments. SNP and Tory MSPs give us warm words about how they want more renewable energy production, but they oppose specific wind farm proposals. The Tories even propose a national moratorium on wind farm developments. Such attitudes, which are based on political opportunism, will not secure progress on renewable energy.

I have not spoken to them about those proposals. I am talking about the Executive's strategy as a whole—that is what the motion refers to. What the SNP's amendment says about wind farm planning applications contradicts the SNP's overall strategy of having more ambitious renewable energy targets. The member must examine that contradiction. The Executive's strategy is in contrast to the other parties' political opportunism, because it is based on encouraging the development of  experimental new technologies and supporting technologies that are in the marketplace. It does that successfully through the programme of renewable obligation certificates. Making progress now on developing our renewable energy is not only an environmental imperative. It is not simply part of a green agenda, worthy as that might be; it is an economic imperative, too. Debates may take place over the aesthetics of wind farms, and planning processes should be sensitive to several factors, including the environmental impact of proposals. I am sure that Dr Murray would have referred to such matters. We hear often from a small but vocal group of people, regularly including the Tories, who oppose wind farms and specific developments. When the Enterprise and Culture Committee visited Campbeltown, we heard about the extremely positive impact that the wind farm there is having on the local economy. It is providing vital jobs for local people in an area where they are greatly needed.

I would not want the Labour group to be dictated to by anybody, and certainly not on such an issue. I am sure that John Home Robertson will refer to the matters that Mr Mundell mentioned. I am talking about the benefits of renewable energy and I want to make progress on describing what we can achieve with that. We could bring great benefits to our economy by investing in developing renewable energy technologies. Tidal energy is a particularly exciting development because of its potential to provide a predictable energy supply. In particular, I want to refer to offshore technologies, which are not being neglected—they are being invested in. The Executive has recognised their potential in the funding that it has given to research projects, such as the £2 million that was given to the European Marine Energy Centre in Orkney, and the intermediary technology institute for energy in Aberdeen will help us to consider how we can diversify current skills and resources in the oil and gas sector into developing offshore renewables. The Executive has also supported the development of offshore wind through a research grant for the plans to develop Europe's first deep offshore wind farm. Those plans propose to place some 200 turbines on existing platforms in the  Beatrice oilfield, and there is the potential to generate around half of the new generation that is needed to meet the Executive's 40 per cent target for 2020. In Scotland, we have some of the world's leading expertise in new technologies for marine and tidal energy, at universities such as the Robert Gordon University. That is no accident, but part of the Executive's strategy for funding research. I hope that that funding can be backed up by the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council looking to fund more marine energy research in our universities, because, by capitalising on the development of such technology in Scotland, we can be Europe's leaders in the industry. I was pleased to see that the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland has set up a marine energy sub-group, and that meetings are to take place with people who are developing the marine energy sector in Portugal, to which Murdo Fraser and others have referred. Indeed, we heard much about that matter during the committee's inquiry. We must ensure that we are in a position to capitalise on the expertise that we have in Scotland and ensure that the skills and infrastructure that have made Aberdeen the energy capital of Europe can be applied to successful new industry, with new ways of developing energy that will go beyond the lifespan of the oil and gas industry. The minister has rightly stated that Scotland has the greatest marine energy potential in Europe and the Executive has welcomed reports that 35,000 jobs could be created throughout the United Kingdom in the renewable energy industry by 2020. Nearly 2,000 people are currently employed in the industry in Scotland. The committee's inquiry heard from the Scottish Renewables Forum that as many as 24,000 jobs could be created through marine and tidal energy production in Scotland alone by 2015. That is why I am pleased that the Executive is investing in developing marine energy, which represents the great potential of the renewable energy industry as a whole, not only to improve our environment, but to benefit our economy and create jobs. It is also why I lament the timid support and confused strategies for developing renewable energy that are displayed in the Opposition amendments, why I applaud the Executive's bold strategy of developing renewable energy and why I support the Executive's motion.

Will the minister join me in welcoming today's announcement that the VisitScotland expo will return to Aberdeen next year, which will bring tourism industry representatives from throughout the globe back to the city? Is that a positive sign that the new hub structure will lead not to a loss of local influence but to a strategy that meets the tourism industry's needs throughout Scotland?

To ask the First Minister what action is being taken to ensure that the activities of gangmasters are properly regulated. (S2F-795)

The First Minister will be aware of recent arrests made by Grampian police in Aberdeen and Fraserburgh as a result of investigations into illegal activities by gangmasters. Does the First Minister agree that, although some businesses, including fish processing businesses, have genuine recruitment problems, resorting to the use of illegal labour is not the answer? Does he agree that the measures proposed in Jim Sheridan's private member's bill at Westminster represent a significant step forward in regulating the work of gangmasters; and does he agree that, although we welcome people coming to this country legally to work, those who are brought here illegally are too often being exploited for the benefit of unscrupulous gangmasters?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it endorses the change in strategy by the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency. (S2O-1587)

Given the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency's new approach, which is based on new laws on seizing the assets of drug dealers, will the minister assure me that the agency will work with the appropriate authorities in England to tackle the problem of drug dealers from the midlands bringing crack cocaine to Aberdeen? Could he assure me that, as the profits of drugs gangs are targeted, the proceeds arising from the assets that are seized will be used to support schemes to tackle drugs misuse for the benefit of communities that are plagued by drugs crime, including communities in Aberdeen?

At least the committee has given a serious and intelligent reply. When the Enterprise and Culture Committee was considering the impact of top-up fees south of the border, we were talking about a situation that we might have to deal with. Now, however, we are talking about a challenge that we have to rise to. I am pleased that the Executive has made it clear that it will not introduce top-up fees and that it is determined to ensure that our universities are not disadvantaged by the changes down south. I commend to the Executive the recommendations in the report, which, if implemented, would contribute to ensuring that higher education in Scotland maintains its current high standard of being among the best in the world. Whatever the debates are, that should not be a point of discussion.  The whole committee agreed about the importance of maintaining Scotland's excellence in higher education provision in universities and colleges, where we are ahead of the game in giving people access to higher education. Colleges' contribution must be recognised. As we have heard, agreement is perhaps not as great over the competitive advantage that Scottish universities have. However, we heard evidence that acknowledged that Government funding for universities in Scotland is better than that in England. The Executive's commitment to increasing higher education sector funding from £600 million in 1999-2000 to more than £800 million in 2005-06 is clear. By any measure, that is a significant investment increase. We have heard that the rate of participation in higher education in Scotland is higher than that in England. England is following our lead on student funding by providing bursaries for poorer students. We are experiencing success in encouraging people from all backgrounds and parts of society to continue in education. We need to work to preserve those successes.

I suspect that the diddling and fiddling is in Alex Neil's statistics. I heard his comments about OECD comparisons. Our OECD comparisons on gross domestic product are good, so I will treat his statistics with some dubiety. The report outlines the concern that the funding advantages that we afford our universities could be eroded. The fear is that higher pay might lure some of our best academic staff south. That discussion takes place while the Association of University Teachers throughout the UK is campaigning for fairer pay and conditions for staff whose rates of pay have not kept up with those of comparable professions.

The report refers to national pay bargaining, which could help to prevent some staff from going down south. I commend to the Executive the committee's recommendations on  staff recruitment and retention and particularly its recommendations on short-term contractors, to which Alasdair Morgan referred. Dealing with that issue could keep some of those staff here. I was encouraged by what the minister said about examining cross-border student flows. I am especially interested in what we will do to address the impact on students from Scotland who wish to study in England, because they could face costs, too. During the inquiry, we heard that what stands Scotland in good stead for keeping excellent research in Scotland are the research communities that we have developed. Biomedicine research at the University of Dundee is an example of our success. Moreover, the University of Aberdeen today announced plans for a new state-of-the-art health research facility. If we want to have a knowledge economy and to capitalise on innovation, we must allow universities to keep that research in Scotland. That is why the report calls for increased funding and why it says that any Barnett consequentials that flow from the new investment down south should be prioritised for higher education. The minister referred to communication. I regard devolution in the UK as the best and the right constitutional settlement, but it has become clear to me from what has happened that each Government in the UK should consider the impact of its decisions on the rest of the UK and not take decisions in isolation. Ministers should consult their colleagues in other Administrations fully when such decisions are being made. I am pleased that progress is being made on that. The Executive has every right to be proud of its record on funding higher education and on expanding access. The goal is to maintain Scotland's competitive advantage. I have heard today about stark choices and a supposed delay in response, but the unrealistic, knee-jerk, impractical and unworkable responses from some are in stark contrast to the considered response in the committee's report. Not until 2006 will even some of the top-up fee income be received in universities down south. The First Minister has made it clear that Scottish Labour is the party of enterprise and that an enterprising economy needs a successful higher education sector. We are at an important juncture in determining higher education funding for the future. We must maintain high participation and equality of access must be key. Most of all, we must ensure that our universities have the right funds to deliver high-quality education and research. I hope that the recommendations in the report will play a key part in determining future policy. I commend them and the motion in the convener's name to Parliament.

Although the minister acknowledges that the Executive wants to make further progress on the issue, he will be aware of the additional provision of drug treatment services in Aberdeen in recent years. I am sure that he will join me in welcoming the reduction in drug-related incidents that Grampian police announced this week. Will he tell us what consideration the Executive will give to the provision of residential rehabilitation services based in the north-east to help to reduce drug misuse in the region?

The Procedures Committee has given a great deal of consideration to the issues and reports that we are debating today. We propose to make the  procedure for emergency bills more transparent so that it runs more smoothly. We have also sought to make changes to Executive question time to create a format that will not only allow more focused scrutiny of specific areas of the Executive's work on a broadly departmental basis, but make Executive question time more distinctive and, it is hoped, give it a higher profile in its own right. The changes that we are suggesting to the timing and format of both First Minister's question time and Executive question time are on a trial basis. We believe that we are striking a balance between giving the new formats time to bed down and ensuring that tried and tested formats are in place when we move into our new chamber at Holyrood. Even before the decoupling of the question times, it was clear that we had to examine ways in which to ensure that Executive question time had a distinct identity and a profile that did not simply feed off its proximity to First Minister's question time. We also needed to look to its format, rather than where it was in relation to FMQT, to find ways of attracting a larger audience and increasing its profile. The idea of introducing a thematic element to Executive question time reflects the evidence that the committee received, which included a letter from the First Minister proposing that we consider such a change. Under the proposal, there will be six department-based themes, although, to allow for flexibility, we would not enshrine that in the standing orders. There would be questioning for two departments each week, allowing more focus on areas of ministerial responsibility. The additional time that we propose for Executive questions means that, every week, two themes will receive adequate time for debate. The fact that we propose to continue to have an element of general questioning means that members will still be able to ask questions that either are not covered under the themes for questioning in that week but that need to be discussed because they are topical, or do not fall neatly into the themes that have been suggested. Moreover, all members will have an equal right to ask questions and an equal chance of having their questions selected. I believe that it is good for back benchers that we did not accept the proposal to have a mini-FMQT on a departmental basis, as that would have placed the majority of the focus on party spokespeople. Almost inevitably, the issue in the committee's recent deliberations that has received most attention, especially outwith the committee, is that of the format and timing of FMQT. I say to Jamie McGrigor that, although Alastair Campbell has been accused of many things, he can rarely have  been accused of setting the time for questions in the Scottish Parliament. Given the fate of others, Mr McGrigor should perhaps exercise caution before trying to hold Alastair Campbell accountable for that.

The mindset of Alastair Campbell is to get as much attention and publicity as possible for the Prime Minister and his policies. That is why Prime Minister's question time was moved to an earlier time. He probably made the same judgment as was made here when we decided that we wanted to try to get a broader cross-section of the Scottish public listening to and watching FMQT. Our report reflects a widely held opinion that the allocation of additional time for FMQT has worked well, giving adequate opportunity for minority party leaders to ask questions and giving back benchers a reasonable chance of asking a question or a supplementary. The report also reflects the view that the current format of FMQT is successful. More controversial is the timing of FMQT. Much of the committee's debate focused on the audience figures for programmes that cover FMQT, such as "Holyrood Live". As Bruce Crawford said, the BBC gave evidence arguing against the current timing of FMQT, which it believes has adversely affected the audience figures. There is no doubt that "Holyrood Live" provides invaluable coverage of the Parliament's work. However, we must look at the broader picture of the coverage of FMQT on other BBC programmes and across the channels. The highlights of FMQT cannot be broadcast on the BBC lunchtime news or on the lunchtime news of STV or Grampian TV.

I do not have time. I am in my last minute. The cumulative audience figure for all those programmes is much higher than the figure that "Holyrood Live" is able to achieve. The issue is not only about television audience figures. The fact is that the shift in time has made it easier for schoolchildren to attend. We gathered, from our questionnaires from people who had attended FMQT, that many people found the current time convenient. The changes that we propose mean that both  question times will run in their new formats for a trial period. We will then have an opportunity to review their success before we settle on the formats that we will use in the new Parliament building. That is a sensible approach. The changes that we have recommended are innovative and give us an opportunity to take more interest in the way in which we ask questions of ministers. I commend the conclusions of the committee's reports to Parliament.

It makes a refreshing change to be able to welcome a motion lodged by the Scottish National Party. I welcome the debate principally for two reasons. First, it identifies areas on which the Executive is making progress and, secondly, it addresses concerns that I highlighted in November in a motion on the crisis in Scottish football. That was in the wake of Dundee going into administration and, although I knew that the situation was serious, I had not imagined that, only a couple of months later, another SPL club would go into administration, with yet another seemingly on the verge. What makes those experiences particularly painful for fans is that they have few options but to look on while the clubs they love face financial ruin. As someone who was, until this season, a season-ticket holder at Tynecastle, with a long family tradition of supporting Hearts, that has come home to me cruelly. Whatever the financial arguments over the future of Hearts are, the owners of the club are persevering with their plan to sell Tynecastle despite overwhelming opposition from Hearts supporters. I am pleased, therefore, that the Executive is backing supporters trusts, with a view to getting fans' representatives on boards. I know that colleagues—including Scott Barrie at Dunfermline and Lewis Macdonald at Aberdeen—are involved in individual trusts, and I hope that the future of Scottish football is not one where owners have all the say and fans have no say. The other area that the Executive has prioritised is the grass-roots development of the game. The  Executive has invested in youth academies, and the Scottish Football Partnership is overseeing £7 million of investment in developing young footballing talent and finding the players of the future who will be vital to our success at international level. I have been surprised to hear some senior people in the game suggesting that the Executive should intervene directly to help some clubs, when the SFA has made it clear that it does not envisage such a role for itself. That is not to say that we can afford to take a laissez-faire approach. The SPL has announced that clubs in administration will be docked points, but there has to be constructive support too. The Executive has a role to play in reviewing how the governance of the game can better support clubs and the development of the sport more widely, and I look forward to the publication of the SFA review on that issue. There could be a role for Parliament to contribute ideas for the future and I hope that, in the midst of its busy schedule, the Enterprise and Culture Committee could find time to investigate how all the stakeholders in senior football could work together to help clubs to tackle their financial problems. That includes the communities around clubs and sponsoring organisations such as the Bank of Scotland. I have had a useful meeting with the bank on its involvement in supporting football. The investment that it puts into clubs and communities is hugely welcome. It has insisted in the past that it will not pull the plug on the many clubs that owe it huge debts. I hope that that policy will continue despite the recent events at Livingston, and the apparent pressure that it is putting on the Hearts board to sell Tynecastle. I also hope that it will provide financial advice and guidelines for clubs and help the SFA to engage in more regular financial scrutiny of clubs. Another proposal to help clubs out of their financial plight is ground sharing, where that is desirable. A number of interesting ideas have emerged in the review published today by the all-party group on football at Westminster. In short, a team effort is needed to address the problem. What irks most about the crisis is that many fans have been saying for years that it was coming. I hope that, in future, fans will have a say in ensuring that our football clubs do not reach such a crisis again because, although football is a game, it contributes a vital economic and cultural boost to communities throughout Scotland. It is not just the clubs that cannot afford to take no action to ensure a better, more prosperous future for Scottish football.

This year's funding settlement for local authorities is a reflection not only of the importance that the Executive places on the vital public services that local authorities deliver, but of the fact that it is asking local authorities to achieve more than they have done in the past. The minister has stated before that adequate resources are being given to councils to carry out their new duties. Surely the figures speak for themselves. We should all welcome the year-on-year increases in funding that local authorities will receive, which will be 5.2 per cent next year and 4.2 per cent the year after that. By 2006, the Executive will be giving Scottish local authorities just short of £8 billion. Andrew Welsh raised the issue of three-year settlements, but they are by far preferable to the previous one-year settlements for councils  because they allow councils to plan and to manage resources better. The new prudential system for capital funding is a welcome empowerment for councils in setting their agendas for important investments. I welcome the agenda of empowering local decision making. I am well aware of the impact of the new funds at local level because councils in the north-east are benefiting from it. Aberdeen City Council will receive an increase in funding of nearly £10 million between 2004 and 2006. The issue is not only about overall spending, but about specific initiatives. Aberdeen and Dundee have benefited from funding from the cities growth fund. In Aberdeen, that means a £2.5 million investment in a variety of projects to encourage economic growth and regeneration in the city. That money comes on top of the investment in the intermediary technology institutes that are to be based in Aberdeen and Dundee and the investment in the western peripheral route, which will benefit not only Aberdeen but the whole region. The minister will be aware that some councils still argue that they need more resources. The Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services recently met Aberdeenshire Council to discuss its fair share campaign. Is he aware that Aberdeen City Council is also campaigning for a higher funding allocation? It argues that its present allocation is the lowest per capita in Scotland. Perhaps he could tell us in closing whether he agrees with the case that that council is making. I, too, received an e-mail today—to which Brian Adam referred—from the leader of Aberdeen City Council. In the e-mail, she says that the current funding for the council means that the council is considering raising council tax by a figure that is several times the rate of inflation, which I find to be concerning and surprising. I wonder whether the Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services can tell us whether the Executive believes that Aberdeen City Council needs to increase council tax so much to balance the books. Population decrease is another issue of concern to councils in the north-east—I am sure that that concern is shared by councils throughout Scotland. Two of the worst projections are for Aberdeen and Dundee, with declines of 17 per cent and 14 per cent respectively predicted by the Registrar General. The minister has in today's debate again made a welcome commitment to providing funding for councils that have to address such circumstances. I hope that the Executive will monitor the situation and respond appropriately. I am aware that the funding settlement is generous for local authorities. It would therefore seem to be bizarre if it were followed by large council tax increases in some areas. I welcome the additional funding that the settlement will bring  to local authorities, but I would be interested to hear the deputy minister respond to the concerns that authorities have expressed. I hope that the Executive will continue to give our local services the investment that they need, as it has certainly done in this welcome funding settlement.

Once again, a debate on student funding has provoked a wide range of strongly held opinions. Nobody disagrees that the prospect of top-up fees in England represents a major challenge to our higher education sector, but we should all be clear that the challenge is to keep Scottish education where it is now—ahead of the game. We have heard various figures quoted, but what is undeniable is that higher education in Scotland has for many years had higher levels of funding than higher education in the rest of the UK has had, as Mike Watson illustrated. The rest of the UK is playing catch-up on student funding. When other members were taking their seats in the first session of Parliament, I was campaigning for better student funding in my role as president of NUS Scotland. In that job, I met countless people who had benefited from Labour's policy of widening access. The introduction of bursaries for poorer students remains one of the most significant achievements of the Scottish Executive, and we heard from the minister about the significant increases in funding that the Executive has pledged to higher education. Challenges there may be, but the doom-mongers among the SNP and Tory members are well wide of the mark. Ever since I have been involved in the debate on university funding, it has benefited from processes of careful consideration. From Cubie to Dearing to the Executive's own current review of lifelong learning, the debate represents the strategic thinking that Fiona Hyslop demanded. By contrast, as Jamie Stone said, knee-jerk reactions and political point scoring that are backed up by no practical proposals for long-term funding of higher education benefit no one, least of all students.  In this Parliament, far from there being a gloomy outlook, there will be no fees; it is right to say that they are not fees but contributions to bursaries. We will also review the level of bursaries for poorer students.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. In the long term, if top-up fees in England proceed, there are a number of measures that we can take that will help our universities to compete without disadvantaging students. Legitimate concerns, which were constructively outlined by Mike Watson and Des McNulty, include the possible impacts on academic staff and on Scottish students studying in England. However, a number of tools to deal with those issues have been suggested in the Enterprise and Culture Committee's report. The report's suggestions should be implemented. There should be better support for staff, particularly junior support staff, and institutions should be encouraged to diversify their funding streams through working more with business, for example. We must also prioritise any possible Barnett consequentials for higher education. Those useful proposals are in stark contrast to the paucity in the Opposition's response to the situation. An example of that is the opportunism of the Tories. Murdo Fraser accuses Labour of opportunism, but what could be more opportunistic than to oppose a policy without proposing an alternative. Phil Gallie and Murdo Fraser talked of the Tories expanding access, but at least until the demise of Iain Duncan Smith the Tories' policy was to restrict access to higher education. The SNP, which has no ideas or plans for increasing investment in higher education, instead indulges itself once more in misguidedly using today's debate to attack the constitution. I agree with Murdo Fraser that to do so is irrelevant because an independent Scotland would face exactly the same challenges. Mike Watson's questions about how we would pay for what Opposition members propose have gone unanswered. Jim Mather supports the comments of Lord Sutherland, who advocates an entirely free market in higher education. It is surprising that Jim Mather should support such a view. Perhaps all Parliaments in the UK should in future give more consideration to how their decisions will affect one another. When there were changes to student funding here, the SNP did not suggest that we consult MPs first. Now SNP members tell us to tell Westminster what to do. If the reverse were true for the Scotland Act 1998 or any other act, they would be furious with MPs.  Today's debate has been another example of the Opposition's being high on criticism but short of ideas on finding a way forward. The Executive is well placed to meet the challenges and to give Scotland's universities and colleges the support that they need to continue to be accessible to people in every part of our society and to be among the best, not just in the UK, but in the world.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Executive is taking to retain jobs in the oil and gas industry in the north-east. (S2F-513)

The First Minister will be aware of the recent job losses in the oil and gas industry in Aberdeen and the importance of exploration and drilling to the industry. He will also be aware of job cuts in the drilling industry and the low level of drilling in the North sea last year and this year. Is he aware of proposals by the trade union Amicus further to encourage the transfer of unused assets in the North sea from major companies to smaller operators? How is the Executive supporting such initiatives?

I welcome the additional income that the agreement could bring to sections of the fishing industry, but will the Executive continue to press for additional days' fishing for those with less than 5 per cent cod bycatch, particularly as the ability to minimise bycatches improves?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in tackling drugs crime through its drugs court pilots. (S2O-971)

The success of the drugs court pilots will be widely welcomed. Does the minister  agree that drug testing and treatment orders have been a success in Aberdeen, where there has been a particular problem with drug-related crime, as illustrated by the recent arrest by Grampian police of several people in relation to cocaine dealing? Does he also agree that the establishment of a drugs court in Aberdeen could be an extremely effective tool in tackling drugs crime in the city?

I congratulate Richard Lochhead on securing the debate. I also welcome the cross-party support for the campaign to improve access to children's therapy services in north-east Scotland. I also join him in welcoming Julie Fawns and all those who have travelled from the north-east to Edinburgh for the debate this evening. I support whole-heartedly the call in the motion for greater access to vital therapies for children with special needs in Aberdeenshire. There is no doubt that those services are under great strain. That has been pointed out in Richard Lochhead's speech and in the motion. Action needs to be taken now to address the deficiencies in provision that are caused by underfunding and the problem of recruitment and retention of therapists, particularly the problem of recruiting enough therapists to meet the need that now exists in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire. Richard Lochhead referred to the worrying statistics that show the need for recruitment. In Ellon last month, I was fortunate enough to meet some of the parents who have done so much to highlight the issue. Their determination to get access to therapy for their children was clear and impressive to see. I heard about the great strain that has been put on them and about the sacrifices that they have made to look after their children. Their commitment to do as much as they can to help their children should be met with a similar commitment from Government and the local agencies and authorities that provide the services. Nobody is saying that it is an easy job—it is not. The number of children in Aberdeenshire with autism appears to have increased greatly. There is a great debate as to whether that is down to better diagnosis of the condition or to a range of other factors, some of which we do not know about. The fact is that greater pressures have been placed on therapy services and there has to be an adequate response. There is also no debate that educating a special needs child can be expensive. However, as the parents have pointed out, if a child remains low functioning there is the potential for them to remain in adult services from 18 to 80. That would result in even greater expense.

Thank you. I understand Brian Adam's concerns. I hope that the replacement measures that the Executive comes up with address the issue that he raises. I stress that the necessity for immediate action is not for the provision of new, untested or unproved therapies but for the basic therapy services that have been shown to benefit children. Parents have told me how much their children have benefited from the speech and language therapy that the children received. However, the children are able to receive that therapy only sporadically and after a long wait. Those therapies should be made available to children with special needs not because of the efforts of parents in trying to get them for their children or because parents can afford to pay for private services, which some parents have felt compelled to do. The therapies should be made available on the basis of need. I am sure that attempts are being made to do that, but it can only be an uphill struggle given the current shortage of available therapy. I am aware that the problem is one that is not solely for the north-east. However, when I met the parents, they told me that therapists in Aberdeenshire have a greater case load than that of therapists in any other area of Scotland apart from one. They told me about the specific lack of provision in Fraserburgh, which has been an on-going issue. They also told me about the waiting list for speech therapy in Peterhead that has 300 people on it and that places for the programme at St Andrew's School at Inverurie are heavily oversubscribed. There is clearly an inadequacy of provision. I have met some of the staff who have to work in this situation. It is important to stress that the staff who are involved in managing therapy services are doing an excellent job—one that is vital and difficult. They should be congratulated on their efforts, but they need more help to do their job. The question is what can be done. There is a desire for more collaborative work with the education authorities to help to deliver some of  those services and, crucially, we must consider the training that is available, as Richard Lochhead said. I have heard from parents who would be interested in undertaking training themselves in order to help their children and we have heard how in Aberdeen we hope to have more training in other areas—in dentistry for example—so that we can recruit people to the area to address current needs. I am pleased to hear about the progress that has been made with RGU and NHS Grampian and I hope that that potential is realised. Clearly, we must consider the allocation of resources to address the shortage of therapists in the area and all the agencies involved need to work in partnership to address the problem. The issue has gained support across the political spectrum in the Parliament. I hope that there can be a similar unity of purpose among providers of services to children, to give the staff who work day in, day out to help children the support that they require and to give the children who need those vital therapies the help that they need and deserve.

I have been on the same journey as the other committee members. We dealt with a great deal of evidence, both written and oral, and no stone was left unturned in examining the evidence and the issues before we arrived at today's debate on the preliminary stage report. I join David Mundell in congratulating Bill Butler on his convenership of the committee. I enjoyed the meetings, even though I had to act as a windbreak for David. I also thank Scott Barrie for mentioning that; perhaps I have found my niche. I pay particular tribute to the clerks, who had to deal with the great number of hefty documents that made up the evidence and who ensured that the committee meetings took place efficiently in  Alloa—the committee's work has been brought to the area in which the decisions on the bill will have an impact. I would like to record the fact that I found the site visit extremely useful. Committee members were given the chance to see exactly where the new line will run, which enabled us to see clearly the areas that will benefit from the new line and the properties whose residents argue that they would be adversely affected by the proposal. It was pleasing to see good attendances at the committee meetings in Alloa. Local people have clearly taken a great and active interest in the matter and I am sure that we will see some of those who attended our first evidence-taking sessions again when we return to Alloa to gather evidence for our deliberations at the consideration stage. Today, we are debating our report on the bill's general principles. The committee has concluded that we should recommend that Parliament agree to the general principles of the bill and that the bill continue as a private bill. We have received written and oral evidence from some of the objectors to the bill, including the Kincardine railway concern group. Those objections and others will be fully examined at the consideration stage. Inevitably, I will touch on some of what Bill Butler and other committee members have said, but I want to mention some of the issues that the committee considered during its evidence-taking sessions. The committee acknowledges in its report that some of the benefits of the railway may be "difficult to quantify at this stage", but I believe that we worked hard to ensure that our conclusions were based on the most robust evidence that we could obtain. We pushed witnesses for that evidence. We asked MVA for revised net present value figures in the light of new information on Longannet's potential lifespan and we pressed the promoter for full details of the consultation that had taken place with residents. We heard a great deal about the benefits that the railway could bring to Clackmannanshire, both from representatives of the local authority and from Scottish Enterprise. We did not just accept Scottish Enterprise's hypothesis; we gained hard evidence of businesses that would be attracted to the area if the railway line went ahead. As Bill Butler said, that information was supplied to the committee confidentially. As the report says, it soon became clear that the anticipated lifespan of the Longannet power station in MVA's original benefit study did not tally with Scottish Power's assessment. That complicated our assessment of the economic benefit. The future of Longannet is not clear cut; if  electricity prices change, Scottish Power could viably make the necessary changes for the station to meet the new environmental directives and so prolong its life. The lack of dialogue between the promoter and Scottish Power, to which David Mundell referred, was concerning. However, it was reassuring for the committee to hear from the minister the Executive's assessment that, despite the revisions in the economic-benefit case, investment in the project was still appropriate and valuable. Of course there are other benefits to the scheme. I have referred to the evidence that we heard from local authorities and Scottish Enterprise on the potential local economic benefit, but another area of potential benefit is the freeing up of rail paths as coal freight is transferred from being transported across the Forth rail bridge. That presents the opportunity for improved services for passengers on the east coast line, which would be a significant development, as Scott Barrie and Marilyn Livingstone said. We also heard that the reopening of the line would have other effects on the overall strategy for improving rail services. The scheme represents one of the biggest contributions to meeting the target of 80 per cent growth in freight transported by rail this decade; although it represents only about 0.5 per cent of that target, it is still one of the single biggest contributions. The committee has concluded that the proposed line will bring clear benefits in public policy terms. I urge the Parliament to support the general principles of the bill and I look forward to the consideration stage, when we will hear further evidence from the objectors and the promoter.

I welcome the debate. My remarks will be brief, as I have already spoken today and will be speaking again tomorrow; I am sure that members would not want to have too much of a good thing. I congratulate Mike Rumbles on securing the debate and I endorse fully his motion on reopening the station at Laurencekirk, which was closed in 1967. The motion is right to mention support for the measure; that support exists not only in Laurencekirk, but in the rest of the north-east. I am aware that the proposal is the culmination of on-going discussions between Aberdeenshire Council, the rail industry, the local community, local Labour Party members and, of course, Mike Rumbles. I welcome the assessments that are taking place and the fact that the Executive and ScotRail are providing investment to assess the costs and benefits of reopening the station. I believe that ScotRail has already carried out a study, which has estimated the costs of a basic two-platform station with a footbridge, passenger shelters and up to 20 parking spaces. That study has apparently already indicated that there is a positive business case for the project on the grounds that there will be transportation, economic and environmental benefits. Therefore, I am sure that we can be confident that any new studies would find that a station at Laurencekirk would improve public transport accessibility in the area, as well as support the wider economy.  The argument for improvements in transport infrastructure has been well made throughout the north-east. The western peripheral route was argued for successfully and the Executive is supporting the feasibility study for the Aberdeen crossrail project, the case for which I hope will be made successfully. That would open up more possibilities for a reopened station at Laurencekirk which, as members have mentioned, could be linked to the new crossrail service. I have heard the minister say that it is sometimes hard to make a best-value case for new rail routes and services, but I hope that the Laurencekirk proposal meets that case. It would fit in well with the Executive's stated aim of extending rail services and would improve access to transport in rural areas. I hope that the Executive will look favourably on the proposal. I reiterate my support for Mike Rumbles's motion.

I welcome what the minister said in his opening remarks and the fact that he sees the Commission's proposals for TACs as a starting point in the forthcoming negotiations. I welcome the fact that the Commission has not followed the most cautious scientific advice. However, we need to push for the best possible deal in the negotiations. There should be a shared view that we need to balance the conservation and recovery of stocks with the maintenance of a viable industry following the reduction in effort that it has already had to undergo. For the north-east of Scotland, it is vital that the industry's future is secured. Aberdeenshire Council's report on the economic impact of fishing on the north-east showed that some 1,300 people were employed in the fleet alone and that there was a turnover of around £120 million. It also showed that nine of the 10 areas with the most deprivation in Aberdeenshire are places that are dependent on fisheries. Those factors must be taken into consideration when the negotiations move on from the starting point of the Commission's TAC proposals. Although the Commission has not followed the most cautious scientific advice, the proposed 13.6 per cent cut in quota for monkfish is severe. There is surely also room for higher quotas for other species. I am pleased that the minister has said that he will continue to argue for a better deal for the haddock, monkfish and nephrops fisheries. There has to be a balance in securing the long-term future of the industry and preserving the fishing fleet.

We would obviously like there to be more effort in decoupling. However, I will come on to another issue to do with haddock, if Robin Harper will bear with me. There is no room for complacency when we consider the science. It is not reasonable to say that the sea is teeming with fish. At the last meeting of the North East Scotland Fisheries Development Partnership, we heard that, although stocks of haddock are relatively good now, that view is based on one good year class from 1999. There is a continued need for vigilance. There is still room for progress in the talks on quotas, but we have to ensure a long-term future for the industry. It is because we want to secure a future for the industry that the industry has had to accept restriction of fishing effort. Understandably, the debate has focused on the offshore aspect of the industry. However, I agree with Margaret Ewing that we must also consider the onshore industries that have been affected—for example, the businesses that supply gear, men and boats or that process catches. I have pressed the minister before to urge him to ensure that the processing sector is assisted. We should encourage a higher number of applications from processors for financial instrument for fisheries guidance aid. I endorse the Executive's position on the overall strategy. I do not believe that withdrawal from the CFP is a realistic option or that it would provide a workable solution to the problems that Scotland's fishing industry faces. We require reform of the CFP, not its abolition and a free-for-all in the North sea. There is general agreement that the CFP needs to change and that there should be more regional management. Progress on that is being made through the establishment of regional advisory councils. The CFP must be fair and the pain of conserving fish stocks must be shared—other nations must take their share of the responsibility. Scotland should get credit for the considerable efforts that have been made in decommissioning the Scottish fleet, even as other countries built up their fleets with EU money, so I welcome the minister's statement that 2001 will be taken as the baseline in the negotiations. The principle of relative stability, the Hague preference and the Shetland box are all viable aspects of the CFP. The UK delegation secured those aspects last December and they should not be given up.  Of course, the Tories advocate withdrawal from the CFP, even though they took us into it. The Scottish National Party—and Alex Salmond in particular—has suggested that it would be possible to withdraw from the CFP without withdrawing from the EU. Ted Brocklebank, who is not in the chamber to respond, said the same thing today. However, both the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and the European Commission have confirmed that that is not the case. I suspect that, even in its current Eurosceptic mood, the SNP does not advocate withdrawal from the EU. However, to suggest that withdrawal from the CFP is a panacea for the industry's problems is to visit a cruel deceit on our fishing industry.

The minister has made it clear that the position on EU competence has already been established in law, so some of the current debate is frankly—not to make a poor pun—a red herring. I do not believe that we can strike a better deal by negotiating unilateral agreements with other nations from a much weaker position. We should continue to press for reform of the CFP, because there are few issues on which international co-operation is more essential than marine conservation. If we pursue that realistic, achievable policy, we offer the best chance to our fishing industry of a better future in the long term.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is supporting the provision of dermatology services. (S2O-832)

Is the minister aware of the difficulties that have been experienced in recruiting a consultant to fill a vacancy in the dermatology department at NHS Grampian, which already has fewer consultants and departments than other parts of NHS Scotland that cover similarly sized areas? Is the minister aware that a peer-group review of the department highlighted the urgent need for extra investment? Finally, is he aware of the wider concern across Scotland that dermatology is often seen as a poor relation when it comes to investment in health services?

I, too, welcome the results of the Scottish house condition survey, which shows that the amount of fuel poverty in Scotland has halved. To reduce the number of fuel-poor people by nearly 400,000 while widening the definition of fuel poverty is a hugely significant achievement. It represents vital progress for the many vulnerable Scots who have lived for too long in cold, poorly insulated homes in a cold climate. That progress has been made not by accident, but through a well-thought-out strategy and a concerted effort by the Executive. I was fortunate enough to be at the launch of the Executive's free central heating programme three years ago, while I was working for Help the Aged Scotland. That charity welcomed the programme because it had been involved in highlighting the particular misery that is suffered by older people as a result of fuel poverty. Help the Aged Scotland ran a high-profile national campaign called "Heating or eating", which highlighted the stark choices that some older people have to make. Following that campaign, the chancellor introduced the winter fuel allowance, which has also been an important factor in reducing fuel poverty because it addresses the key point—let us provide older people with free central heating, but  let us ensure that they can afford to use it. That is why we should welcome today's announcement by the Department for Work and Pensions that, for the first time ever, about 2 million households that contain someone aged over 80 will automatically receive £100 on top of the £200 winter fuel payment. Another campaign by Help the Aged highlighted Scotland's excessive winter death rate, to which Mr Ruskell referred. Scotland's rate is worse than that of colder European countries; last winter's rate was higher than the normal rate by about 2,500 deaths, about 500 of which were in the Grampian and Tayside areas. Those figures are lower than in previous years, but they show that we still need to make progress. Of course, cold homes are one of a number of factors in such deaths, but older people are affected particularly badly by every aspect of fuel poverty and our winter climate. Three quarters of excessive winter deaths are in the over-75 age band, and 239,000 pensioner households live in fuel poverty—that is 65 per cent of the total number of households that are in fuel poverty. The progress that is being made shows that the Executive and the Government are targeting the correct groups of people in tackling fuel poverty, and that they are offering an holistic approach to the problem through a package of measures including warm deal grants and the central heating scheme. The Executive is helped in its efforts by other organisations; one notable scheme is SCARF, the save cash and reduce fuel campaign that was set up in Aberdeen in 1995 to offer education and advice on energy issues. That addresses the crucial point that people who are worried about fuel costs need to be given effective advice on how to use fuel efficiently, as Donald Gorrie said. It is important to monitor our progress in tackling fuel poverty and that is why I welcome the broad representation on the Executive's Scottish fuel poverty advisory group, which includes the power companies and voluntary sector groups. Vigilance is required to ensure that the free central heating scheme runs well. It is an excellent programme that has made a significant impact by lifting households out of fuel poverty, but I have come across a couple of cases in which people are unhappy with the standard of installation by contractors. Not only must we monitor the performance of Executive schemes, but we must monitor fuel poverty in general. We are moving ahead in leaps and bounds; that has been assisted by lower charges for household fuel consumption. However, we all know that prices could rise in future.  I am sure that the Executive is well aware of the challenges. I hope that it will take further successful measures to make progress towards its stated aim of ending fuel poverty in Scotland by 2016. That is a bold target but, on the evidence of recent progress, it is one that we can achieve.

Murdo Fraser's motion raises a vital and emotive issue and, in that sense, it is welcome. The planning process needs to balance the potential for development with the concerns of local residents. A balance needs to be struck and that will not happen if a moratorium is instructed. Like other members, I ask the Executive to do all that it can to encourage alternative forms of renewable energy. The minister is well aware of the excellent research that is being done at Robert Gordon University into tidal power and of the potential for the development of offshore wind in the Beatrice field, which is being promoted by Talisman Energy. We should do more to ensure that communities that are near wind farm developments benefit from them. The essence of my contribution is that there should be no moratorium. Consideration of proposals must be robust. That said, I am aware that companies that want to build wind farms find that they have to make a substantial number of applications in order for one proposal to be accepted. It should be remembered that some wind farm proposals have greater public support than others do. The minister is aware of proposals in Aberdeen for wind turbines to be located off the coast of the city. I am not saying that polls are a scientific measure, but one that was conducted in Aberdeen by the Evening Express on the proposals saw an 84 per cent vote in favour of the proposals and only an 11 per cent vote against. Of course, there needs to be more consultation than that, but I believe that the vote is an indication of the substantial body of opinion in Aberdeen. People want the city to be the energy capital of Europe now and in the long term. I do not believe that such aspirations should be blocked by a moratorium. I also do not believe that proposals should be stalled before proper consultation takes place. I agree that we have to take on board local concerns about specific proposals. However, if we are going to be serious about the need to make progress in the development of renewable energy, as we must be, we cannot support a moratorium.

I, too, welcome the announcement of funding. Before additional dentist training is available in Aberdeen, what is the potential for using golden hellos and for extending the dental  practice retainer scheme to attract and retain dentists in the short term to address the gap in provision?

There is no doubt that the Scottish  Executive is investing massively in Scotland's transport infrastructure. The fact that the issue is being prioritised is made evident by the spending allocations—the transport budget will rise by more than 50 per cent in the next three years, to reach almost £1 billion by 2006. I will focus on how vital that investment is to enable Scotland to be a driver of economic growth and to help to empower people from poor backgrounds and in remote communities. It is crucial that that investment works in such areas throughout Scotland, particularly in the north-east, where progress on transport projects—both those that are proposed and those that are in place—will be vital to growing the region's economy and where continued investment is required to meet the needs of people in rural areas. That might be an argument for basing the new transport agency in the north-east; wherever it is based, it will have a huge job of work to do. It will have to persuade businesses, commuters and passengers quickly that it is not just another body that makes decisions on transport services. I welcome the proposal on the new transport agency as a move that can foster more integrated development of services and a better balance between transport modes. Given the levels of investment that I have mentioned, it is right to create a body that will take a strategic, long-term approach. I am also encouraged that the minister stated that the new agency will work closely with the existing regional transport partnerships. He will be aware of the work that the north-east transport partnership—NESTRANS—has done, which is a good example of the success that those partnerships have had. Such experience and success should be drawn on and built on. Rural areas of Scotland require continued extra investment in transport links, which are lifelines for isolated communities. That is a big issue for many communities in the north-east. Through the rural transport fund there has been a welcome £1.75 million investment in community transport initiatives and improvements to local bus services in the region. The Executive must ensure that such investment is effectively targeted to meet local needs. One of the key points about that investment is that it will improve access to public transport for particular groups of people. The free bus schemes for older people and people with disabilities are already a success. I am sure that all members have received representations from older people who want the national scheme to come on stream as soon as possible. Also welcome, although not mentioned in the Executive's motion, is the commitment to introduce a national concessionary scheme for  young people. We are all aware of the financial problems that young people increasingly have to face. I was pleased to hear from the minister that consultation on such a scheme will start soon. Transport as an impetus for economic growth is where opportunities have already been secured for the north-east through the Executive's investment and the work of groups such as NESTRANS, and where there are also challenges ahead. The construction of the western peripheral route will be crucial to business throughout the north-east. I welcome the commitment to the route that was made in the partnership agreement and I hope that the proposed new agency will help to ensure that speedy progress is made on its construction and that it is completed on time.

Anything that will encourage business and jobs, as that road will do, will help to promote social inclusion. The western peripheral route will have a role to play in other issues such as congestion in Aberdeen city centre, which causes pollution problems. There are many ways in which the route will be an advantage to the area. I agree with Mr Mundell that we want there to be progress. The partnership agreement also outlines continued Executive support for the feasibility study into the Aberdeen crossrail project. I hope that it is not too long before we can make real progress on that scheme and address the concerns about the frequency of trains on the Aberdeen to Inverness route, which is vital to enable the scheme to go ahead.

The consensus in Aberdeen will be that the discussions have been fruitful and we are hoping for good news, whenever it comes. Another challenge is to ensure that Aberdeen can share in the success of the increase in air travel. We hear about the welcome commitments to new rail links for Edinburgh and Glasgow airports, but Aberdeen still needs an adequate bus link between the airport and the city centre. I use that as an example of the fact that we should take an holistic approach when dealing with such issues. Of course, investment in transport infrastructure in one part of Scotland can benefit other parts of  the country. Improved services on the east coast rail line are as important to Aberdeen and Dundee as they are to Edinburgh. I hope that the Executive will work in partnership with the UK Government to ensure that the necessary improvements are made to Waverley station, because they could benefit all Scotland. That much-needed proposal will be key in complementing the upgrades to the east coast line that the SRA outlined in its 10-year plan. The economic case for the western peripheral route was well made in the Scottish transport appraisal guidance appraisal of the scheme as well as by local and national business organisations. I am sure that similar economic benefits will come from the introduction of the Aberdeen crossrail. Those are examples of how investment in transport in the north-east can make a positive difference to the Scottish economy. As we see the Scottish economy beginning to turn a corner in terms of gross domestic product, the impact of such investment will be vital. Investment in transport for economic growth, as well as to contribute to social justice, is the right goal. In supporting the Executive's motion, I hope that the proposed new agency will be an effective body and will ensure that the Executive delivers on its goals.

The minister wrote to me last month to say that a range of possible measures were being considered to increase applications for aid under the FIFG programme, and I am grateful for that response. Can he now tell us how those deliberations are progressing? Although fish processors can apply for the aid, the uptake is low.

I welcome today's debate, as it highlights the fact that a smart, successful Scotland must also be a confident Scotland. Much has been said about making Scotland a more confident nation—Susan Deacon referred to that—but too often that is discussed in terms of asserting cultural identity or of constitutional reform, rather than of how we encourage Scots to be confident individuals and how we grow our economy to be enterprising. We are all aware of the problems that Scotland has had in encouraging business start-ups. The enterprise networks have new targets for direct assistance to new businesses, but we must take a longer-term look at how we engender a culture of enterprise in Scotland. A wealth of research over the past 25 years has pointed to risk aversion and a fear of failure in the Scottish population. The right strategy is to encourage Scots to have self-belief from a young age, so that they are equipped with the vital skills that enable them to be enterprising and to start their own businesses. When I was a student representative at the University of Aberdeen, I was fortunate enough to be involved in the steering committee for the centre for entrepreneurship. The centre is continuing its excellent work to encourage enterprise in the higher education sector. Last night, Jennifer Ng, a student from Aberdeen, won the most enterprising student in Scotland award, as part of the excellent Shell technology enterprise programme, which is successfully involving students in enterprise and industry. Enterprise is also being encouraged by staff in the further education sector, where education-business partnerships enable college students and teachers to obtain industrial and business experience. The Executive has rightly identified a need to encourage younger pupils to be engaged in enterprise. I welcome the £40 million that has been earmarked for enterprise in education over the next three years and I welcome in particular the £5 million that has been invested in the schools enterprise programme. It is encouraging that, while there are excellent initiatives in secondary education, such as work-based learning opportunities for over-14s, the strategy is starting in primary schools. It is impressive that the schools enterprise programme has a three-year target to involve 120,000 pupils in enterprise activities. It is also important that the programme goes as far as it can to achieve its overarching goal, which is to ensure that all primary pupils and secondary 1 and 2 pupils have the opportunity to participate in three enterprise experiences as part of the five-to-14 curriculum.  The partnerships that are involved in developing the strategy rightly involve people who have been successful in business, business organisations, trade unions and local authorities, as well as representatives from Young Enterprise Scotland, which has been engaged with that work since 1977. The work of the review group has been invaluable in ensuring that the strategy has the right focus. We have heard about some of the enterprising activities and initiatives—such as work-based learning—in which pupils have been involved. Teaching staff have been given support to enable pupils to take part in such initiatives. The enterprise in education strategy must be part of schools' broader efforts to ensure that pupils are given the opportunity to play their part in building a smart, successful Scotland. If we are to compete in the global marketplace, greater emphasis must be placed on learning modern languages. I understand that progress on that is being made at primary school level, but that must be carried through so that further progress is made in secondary education. We need to encourage more pupils to take up science and I hope that the Executive will continue to award the science enterprise challenge awards—the science Oscars—to schools. The most recent award was won by Harris Academy in Dundee. A great deal of the Executive's current work on the creation of intermediary technology institutes emphasises the need for scientific expertise, so it is essential that pupils are encouraged to engage in science subjects at school. We must do more to ensure that all pupils gain the right information technology skills from as early an age as possible. I was heartened to hear yesterday that the Executive is investing £3 million to encourage toddlers to gain computer skills. I admit that I dread to think what I might have done to a computer if I had been presented with one at the age of three, but I am sure that the policy of encouraging children to gain computer skills at an early age is right.

I agree—I do not think that anyone would disagree—that human interaction is the priority in the education of children of that age. However, surely the idea is that teaching children about IT will involve human interaction, as children will be in an environment in which they are  encouraged by teachers. It is important that children learn those skills and are aware of those technologies from as early an age as possible, as Susan Deacon said. In conclusion, I am sure that there is wide agreement in the chamber that encouragement of enterprise skills from an early age is the right strategy in the context of teaching the other skills that are required for Scots to succeed in the global marketplace. That strategy shows that the Executive is thinking beyond the short and medium term in encouraging economic success in Scotland. I welcome a strategy that will help young Scots to have the skills, talent and self-belief to ensure that the Scotland of the future is a smart, successful Scotland with a prosperous economy that is based on the achievements of enterprising citizens.

I welcome the SAC's proposal to retain some education services—in particular, the organic research farm at Craibstone—as a step in the right direction. However, we have some way to go before many of the fears of staff and students are allayed. Will the minister urge the SAC to consult the Executive fully this time when developing its proposals, which still represent the scaling down of SAC education services in the north-east?

It is natural that I welcome today's ministerial statement, as it shows that the Executive will deliver on the priorities that were outlined by Labour in our election manifesto. Too often, the aspirations of political parties are not matched by practical proposals for ways in which they will be afforded. Today, pledges have been matched with spending commitments: pledges on crime matched by investment in more police; pledges on education matched by the promise of 53,000 more teachers; and pledges on health matched by the proposal for more nurses. There will be greater investment in public services each year for the next three years. Two of the key areas that Labour highlighted in the election campaign are reflected in spending commitments that have been announced by the minister today: making our communities safe for our citizens and growing Scotland's economy. Tackling antisocial behaviour is about getting the right legislation. It is also about giving the police the resources that they need to do their jobs. I therefore welcome the announcement of more police officers and the £65 million extra for legislation on antisocial behaviour The north-east has areas that have acute problems with drug misuse and, over the summer, there were many worrying incidents of youth crime in Aberdeen, committed by a minority of young offenders. The announcement of funds for extra police officers and the investment in schemes to tackle antisocial behaviour are therefore welcome. Making Scotland a safer place goes hand in hand with making ours a more prosperous nation. I believe that the Executive's strategy for the economy is right. During the election campaign,  and again prior to today's statement, we heard the main Opposition parties saying that they would prioritise cutting business rates instead. The Executive is right to be far more ambitious for Scotland by prioritising investment in skills, innovation and enterprise and fully embracing the strategy of "A Smart, Successful Scotland". At the heart of that strategy is investment in the intermediary technology institutes. With the ITI for energy based in Aberdeen and the ITI for life sciences based in Dundee, the north-east is in an excellent position to benefit from that policy. I believe that it is the right strategy for ensuring that the excellent research and expertise that exist in Scotland make the fullest contribution to our economic growth. The universities in Aberdeen and Dundee are well placed to make their contribution to the strategy. I was pleased to hear the minister state again today that the Executive's investment in infrastructure is key to a stronger economy. I am also pleased that the partnership agreement outlined that there will be early work on the western peripheral route. At the risk of infuriating my Green colleagues, I suggest that the speedy progress of its construction will be of huge benefit to the local economy. As I have mentioned, I welcome the extra resources for health, in the form of new nurses. I was also pleased to hear about the additional resources that are being allocated for free eye and dental health checks. Nevertheless, I highlight the need for more dentists—especially NHS dentists—in the north-east to enable those checks to be carried out. I welcome the commitment to a dental outreach centre in Aberdeen, which is part of the partnership agreement, and I hope that that is the start of real progress on the issue. The ministerial statement shows that Labour and the Executive are ensuring that the north-east will benefit from investment in public services and infrastructure, and that it will be at the heart of the Executive's work in growing Scotland's economy. I believe that the statement shows why the Scottish people were right to vote for policies that will make Scotland's communities stronger and safer, and our nation prosperous. I congratulate the Scottish people on their excellent judgment and the minister on his statement.

Does Mr Ewing agree that opinion in the business community is not quite so clear cut on that issue? John Downie from the Federation of Small Businesses said in March this year: "We want to see investment in schools, transport, broadband infrastructure before we see a cut in business rates. Businesses will always welcome tax cuts, but cutting business rates won't stimulate growth." Does Mr Ewing agree with that comment?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will address any concerns relating to delays in accessing drug treatment and rehabilitation. (S2O-365)

What has the Executive done to address concerns in the Aberdeen area about waiting times for access to drug treatment services? Will the minister outline what the Executive is doing to address the city's particular problem with the use of cocaine and crack cocaine?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it supports the development of new incineration facilities. (S2O-281)

Is the minister aware of the widespread concern in Aberdeen over the plans to build an incinerator at a site in the Altens area of the city? Aberdeen City Council is still considering the planning application for that site. Thousands of people in the communities around Altens object to the fact that the proposed incinerator is of such a size that it will need to process waste from outside the city in order to be economically viable. They are also concerned about the substances that will be released from the incinerator into the environment around their homes. In light of those objections, does the minister agree that the proposed incinerator should not be built?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is supporting men's health week from 9 June to 15 June 2003. (S2O-183)

Will the minister join me in welcoming men's health week, especially as statistics show that, on average, men die five years earlier than women? The gap is wider for men from lower-income backgrounds. How is the Executive addressing men's health issues in the light of that situation?

I congratulate Adam Ingram on securing the debate. The SAC board's plans to shut the campuses at Craibstone and Auchincruive were announced at the outset of the election campaign. Brian Adam's predecessor in Aberdeen North, Elaine Thomson, was at the forefront of the campaign to keep Craibstone open and candidates from all parties met staff and students at a hustings to hear their grave concerns about the plans. I still share their concerns, because although it is clear that the SAC needs to rationalise, I do not agree that that means closing the Craibstone campus. Many of the issues that have been raised in relation to Auchincruive are echoed at Craibstone. We must put in context the plans that have been announced. The staff and students whom I met at Craibstone expressed deep concern at the total lack of consultation with them about the plans, so the board was uninformed about how they would react. The plan suggests selling land at Craibstone when, as Brian Adam said, other developments in the city, such as the bypass, mean that the land will more valuable in the future. All the financial data for Deloitte & Touche's report has not been released to allow independent scrutiny. Apart from the plan's financial impact on the college, the Executive must consider the financial impact on agriculture in the north-east, which is an important industry in the region. I question how financially preferable it is to centralise the SAC's activities in one of the most expensive parts of Scotland. That will be an important issue for students who are deciding where to study. As John Scott said, such centralisation runs counter to the Executive's policy of relocating its agencies to other parts of Scotland. Overall, I question the robustness of the Deloitte & Touche report as the best financial option for the SAC. It is certainly a backward and bad option for farming in the north-east. A lack of consultation with students means that the authors of the report have not learned that many will vote with their feet. Like Mike Rumbles, I received a letter today from my successors at the National Union of Students Scotland. It was pointed out that almost 80 per cent of SAC students are based at either Auchencruive or Craibstone and that many of them are unwilling or unable to study in Edinburgh. That is bad business for the SAC. The lack of consultation with staff means that their expertise and suggestions for  alternatives to the plans, based on knowledge of the research being carried out and the education being provided, were not considered. I was glad to hear the minister say that the decisions are not irrevocable, as I believe that they should be revoked. Craibstone campus should be kept open and better decisions should be made for the college and for the economic development of our rural communities, including those in the north-east.

It is a great pleasure to make my maiden speech in the chamber this evening and a great privilege to have secured the first members' business debate of this session on such an important issue. Poor access to dental services in Grampian and many other parts of rural Scotland is a problem that the Parliament will have to address. As this is my first speech, I would like to take a moment to say that I am proud to have been elected to represent North East Scotland. I have not succeeded a Labour member in that position, but I would like to pay tribute to Elaine Thomson for her work in representing Aberdeen North in the previous session. Over four years, she worked tirelessly and achieved a great deal for her constituents and on issues such as the future of the energy industry in the north-east. I am sure that members from all parties would like to thank her for her efforts and wish her the best for the future. I look forward to fighting our region's corner in the Parliament. It has already become clear to me that there are a number of issues on which members for the region work across party lines. Access to dental services is one of those issues, and I am pleased that my motion has received cross-party support. It is a great concern to all of us in the north-east that there are such evident problems in access to dental services in the region—especially access to national health service dentists. That is a problem throughout Scotland. The number of dental graduates who opt to work in the NHS has fallen from 70 per cent to 60 per cent over the past 10 years. Although there are  vocational training initiatives in Scotland, students too often choose to work south of the border once they qualify. There is a particular problem because of the low number of dentists who provide NHS treatment in the north-east. In the most recent report of the Scottish Dental Practice Board, from 2000-01, it was noted that some 63 per cent of children and 48 per cent of adults were registered with an NHS dentist. Those figures are below the national average for Scotland, which are 65 per cent and 50 per cent respectively. Since that time, the number of available dentists who practise in Grampian has fallen and many primary care dentists have moved away from NHS treatment to private insurance schemes for patients. The Executive's action plan for dental services in Scotland shows that nearly 25 per cent of children are not registered with a dental practice, leaving them with no on-going dental care at all. That needs to be put in the context of the particular problem in Grampian, where there is one dentist for every 3,600 people. That compares with one dentist for every 2,300 people in central Scotland. In Aberdeenshire, there is one dentist for every 5,000 people. I welcome the proposal in the partnership agreement to introduce free dental checks. For that to happen effectively, we must first ensure that people have access to dentists. I have spoken today to Robert Donald, who is the chairman of the Scottish dental practice committee. He told me of the shortage of dentists throughout Scotland and pointed out that the Highlands share many of Grampian's recruitment problems. The fundamental problem in Grampian is recruitment and retention. Many posts for dental staff remain vacant. If that trend is to be changed, we will have to attract more dental undergraduates and postgraduates to the area. From my experience, people who come to Aberdeen to study enjoy living in the area and often stay or return to work there. The challenge must be to foster that environment for dental students. A start has been made. A golden hello package has been introduced by the Scottish Executive with some £270,000 being allocated to Grampian. Those who are recruiting postgraduates to work in Grampian have had particular success this year. For the first time ever, the Aberdeen vocational training scheme for newly qualified dentists was filled before that of other more centrally located schemes, with all 10 postgraduate places in local dentists' practices being filled.

Brian, it would be good to welcome the efforts and the progress that are being made. For the first time, we have all those postgraduate places filled. If the member listens intently to my speech, as I am sure he will, he will see that we are already making progress in providing further postgraduate training places in Aberdeen. That is what the announcements in the partnership agreement were about. Last year, a pilot student outreach scheme proved very popular. Final year students from Dundee were attached to practices in Grampian. I welcome the commitment in the partnership agreement to the £4 million dental outreach centre in Aberdeen. That will address some of the points that Brian Adam makes. The proposal for consultation on further development of dental training in Aberdeen is also welcome. This is an opportune time for that consultation, as key stakeholders meet next week in Peterhead to discuss future plans for dental training in Grampian. It is important that the consultation process is robust and considers all the options. One of those options is the proposal for a dental school in Aberdeen. I believe that the University of Aberdeen has already indicated that it would be willing to be involved in such a scheme. The proposal needs careful consideration. It should be discussed with those who are already involved in providing dental training in the city. I believe that the right decision has been made in developing further postgraduate training first, so that we can gauge its impact. Without doubt, only a start has been made in addressing the problems of dental service provision in the region and, more generally, of recruitment of dentists in rural areas. I am sure that those will be key issues throughout this session of Parliament. I urge the Executive to make swift progress in encouraging the development of the outreach centre in Aberdeen to ensure that it is adequately resourced, and to listen to the views of those involved in dental service provision in Grampian when considering what further developments will be required in providing additional training. I hope that the general spirit of broad consensus on this issue continues as we all work to ensure far better access to dental services for people in Grampian and throughout the north-east.

I was pleased to stand on Labour's manifesto, which pledged to alleviate student hardship further through a review of the level of student bursaries. I am also pleased that the First Minister referred to that policy again this afternoon. Will he tell us more about the Executive's plan for that review?