Yesterday’s debate on the budget resulted in Labour and the Scottish National Party agreeing that we would bin the bedroom tax. I warmly welcome that. In the debate last year, I asked the SNP to work with us when we debated local government finance. The bedroom tax is a policy based on Tory ideology, with no understanding of the reality of the lives of the thousands of tenants who live in council and housing association properties. There are simply not enough affordable houses for people who need them. The policy ignores the realities of families—for example, children having needs because they are studying for exams, carers looking after a relative and people with disabilities. Last year, I knew from talking to Labour councils across the country that they were worried that the bedroom tax was pushing into debt tenants who had never been in debt and destabilising council and housing association budgets. We can take pride from yesterday, when we worked as the Parliament that we were set up to be and used our powers to protect people. Today’s debate is about our councils’ capacity to do the same—to use the increasingly scarce resources that they are allocated, to work with the increasingly centralist policy framework that they have been given and to try to plan ahead to address challenges such as the care of older people and climate change. Those are no longer challenges for the future; they are with us now. We look to local government to deliver better-quality environments, well-planned housing for communities, local economic action to support local jobs and training, and the high-quality education and social care services that give us all not just the best start in life but the best support and care throughout our lives when we need it. We do not see today as a complete cause for celebration because, although extra resource is being put in to tackle the bedroom tax, the overall financial settlement for local government is not good news. It is a story of cuts, of centralisation and of impacts on front-line services resulting from the SNP’s financial straitjacket. Every MSP will know of the tough decisions that our council colleagues are making. The SNP has broken local government finance, with nearly 35,000 jobs being cut from local government since 2008. As Audit Scotland rightly documents, the challenge of delivering health and social care under the budget settlement will add to the pressures on care workers and the families who rely on their services. We need committed care staff who are paid a decent wage and are well trained and motivated. The loss of local authority jobs is bad for local economies, too, especially in economically fragile areas, as it has a negative impact on local economic activity and businesses. We believe that the Scottish National Party Government is on pause and is more concerned about independence than about the reality of people’s lives. More could be done. For example, we could create flexibility for councils to benefit financially from tourism and to build local renewables and heat and power infrastructure to keep people warm and keep energy affordable. At present, only a few councils are able to do that given their scale. My colleague Richard Baker will talk about the need to give businesses more support and to give local authorities the support that they need to do that. Local government costs have risen by 10 per cent since 2007 but, with this budget, £637 million has been cut since 2008-09. The SNP’s white paper talks grandly about life post-2016, but it does not address the realities of the cost-of-living crisis for people now. The SNP is proud of its underfunded council tax freeze—we heard that again today—but it hits hardest those people on low and modest incomes, or the people whom the SNP says it is meant to help.

Absolutely. When we look at the budgets that are being set across the country, we see that the choice between keeping the council tax freeze or losing even more money is not a palatable one for our councils. The point that I am making is that the council tax freeze is predicated on tackling the cost-of-living crisis, yet the people it hits directly in their pockets are those on the lowest incomes, who most deserve our support. For example, the council tax freeze most benefits those with the largest houses. This year, the annual benefit for people in band F, G and H houses is more than £300, but for those in band A houses it is under £100. Then there is the increase in charges for services across the country. In 2003, income from charges equated to 40 per cent of the money raised by the council tax. Today, the figure is nearly 60 per cent. The finances are crucial. The real-terms funding cuts at a time of increased demand and the impact of Tory austerity policies mean that something has to give. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation told us last year that local government cuts have the severest impact on poorer communities, that we will see local councils withdraw from front-line services and reduce and ration services and that the most vulnerable will be hardest hit—we have debated that in the chamber before. This is a tough settlement for local government. I welcome some of the announcements that the cabinet secretary made today, especially on payday loans. We have been constructive over the past year. For example, we supported the increase in planning fees to ensure a degree of cost recovery and last year we proposed working jointly to mitigate the bedroom tax. This settlement will be a challenge to local government. Last year, the cabinet secretary described his deal as a flat cash settlement but it was not, because local authorities had to make cuts to balance the books. We received the figures for today’s budget only at 5 past 2 and will examine them in more detail after the debate.

Last year, we warned about the removal of local control of policing and this year we have seen cuts without consultation in police counters and control rooms. That move is not in line with the Scottish Government’s town centre-first policy and does not support local employment strategies. Good things are being done, but they are happening against the tough budget settlement that our councils face. Councils want and are ambitious to do more, but they need the ability to do that and the Scottish Government is not doing enough to help them. Although we will vote for the motion at decision time, we will do so with a heavy heart. Our communities deserve better.

We would be equally keen to hear what the SNP is going to do to make local government finance fairer. It promised to do that in its past two manifestos, but we will be waiting until after 2016, I think.

2. To ask the Scottish Government for what reason there was a delay in the publication of the business case for the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme. (S4O-02868)

Does the minister not accept that there is huge disappointment in the business case? Project costs have gone up, the ambition has gone down—the project will not do what it was intended to deliver initially—and the timeframe has been abandoned. A once-lauded flagship transport policy is now completely unrecognisable. Does the minister not realise that the final business case poses even more questions about the long-term vision and sustainability of this key project for Scotland and his handling of it?

What assessment was done of the operational and financial implications for local authorities before Police Scotland announced its decision?

5. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to strengthen the powers that local authorities and communities have to purchase land. (S4F-01848)

Last week, we debated town centres. In bringing about the required transformation, the key issues are to do with funding and the powers that local authorities need. Will the First Minister commit to examining the powers in the community empowerment bill to ensure that local authorities have the power to compulsorily purchase land to transform our town centres, particularly in communities where market forces have failed?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service board. (S4O-02800)

That is great timing. I have met the staff in the Edinburgh control room, who are deeply worried about the idea that they would relocate to another place if that control room was closed. They are also deeply worried that we would lose expertise that is critical to delivery of the high standards of safety that are at the core of the service. When the minister meets the chair of the rescue service, will she raise the issue of the Edinburgh control room’s strategic position in Scotland, both in terms of safeguarding jobs but also, crucially, in terms of ensuring that we retain the safety and security that is at the heart of the service?

I welcome this debate because it gives us a chance to focus on what action needs to be taken to enable our town centres to survive. It is only a short debate, so I will use my time to focus on the issues that need more priority and investment. Last week, a leading retail expert warned that high streets could become “zombies” unless planning rules change to make it easier for cafes, restaurants and homes to move in where shops can no longer operate. He highlighted, though, that in his view the top 50 United Kingdom high streets would get stronger. The pace of change in retail is accelerating, particularly in relation to online shopping, and it is not going to slow down. For example, online sales for John Lewis in the new year sales jumped by 34.5 per cent compared with those in the same week last year, and John Lewis is already doing well in online sales. There can be no room for complacency for all of us on the issue of high streets. There is much that we can agree with in terms of the ambition and analysis in the Malcolm Fraser report, but there is so much more that the Government’s action plan should have included for action. Our town centres need to be regenerated and local authorities need to work with businesses and local communities to develop strategies and action plans to save our town centres. They need to be interesting and attractive and have a range of shops and services that we want to use that must be safe and accessible. There is a lot that we need to do. I strongly support the town centre first principle, but it must be applied consistently by the Scottish Government. We need every public service and leisure and cultural facility assessed in terms of its capacity in town centres. That will bring the vitality and dynamism that our town centres urgently need. That is why Labour MSPs have opposed the Scottish Government’s court closure programme and proposals to reduce access to or close police station counters. In towns such as Haddington and South Queensferry, people have objected because they understand that the closures would have a negative impact and reduce the vitality and attractiveness of our town centres. The Labour amendment focuses on the importance of enabling people to live in our town centres. The aim of bringing people back into town centres through utilising land and buildings is massively desirable. It would certainly help shop workers faced with difficult journeys into towns when the buses do not start in time for their shift and it would be great for people working in businesses and public services, and for people who are attracted to the buzz that comes from living in town centres. Support for businesses is crucial, but we must think about a package that will enable people to live in our town centres and bring them to life again. The money that has been allocated to the town centre housing fund is a drop in the ocean compared with what we need for our town centres, particularly given that only seven town centres benefit. Our amendment just states the obvious, because we need significantly more than £2.75 million to get people back into our town centres. The minister had to push the amount up from £2 million within a relatively short timescale, but I am sure that if he had offered more money, we would have had a host of further projects. We therefore need to do more. There is also the issue of the role of our local authorities in bringing businesses, communities and agencies together. Local authorities have a vital role in developing projects on the ground to rescue and reshape our town centres, whether that is urban rail projects or putting together redevelopment packages when the market has simply walked away and owners are happy to have their properties lie empty for years at a time. There are significant obstacles and we all know that councils are cash strapped. It is therefore difficult for them to allocate extra money for town centre management initiatives, and even more so for them to put money into capital investment to transform the kind of rundown buildings that we have heard about in the debate. A key power that local authorities could do with having would be a more streamlined compulsory purchase power. Will that be one of the powers that the minister will include in the proposed community empowerment and renewal bill? It could be a really useful power. At the Built Environment Forum for Scotland conference last year, there was a showcase of some fantastic examples of local authority-led initiatives that have transformed town centres. For example, there was Glasgow’s use of property ownership to give access to young aspiring entrepreneurs and arts-based companies who needed a shop window. Glasgow will support that with business assistance for the first few years. There are also the co-operative-owned companies, which are the kind of idea that was in the Greens’ proposed amendment. Such companies work particularly well in smaller towns and rural communities where there is a strong community ethos. There is a lot in the action plan, with a lot of lists of things that need to be done. However, having visited several town centres last summer to look at what is happening on the ground, I firmly believe that every town centre needs to have its own action plan and its own strategy, resourced and enabled with proper buy-in from key players. Local authorities are best placed to take the role of being the key civic leadership in pulling together local businesses and their owners and developing bids. They have the capacity to analyse which buildings could be brought together in project management, and particularly to look at buildings that are full of character but poorly maintained. We need the capacity to get on with this work, and that is why I believe that the action plan needs to be more ambitious. For example, we need better bus connections and better walking and cycling infrastructure. Can the minister explain why walking and cycling are seen as long-term issues to be addressed? Spokes makes the obvious point that, if we have better facilities and better access to our town centres, that will lead to more attractive opportunities.

Yes.

Right. I thought that the minister might have come in on the cycling point, but there is always the summing-up speech at the end. The pace of change is accelerating—we all know that—so we need a greater sense of urgency in addressing the challenges. We have focused on housing and getting people back into our town centres to live. That is a practical thing and a job that we could all do together, but it needs more resource. I therefore move amendment S4M-08769.2, to insert at end: “; recognises the importance of investment in housing to help regenerate Scotland’s town centres, and acknowledges that to properly implement the Town Centre Action Plan and reinvigorate town centres there must be significantly more investment than the £2.75 million currently set aside in the Town Centre Housing Fund.”

Although the debate has been brief, it has been good with lots of practical ideas for real town centres throughout the country. There has also been some constructive criticism of the Government’s town centre plan. The challenges of bringing regeneration to our town centres will not go away. The challenge of competing with out-of-town retail parks will continue. Elaine Murray’s points were absolutely spot on. One of the challenges for the minister is to think about his role as a champion for town centres and how to make the town centre first principle real and ensure that it is applied across Government and the public sector. He needs to consider his planning powers. There is an interesting challenge to be thought about in that. I know that the minister is keen to devolve planning decisions and for central Government not to take a strong role, but there is a balance to be struck in terms of the guidelines and his power to call in major planning applications. I leave that thought with him, because there is a real issue about how he exercises those powers. Several members commented that the challenges that town centres face are also relevant in our cities and villages, although the scales are different. We need to learn from best practice. Edinburgh’s George Street, for example, is not successful by accident. The City of Edinburgh Council invested a lot of time, money and resource to develop a strategy to attract the right sort of retailers to make it work, and it did a lot of work for the business community. Bob Doris and Alison Johnstone were absolutely right to say that, as well as thinking about individual town centres, we need to think about city centres. They, too, need specific strategies. Several members mentioned the cost of living crisis and the significant impact that it is having on retailing and people’s capacity to spend. It is interesting that even those retailers that discounted heavily in the run-up to Christmas reported an incredibly tough retailing climate. The period before Christmas and the new year period are the best time for retailers to get people into the shops. I think that those challenges will continue, particularly for those town centres that are caught in a spiral of decline, where retailers are struggling to keep up with the pace of change. They need practical help, because the pace of change is beyond the capacity of many smaller retailers to deal with. We now have new types of retailing. There are third-party traders who work with other retailers online. Small companies will not necessarily hold the necessary technological and business strategy skills. A number of colleagues made points about the need to target support for businesses. Margaret McCulloch’s points about the use of the small business bonus scheme to target support at small businesses were bang on. They need support for training and they need to have access to business advice that it is not easy for them to get. The points that Gavin Brown and Margaret McCulloch made about the reality of the business rates incentivisation scheme were bang on. Local authorities believed in good faith that that pot of money was going to come to them. Those council leaders to whom I have spoken have been bitterly disappointed about how that has worked out in practice. When the Scottish Government announces a scheme, it must follow it through. The withdrawal of that incentive has led to many real problems in our communities. A few members mentioned the community empowerment and renewal bill. In my opening speech, I mentioned compulsory purchase orders. There are many other opportunities to which greater community involvement in our town centres can give rise. Community ownership and opportunities for social enterprises, co-operatives and bottom-up, community-led cultural initiatives to locate in town centres alongside cafes and—crucially—new housing properties could all help to turn round and revitalise our town centres. There are many good initiatives. Jayne Baxter—she wanted to speak in the debate, but she knew that it was a short one—told me about the night and day challenge fund that is being looked at in Cowdenbeath. I found it interesting that it targets young people and asks them how they think the town centre could be improved for the future. We need to get the next generation involved rather than make assumptions about how it will use town centres. The research on online shopping shows that the situation is changing, almost by the day. It is no longer the case that people just use their computers to shop when they go home at night; they now use tablets and smartphones to order things as they sit on the bus. On one level, that is fantastic, but the pace of change is hard to cope with. For small retailers and producers, access to better advice and to knowledge about how they can develop their strategy could be hugely important. We now have a champion for small towns, but there is a lot that the minister needs to do to use his leadership capacity. What research capacity could he put in place? The impact of the raft of business support that is available needs to be monitored. We do not think that that is done consistently, and we think that more could be done. For example, what impact has the legislation on empty properties that we passed last year had? At the time, we discussed whether it would be effective. What research has the minister put in place? To what extent have councils used the powers that they have in relation to housing in town centres? How is the minister pulling together the innovation opportunities that have arisen from business investment, to pick up the ideas in the report that the Federation of Small Businesses has presented to us today? I would like a focus on training, which provides an opportunity. If that is tied into town centre investment in housing, win-wins will be available. However, that must be targeted and the research must be done. That research needs to drive Scottish Government policy. On Tuesday, we debated climate change. Yesterday, we debated health. If the Scottish Government is serious about its target that 10 per cent of all trips should be made by bike within the next six years, town centres are critical to that. Joined-up Government thinking is needed. Promoting town and city centres could help to address our wider policy ambitions on public health, community involvement and ownership, and economic regeneration for our communities. However, we must link in local businesses and entrepreneurs. We must focus on the needs and opportunities. It is in the minister’s grasp to use his leadership to do more. We were totally disappointed by the scale of the boxing day Christmas present, which was too modest. I am sure that the minister knows that it did not go far enough. On top of the slashing of the capital budget for housing by 29 per cent, there has been a missed opportunity on housing in town centres. I hope that, in summing up, the minister will talk about what more can be done. The debate has been constructive. We have heard constructive criticism and I hope that we will get constructive answers.

If the minister looks through his books, he will find that it was Jack McConnell who introduced a competitive business regime so that businesses in Scotland were not worse off than those in England.

I thank the committee and witnesses for their work in getting us to this debate today. I want to focus on the processes and principles of adaptation in relation to planning decisions and the importance of flooding as a key test of the adaptation programme. As others have said, we can be in no doubt that our planning system should be able to ensure that decisions are taken that avoid increasing the risk of flooding. That is important in both human and economic terms. The report highlights that climate change will increase the incidence of flooding and the risk that it entails of injury, impact on people’s mental health and even death. If nothing else, that should prompt us to act. Over the years, colleagues across the chamber have related the catastrophic impact of flooding on their constituencies. The strategy is an opportunity both to learn from past problems and to set out the solutions that are needed. I believe that the review of Scottish Planning Policy and NPF3 provide us with the opportunity to incorporate flood management techniques routinely in every single planning decision, to contribute to the Scottish Government’s adaptation strategy. However, adaptation measures in relation to flooding need greater priority and urgency than exist now. Sustainable urban drainage systems are now more than a decade old, so I would be keen to hear from the minister what is being done to evaluate the impact of early schemes and to measure whether the principles are being consistently applied in development proposals. I would also like to know what work is being done with developers to increase their knowledge and share best practice, and to inform householders of their responsibilities and of the practical measures that they can take. SEPA’s analysis highlights the geographical areas that are vulnerable to flooding, and the role of local authorities in planning investment is crucial, because they are partners in the research that the Scottish Government carries out on best practice, but they also need support to build capacity in areas such as the project management of major flood prevention works. The same issue arises in transport and development projects generally; we need that capacity. There is also the issue of local authorities’ capacity to implement the sustainable flood management duties that are in the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003. Again, I would be keen to hear what research the Scottish Government has carried out since the implementation of that act. One of my first acts as a relatively new MSP—and the Minister for Transport and the Environment—was to deal with constituents and businesses in relation to the impact of flooding on my constituency in 2000. Even then, people were concerned about not just the immediate support that they needed, but looking at longer-term planning for flood investment. The delays associated with the planning and construction of flood management systems would be an excellent case study for students, professionals and, indeed, ourselves of what can go wrong even with the best of intentions. Although it is no consolation to my constituents, phase 1 has been completed, although it was delayed for the best part of a decade and costs escalated, but we are stuck and unable to get phase 2 going, and phase 3 is not even on the drawing table yet. Therefore, I am grateful for the opportunity to talk to the minister about the financial gap, because we must work our way beyond the practical delays that occur when we have solutions ready, because they are not acceptable in flood risk management. I started talking about the human dimension that the adaptation report highlights. Before Christmas, I met local community council members, who were exasperated that we—by which I mean politicians across the spectrum—had not collectively fixed that problem for them. When I returned after Christmas, I got incredibly moving correspondence from constituents relaying to me their anxiety about heavy rainfall. That happens every time we have heavy rainfall, and I am sure that I am not alone. This is not a theoretical problem. It matters to our constituents, our businesses and our habitats. Although we cannot control or fix everything, we have to push climate change adaptation up the political agenda, to ensure that we get the right research, the right lessons learned, the right skills and experience and, crucially, the investment to make it happen. That is why today’s debate is vital and why the final climate adaptation strategy needs to be better. It needs to better reflect the role of local authorities in this agenda and it needs clearer targets, a greater sense of urgency and a greater political commitment from the Scottish Government. I hope that that is what the debate will deliver.

Graeme Dey has made an extremely useful point about the capacity of institutions to provide practical examples of what we can all do. Institutions such as colleges that have significant land can make a significant impact in minimising flooding by putting in a surface of grass or one that uses plants and trees instead of concrete. That point is worth bearing in mind in relation to householders and businesses.

Can the minister clarify whether phase 2 of Edinburgh’s vital flood scheme will be eligible for funding from the £42 million to which he referred, as that much-delayed £25 million scheme is currently £6 million short?

Will the minister agree to consider planning in his pilot work with community councils? I know from anecdotal evidence from Edinburgh that the volume of work that is associated with planning issues, whether repeated consultations or the sheer complexity of planning applications, places a huge burden on community councils, which want to exercise their obligations properly. Will he consider that as an area in which there is room for improvement?

I thank the Presiding Officer for her forbearance and apologise to the cabinet secretary for missing the beginning of his statement. I also thank him for advance notice of his statement. On top of supporting our constituents through the cost of living crisis and the Tory welfare policies, our councils must deal with the reality of the cabinet secretary’s local government settlement. For all his assertions that local government has had a good deal from the SNP, he has presided over the removal of around £100 billion from spending on poverty reduction measures, the long-term impact of the underfunding of the council tax freeze and the loss of more than 34,000 local government jobs. Today is another nail in the coffin of our broken local government finance because our local authorities are getting austerity plus. We need a local government settlement to protect the most vulnerable in our communities and enable our local government colleagues to do the jobs that they were elected to do. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation and Unison have commented that the most vulnerable in our communities are the worst hit. Does the cabinet secretary agree with the Joseph Rowntree Foundation that we will see further reductions, rationalisation and residualisation of vital services? What analysis has the Scottish Government carried out on the impact of those service reductions and increases in the cost of charges for services directly on those who are the most vulnerable in our communities?

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the Joseph Rowntree Foundation report “Coping with the cuts? Local government and poorer communities”. (S4F-01739)

We can agree that local government is one of the foremost casualties of austerity in the United Kingdom. However, given that local government has borne the brunt of the Scottish Government’s cut when the costs of providing those services have risen by 10 per cent since 2007—with big social care and welfare challenges yet to come—and given the loss of £1 billion from Scottish Government spending on anti-poverty programmes, does the First Minister accept that it is vital that next week’s local government finance statement is underpinned by principles of fairness and social justice if the most vulnerable in our communities are not to be subjected to not just austerity but austerity plus?

World AIDS day is our chance to celebrate achievements and mourn those who are no longer with us. It is important because it is our opportunity to come together in our different communities to express our solidarity with people who live with HIV and AIDS and their friends and families. It is our chance to raise awareness and to highlight the fact that HIV and AIDS are still with us. It should concern us all that a recent poll by Waverley Care showed that more than half of the population is unaware of all the ways in which the virus can be transmitted, with 11 per cent wrongly believing that it can be passed on by kissing. We really need to increase our efforts on prevention and make sure that information is presented in a relevant way to a new generation. We also need to get the message across that effective treatment is available. Alongside that, we need to tackle the root causes of prejudice that prevents people from coming forward and leaves them living in isolation. We therefore need to support the campaign to encourage people to get tested. A quarter of those who are infected in the United Kingdom do not know that they have been infected. That is bad for prevention, and it also means that they are also denied the social and health support that they need. In particular, today is my chance to thank the staff and volunteers of all the charities that support action on HIV and AIDS. I welcome those who are with us today in the public gallery and those who are watching online. I thank HIV Scotland for its efforts in promoting accurate information and knowledge about HIV in Scotland. One of its statistics leapt out at me: in Scotland, almost one person is being infected every day, and that is one too many. Over the years that I have worked with Waverley Care, I have been impressed by the range of services that it has developed, such as buddying, support networks for families, and support for key groups such as gay men and those from the African diaspora. I particularly thank the staff and all the volunteers and supporters who have made that fantastic work possible. Raising funds is a vital part of the work to ensure that those people can continue to support people in our communities. On Sunday, when I joined Waverley Care’s celebration, I welcomed the fact that Milestone house will reopen in early January. It is testament to effective lobbying by Waverley Care and input from the City of Edinburgh Council and NHS Lothian that that has happened. During our visit to Malawi earlier this year, Alex Fergusson and I saw very practical projects using theatre and radio to promote the prevention agenda for vulnerable groups. We in Scotland can be proud of that. The genesis of my motion goes back to the debate that was held after the showing of the film “Fire in the Blood” at the take one action film festival this October in Edinburgh. Take one action asks that, after the festival, filmgoers should do something specific to change the world: just one thing. It is a fantastic model of targeted activism in a world in which it can seem to be really difficult to know where to start. “Fire in the Blood” records the progress that has been made in developing access to affordable HIV treatment for people across the globe. Last month, at our own cross-party group on international development, the campaigning charity Impact AIDS led our discussion. I particularly want to thank Cathy Crawford, an inspirational campaigner who has done tremendous work to raise awareness on access to affordable treatment. As Impact AIDS put it, global progress has been both brilliant and terrible. It has been brilliant as a result of global pressure. We in the UK can take some pride in the action that followed on from the Gleneagles summit and our support for action on the millennium development goals. Successful lobbying for access to generic drugs meant that there was a breakthrough when we made the goal of affordable medication costing a dollar a day achievable. Investment in health and education in poorer African countries has also had social and economic benefits, particularly for women, so there has been progress. However, it is terrible that in other African countries not enough progress is being made—of the 35 million people who are infected with HIV globally, 25 million live in sub-Saharan Africa. It is therefore too early to say that we are at the beginning of the end of HIV, but the fact that that is even being discussed represents the potential that is now possible. “Fire in the Blood” argues that there is now the threat of new restrictions to cheaper generic drugs through trade regulations, which are being discussed and agreed behind closed doors. We need to demand transparency in those talks so that the affordability of drugs and the needs of those with HIV across the world drive the conclusions of those trade talks. Our members of the European Parliament need our political support and our UK Government needs to take a stand and push for solidarity and equality of access to HIV drugs. Access to cheaper, generic drugs has saved the lives of millions and, crucially, it has also enabled social and economic progress and investment in health and education facilities in some of the world’s poorest countries. We cannot let the clock be turned back on that progress, so on this year’s world AIDS day we need to redouble our efforts in Scotland and abroad. There has been dramatic progress and we can celebrate that, but there is a very long way to go. I hope that the debate will give heart to campaigners that their work is visible, that we regard it as politically important and that we acknowledge its impact. Let us all work together to ensure that we start that discussion on the beginning of the end of AIDS. It is within our grasp but it needs political action, it needs political progress and it needs investment to make it happen.

5. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met the board of Edinburgh College. (S4O-02596)

I, too, attended that event. Tensions and strain have been caused by the merger at Edinburgh College. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has investigated concerns that were raised by the Educational Institute of Scotland branch, and it takes the view that the concerns that the branch raised on administrative assistance and staff morale are “real and serious”, and that new systems that were implemented due to the merger have exacerbated that pressure. What lessons does the cabinet secretary think can be learned from the Edinburgh College merger in that regard? Does he have a view on how best to address the issue of staff morale going forward? For example, other colleges have drawn on the resource of the Scottish Government change team. Does he think that that might be helpful in this case to ensure that students and staff have the highest possible morale going forward?

I congratulate Claire Baker on securing the debate and welcome the publication by the SCNP and the APRS of their report, “Unfinished Business”. It is great to be having a members’ business debate on national parks, which were the subject of the first members’ business debate in the new Scottish Parliament in 1999. There had been a long-standing campaign for a national park in Loch Lomond and the Trossachs, but there was less of a consensus in the Cairngorms area. In fact, in the early days of the Parliament, some were opposed to a national park in the Cairngorms. I think that our national parks are one of the success stories of devolution. The legislative process in the House of Lords would have been a huge challenge, so national parks were one of Donald Dewar’s first priorities and the National Parks (Scotland) Bill featured in the first programme for government. Such was the success of our national parks that it led to the inclusion of highland Perthshire in the Cairngorms national park. That was partly a tribute to the success of the work of the Cairngorms National Park Authority and its first chief executive, Jane Hope. I want to pay tribute to the contribution that she made, because as well as leading the park for nearly a decade, she was the lead official on the National Parks (Scotland) Bill team and did an excellent job in that role, too. As Claire Baker observed, although we had debates on national parks in the previous parliamentary session, the Scottish Government has done no serious work to progress the national parks agenda by making new designations since 2007. As the Cairngorms national park and the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park have passed their 10th anniversaries, now is a good time for us to come back to that agenda, look at their successes and learn lessons for the future. We should pick up the agenda that the SCNP and the APRS are arguing for, as it is truly unfinished business. The Ramblers are right to point to the centenary of the birth of John Muir as a good time to kick-start that agenda for the future. The first two national parks were never meant to be Scotland’s only national parks; they were simply our top priorities at the time, from the point of view of effort and funding. Claire Baker is right that we need a ministerial lead in looking to the future, given the length of the set-up time from thinking about creating a national park to actually designating it. I am sure that there will be competing interests both for and against designations across the country and there is certainly a debate to be had about resources. However, we need to be having that debate now, instead of putting it off to the future.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. That is exactly why we need a ministerial lead. Over the years, there have been many suggestions for different national parks in different parts of the country; indeed, a Scottish Natural Heritage report, for one, made a number of suggestions. Ministers could set the terms and framework of the debate and the various expectations and make clear whether we are looking at on-land parks or the coastal and marine parks that Claire Baker referred to. However, the choice between doing absolutely nothing and waiting for a long time is one that we should not have to make. The integrated planning and management that have been carried out by public bodies and the work with park communities and businesses provide good lessons from which we can learn, and we are missing out by not taking the debate forward. We should be looking to the future. That is why I support the call for a ministerially led national parks strategy group, which would set a framework for the future and expectations—realistic ones, of course. We should not miss out on the huge benefits of national parks, but that is what is happening at the moment. Claire Baker made a fascinating suggestion about the Cheviots, for example. There will be arguments for and against proposals but we need to get back to a discussion that is not for the future but for now. For every conflict that has emerged over our two national parks, there has also been a fantastic achievement and we need to bring the debate into the Parliament and engage third parties and everyone else across the country who has a real interest in the issue. We will always have a limited amount of money but the benefits that the parks bring and the lessons that have been learnt from the first decade present opportunities that we should be seizing in 2014.

Will Colin Keir take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I, too, welcome the debate and congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing it. I commend the recent motion from the Scottish Youth Parliament, which was, I understand, the result of a debate in which concerns were expressed about the portrayal of people as sex objects in the mass media. Page 3 of The Sun was highlighted as a prime example of the kind of portrayal that there was concern about. As colleagues have said, the debate is not new; as Clare Short would testify, it has gone on for years. There have been concerns about the portrayal of women in the media for years, but there is now a body of research that explores the impact of sexualised images in the media that we have a duty to reflect. I want to reflect in particular on the research that the Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust has pulled together, because it is concerning and we need to listen to it. One issue that it has highlighted is that, in response to a recent campaign by Mumsnet about retailers, a survey by The Guardian found an array of items available in major chain stores, from a T-shirt for a three-year-old that bore the slogan “Future WAG” to a top for a toddler with a pink bikini appliquéd on the front, and that New Look sells a range of high heels that start at size 1, which is the shoe size of an average eight-year-old, and a pair of £16 dark-blue platforms with 3.5 inch heels, pointed toes and four straps. That is not necessarily a good role image for young women, and girls in particular. Zero Tolerance has highlighted the concerns about the impact of gender stereotyping and suggested that girls are overly concerned with their body image; that there is bullying of girls who do not conform to gender stereotyping ideals; and that girls who do not conform to those stereotypes experience negative feelings about themselves. We are quite rightly focusing on page 3, but we need to take a wider look at sexualisation in our society, whether in retailing or in other media.

That was a good inquiry for our Equal Opportunities Committee. We need to look at a range of issues, but I will briefly highlight social media and technological change, which have led to a host of new pressures, particularly for young people. One study quoted by Zero Tolerance suggested that girls as young as 12 had experienced pressure to send topless pictures of themselves by text and instant messaging. We should be really concerned about situations such as that, which are adding more and more pressure to young people as they are growing up. Increasingly, there are websites and online magazines that encourage user-generated content that people can rate and comment on. This debate is timely, because we should be considering the impact of the sexualisation of our culture, which should concern us all. A survey of 15 to 19-year-old girls found that 63 per cent considered being a glamour model as their ideal profession and a quarter thought that lap dancing would be their ideal profession, but only 4 per cent chose teaching as their ideal profession. That is deeply worrying. We need to focus on the negative impact of sexualisation on not just young women but young men, too. Malcolm Chisholm was absolutely right to focus on the fact that the issue concerns us all, not just women. Research shows that sexualisation limits young people’s aspirations and affects how they think. It impacts on their physical and mental health and on what should be their healthy sexual development. It is an issue for not just one small group in society or the majority of women, but one that should concern us all. All of us in the Parliament should come together and say that page 3 has been there for a long time; it has been criticised for a long time; it is time for it to go.

3. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to introduce a scheme for local authorities similar to the city deal programme in England. (S4O-02524)

The city deal for Leeds is expected to generate around 60,000 new jobs, and the deal for Manchester is expected to generate £1.2 billion in new investment, through the earn-back tax increment finance scheme. Those are just two examples. What powers does the Scottish Government think that it could transfer to local government? What is being done to talk to the United Kingdom Government about new initiatives that we could provide for our local authorities, to enable them to generate new investment in jobs and infrastructure, to support our local economies in Scotland?

Sometimes when a member is called to speak at the end of a debate they feel that everything that could have been said has been said. However, coming in at the end of a debate also enables us to reflect on what other members have said. I thank Alison Johnstone for bringing the debate to the Parliament. It has been a good debate, because it has illustrated the range of views that there is, even among members. Let us reflect on why the debate has been brought. It has been brought because of the terrible toll of cycling injuries and deaths on our roads, which Graeme Pearson set out at the start of his speech. That is why the petition has been raised. People are looking for a better way to protect cyclists and pedestrians on our roads. That is the motivation and that is where we should start the debate. Today should be the start of the discussion, not the end. Graeme Pearson suggested that the minister bring together stakeholders to discuss the matter. We talk about investment in our roads and pavements, about trying to get the number of cyclists up and about specific types of route, but we tend not to talk about the wider culture and legal environment in which we use our roads. From that perspective, the debate has been useful. It would be good if the minister could look at research from other countries and consider the impact of different legal environments and frameworks. I am not suggesting that the minister says yes or no today; I ask him to think about how we take the debate forward and consider the issue. Strict liability is a contentious issue. I have raised it in discussions with people who instantly say yes or no to it. The people who reject the idea do so very stridently. We need to have a broader discussion before we say yes or no, which is why I am grateful to Alison Johnstone for structuring her motion in the way that she did and enabling us to have the debate. The cross-party group on cycling has a particular role in taking the matter forward, but the minister could lead a debate on the issue, in a cross-party way. We will not all agree on the last dot and comma, but we can at least take the debate forward. For me, anecdotally, our streets feel more confrontational. We know that, statistically, more people are cycling. That is definitely a good thing and we are on the right trajectory. Jim Eadie talked about the Scottish Government’s desire for more people to cycle as part of their daily business. However, there are major challenges. Although more and more people are cycling, the changes to our road infrastructure to facilitate that have simply not kept up. That is why the package of measures that Alison Johnstone mentions in her motion is important. We need to look at investment in our streets and roads, but we also need to look at the culture. It has to be a package. Sandra White mentioned the pavements issue. It would be useful if the minister was to commission some research on that because—again, anecdotally—I am convinced that more and more people are cycling on pavements and doing so in a way that is not safe. I have heard of pedestrians being injured. When people are in pedestrian mode, it is incredibly irritating for them if someone cycles past them on a narrow pavement. However, that behaviour speaks to the anxiety that led to the petition coming in front of us—the anxiety of cyclists who are worried about their safety on the roads. Patrick Harvie was right. Regular cyclists have good days, but also pretty unpleasant days, when they get into work having had two or three near misses. Even when cyclists are trying to be aware and to cycle in the right way, it is not a guarantee of safety. It would be useful to have more research—not just on the generality, but research that teases out some of the issues that we have debated tonight. When I cycled to a hospital recently, I found that the route was just not there for cyclists and the environment was very unfriendly. As well as generally improving cycle access, we need to look at key institutions and ask how easy it would be for people to use their bikes to get there, either to work in them or to visit them. I want to briefly mention the nice way code, which Kezia Dugdale mentioned.

It is important to consider how we view cyclists and to make sure that the advice is right. For example, the advice about not riding on the inside of vehicles cuts across a street layout that has cyclists, at a junction, on the left-hand side. It often ends up with cyclists having to overtake a long vehicle, potentially going into oncoming traffic, and then weave back. Nothing annoys bus or lorry drivers more than cyclists cutting back in.

Let us look at the range of issues. It would be really useful if the minister would commit to commissioning more research and arranging more stakeholder involvement, as that would help to take tonight’s debate forward.

I add my plea that safety issues should be paramount among the criteria that the fire service looks at. I recently met staff at Tollcross fire station and was struck by their regional—not just their local—knowledge across Lothian and the Borders. With particular issues in the capital city, such as tourism, and given that knowledge is vital, I hope that safety is paramount among the criteria for consideration.

When will the cabinet secretary bring forward the SNP’s local income tax proposals for wider consideration in the chamber? Does he not consider that the financial sustainability of local government services has to be discussed by all of us across the chamber now, given that we have lost 40,000 public service jobs over the past few years and given the pressures that the Christie commission highlighted for all of us to address?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what priority it attaches to community policing. (S4O-02464)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of concerns in Edinburgh and the Lothians about the lack of weight given to community policing, which has resulted in the city council’s proposal to withdraw funding from local police officers? Are those concerns not compounded by this week’s announcement on proposed police station closures and cutbacks across the region?

I apologise for having to leave before the end of the debate and I promise that I will read the Official Report. I congratulate Jackie Baillie on raising the topic, which is a central one for us to debate in the chamber. The briefing that we received from the challenge poverty week hit the nail on the head in saying that poverty is not inevitable and that real change is possible. That must be our starting point. The briefing is absolutely right in suggesting that we need to think through the fundamental issues that underlie poverty, which are all about inequality. We must accept that even when we make gains we cannot just move on. The challenge of inequality and poverty is to get from the Government sustained action over time. The young people who were supported by the previous Labour Government through the surestart initiative and better schools are now leaving school at the worst time to find employment in a generation. We need to think about people’s paths all the way through their lives. There has been some excellent focus on child poverty—Jackie Baillie’s speech was excellent in that regard—but I will focus on fuel poverty and the challenge for our older people. There has been investment in tackling fuel poverty. The first two sessions of Parliament saw huge investment in boilers for older people to enable them to upgrade their systems and to afford to heat their houses in an environmentally sustainable way. However, we no longer have that scheme. The Age Scotland report “Mind the Gap” looks at the challenge of enabling current older people to access fuel-poverty measures. Its research shows that, although awareness of the Government’s energy efficiency schemes is quite high, very few people apply for them. I know from my mailbag that many of the pensioners who apply for such support are deemed ineligible and so are consigned to live in properties that they cannot afford to heat properly. That is a real challenge. Another concern that Age Concern Scotland has raised relates to the Scottish Government’s home energy efficiency programme Scotland—HEEPS—funds, which have been underspent and will now be reallocated. We need to understand why that money has not been spent so that we can redouble our efforts to ensure that the money is spent on what it was intended to deal with. I hope that the minister will look into that. We need greater focus on targeting investment at challenging the problem of poverty among our older people. We have rightly debated a lot over the past few days the issue of rising fuel prices—there is action that could, and should, be taken on that—but we should also look at the number of older people who have not received support to get new boilers. Many of them live in owner-occupied or private rented housing that is incredibly poorly maintained, does not have the right standards of energy efficiency and is fitted with out-of-date and expensive heating systems. The current system is not working. Many older people are not online and are not able to access the advice that is absolutely crucial. As I said, fuel poverty is just one aspect of the debate, but on all aspects of poverty we need to drill down into the detail. We need to have our ambition absolutely right, we need to focus on equality, and those efforts need to be sustained. We need to work on looking at each individual policy that will actually tackle poverty, because that is not what is happening at the moment.

Will the member take an intervention?

I want to ask the minister about the housing issue that a couple of colleagues have mentioned. Does he agree that particular challenges are faced in the private rented sector, in which it is difficult to obtain investment in houses that have already been built, particularly in light of the potential Sullivan recommendations? Does he see opportunities in that sector to ramp up energy efficiency and social justice at the same time?

I, too, congratulate Jim Eadie on bringing the debate to the chamber. I thank him for doing so because it gives us the chance to talk about the success that has been created by the University of Edinburgh. The world rankings that the University of Edinburgh has attained are incredibly impressive and hugely significant. I very much welcome the briefing from the University of Edinburgh because it puts the work of its staff centre stage and rightly congratulates them on the huge amount of effort that they have put in. As a former academic, I am impressed by the statistics in the briefing, one of which refers to the research assessment exercise in 2008 that showed that 96 per cent of the university’s departments were carrying out world-leading research. That was a huge achievement that cannot be overestimated. When we think about the pressures of teaching and pastoral work with students, the ability to deliver that level of excellence right across the university is both remarkable and an incredible achievement. The virtuous circle that the university talks about is part of the reason for that success. The University of Edinburgh has been hugely successful in punching above its weight in all sorts of ways. Jim Eadie, Marco Biagi and Gavin Brown mentioned its research excellence in terms of competitive research grants, and its capacity to generate research grants both from the rest of the UK and at the European Union level is worthy of comment, as is its work on international partnership and co-operation. I want to comment on two aspects of the university’s research. First, given that the informatics department burned to the ground in 2002, the work that it now turns out is a fantastic achievement. I note the work of the previous Government in helping to build those new research facilities. I am always deeply impressed when I see the range of students and academics who work out of that building. It is a huge achievement. Secondly, I want to mention briefly the social science and governance work that the university does, which is also groundbreaking. It is not highlighted in Jim Eadie’s motion, but it is worthy of comment. The work that the university is doing to look at the governance of Scotland is first class. It builds on Edinburgh’s history, which, as others have said, is a proud one. Chrystal Macmillan was the first female science graduate from the university, in 1896, and she has inspired generations of women academics. She was a suffragette as well—that is a fantastic town-and-gown comment. We should also welcome the work that is being done on contemporary politics and social sciences, including gender politics and the evaluation of the contribution of women, which is asking some tough questions. As others have said, we do not have just one university in Edinburgh. We have four universities, and they are all pursuing excellence in their own ways. When I picked up my briefings today before I came into the chamber, I thought that it was an act of chutzpah that Heriot-Watt University wanted to remind us of its achievements as well. I finish with a point about leadership. In each of our universities we have fantastic leaders, whether it is Professor Tim O’Shea at the University of Edinburgh, who has driven its fantastic record of achievement, Steve Chapman at Heriot-Watt University, or our two newer leaders—Andrea Nolan at Edinburgh Napier University, who is our most recent leader, and Professor Petra Wend at Queen Margaret University. In them, we have four excellent leaders. They are developing slightly different universities, as others have said, but they are all about excellence, access and research, and they are all thinking about how their students will go out into the world and become successful at whatever careers they select. Tonight, we are celebrating the University of Edinburgh, but let us put on the record the fact that Edinburgh, as a capital and as a city, has the benefit of four universities that are all working incredibly well in collaborating across the rest of Scotland, the UK and the world. That is something that we should all celebrate this evening.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

This pragmatic debate has reflected the complex challenges that we all have to face, and it has indicated that we need to work together in the interests of our constituents. I believe that members have engaged in the debate with that appetite and that overall attitude. Although we need to be pragmatic, we also need to have a few points of principle in mind. To me, the Parliament should be guided by our principles of sustainable development in considering how we run our economy now and the long-term impact of our economy, but also how we factor in environmental and social issues and social impacts. Environmental justice has to be a key part of that world view, and that was ably demonstrated by both Claire Baker and Claudia Beamish. What has happened in our coal industry should worry us all. The question mark over jobs and stability in the industry, which Claire Baker mentioned, has been coming for some time, and it represents a double whammy for local communities. Jobs have been lost by some of our most disadvantaged communities that already have much higher rates of unemployment, as Graeme Pearson mentioned. The loss of commitment to and funding for restoration projects has been a body blow for many of those communities, which are now deeply worried about their future. The bonds and guarantees that were undertaken and given by companies, without which planning permission would not have been granted, have to concern us in the Parliament. That is why our amendment focuses on the need for the Scottish Government to review the policy advice in the draft SPP that closed for consultation this summer. We wanted to make a positive contribution to the debate and to flag up the fact that, because the planning minister has extended the time before the relevant policy is concluded, we have a chance to look at that section. We also wanted to flag up that discussions about the future of the coal and other extractive industries need to include the trade unions that are involved—both those on the mining side and those in relation to transport. It is concerning that, as well as losing jobs in the coal sector, we have seen contracts going away from rail haulage and reverting to road transport. At its very start, the Parliament focused on transferring transport from road to rail, and it is bad news for local communities to see a move back. Our amendment refers to what happens next in planning. The establishment of the task force was welcome, but we all need to put our minds to the key issue of the way forward on restoration in relation to both existing sites and the long-term development of new proposals. There are currently problems with pollution—and Helen Eadie was absolutely right to raise them as they are worrying communities now, even before we look at future issues. That is why, although we have not called for a moratorium, we have called for guidance to be addressed in the new SPP. That is crucial, because the existing document is short on help for local authorities, which have seen the agreements that they had made blown out of the water. With companies going bust and their successor companies attempting to shelve their obligations to carry out restoration work, communities are rightly angry. We need that guidance from the Scottish Government.

Not just now, thank you. Today’s announcement is important, and we need to seize the opportunity. I ask ministers to consider continuing the task force’s inclusive approach as they move forward. It is vital that all voices are drawn into the discussion, including those of communities and local authorities. We need to learn from good practice as well as from failure, and it is important to take on board Claudia Beamish’s comments on best practice in West Lothian and Midlothian. The issues of site surveys and restoration guarantees are also crucial. In future, sites need to be run to the best of standards, and they need to be progressively and appropriately restored. It is important that local authorities have the capacity to tap into specialised financial advice, because we all know that the current financial settlement for local authorities is seeing them lose staff. Those are key issues that we need to address. I ask the minister to consider the Scottish opencast communities alliance’s suggestion that local authorities should be allowed to introduce fees for monitoring and enforcing mineral consents. The alliance points out that such work is complex but underfunded. When the planning minister suggested earlier this year that local authorities should be allowed to raise the cost of planning fees, Labour agreed. The work is expensive, and it is important that planning authorities are properly funded to carry it out. I know from representations from the East Ayrshire Labour group that people are worried that the council simply does not have the resources to deal with a crisis on the scale of the one that it faces. As Graeme Pearson said, the council will discuss the matter this week. The paper from council officials says that the council is seeking support from the UK Government and the Scottish Government to find a way to support the restoration of sites in East Ayrshire. If Willie Rennie had taken interventions when he was in the chamber, mine would have been to say that he surely cannot rule out the involvement of the UK Government. My colleague Sandra Osborne MP raised the issue with the UK Government. Given that 48 per cent of the UK’s opencast coal comes from Scotland, we surely need positive engagement from the UK Government on the issue. Communities have been devastated because of the unsustainable financial settlement from the Scottish Government in this year’s budget, and yet Willie Rennie tells them not to speak to the UK Government. Governments at every level need to work together to see what practical support they can give local authorities and the communities that we represent. It is welcome that cumulative impact will be a material issue for planning authorities under the new planning guidelines. However, we need to ask what weight the Scottish Government will give to the existence of a site for which there are no commitments on restoration in a locality that would be affected by a new proposal. Will a local authority be expected to refuse planning permission until the existing site has been dealt with? Will the issue be reflected in authorities’ consideration of planning applications? The issue is important, because communities have a right to know what kind of environmental protection they can expect in such circumstances. Local authorities need to find out to what extent the Scottish Government will back them in planning decisions if companies are not happy about how their applications have been dealt with. Local authorities need to be confident that the Scottish Government will back them up. We need a transparent policy framework and an approach that is valid, fair and enforceable. I would be interested to know to what extent ministers have discussed the issues with local government and the UK Government and what role they envisage for the Coal Authority and DECC. The intergovernmental challenges are acute in this context and need to be taken on board. We need to get it right, because it is about challenges not just for the coal industry—although that has rightly been the focus for most members in this debate—but for other extractive and environmental industries. Restoration principles apply whether we are talking about fracking, biomass or coal. RSPB Scotland and Friends of the Earth Scotland were right to put the issue on our agenda in their joint briefing. Our economy is still in difficulty and access to money is an issue for companies. Borrowing has become more expensive, so it is a challenge for local authorities to measure accurately long-term financial viability. There are issues to do with global changes, and local authorities need support and strategic advice. We need to work collaboratively across the Parliament on the issue. As Helen Eadie said, ERDF funding was powerful and facilitated restoration projects that have successfully turned round communities. We need to consider the issues in the long run. We will need new jobs as our economy moves on to lower carbon energy sources. That is why the issue is not about a choice between low carbon energy and support for our coal industry; the challenges go hand in hand. Labour members are up for a discussion, to ensure that we work with local communities and Governments at all level to meet the challenge. We cannot leave things to fall as a result of the failure of market forces.

What advice has been given to ensure that sentencing policy is appropriate, given the rise in the number of accidents that have resulted in the deaths of cyclists in the past year?

Given the impact of climate change and the increasing cost of repairing and maintaining the historic tenements in our cities, will the minister review the operation of the law of the tenement in that respect? She has just mentioned—quite rightly—the impact that public sector investment can have on our historic environment, but we have a growing problem with our tenemental properties, which are jointly owned by housing associations, councils, private businesses and private owners.

4. To ask the Scottish Government how much its pledge to maintain the so-called triple lock for pensions will cost. (S4O-02325)

Given that the Scottish Government does not envisage personal tax rises if Scotland becomes independent, will the state pension age increase to help to pay for the policy?

4. To ask the Scottish Government which policies in the draft “Scottish Planning Policy” will inform local authority development plans in relation to housing needs for older people. (S4O-02285)

Given the projected significant increase in the number of older people over the short and, particularly, medium term, has the minister any plans to review the process by which analysis should be carried out to do that forward planning for older people in our communities? In years to come, we will be looking not only at specialist housing, as the general numbers of older people will mean that some will need mainstream housing, so we need to rethink our approach. Given that the guidance was last reviewed in 2008, does the minister have any plans to look at the issue?

I thank the many organisations that have sent us briefings today. I realise that they had a very short time to pull together their key observations, and their briefings have been really helpful to me—and I suspect others—in preparing for this debate. At its heart, planning is a democratic process that enables communities and their representatives to shape change. The purpose of the Labour amendment is to flag up our concerns about the increasing use of the term “sustainable economic growth” rather than “sustainable development”. We are concerned because a more sustainable Scotland will be created not just by willing it to happen but by the many incremental day-to-day decisions that are taken through the planning system and by infrastructure development. Leadership is absolutely crucial and there is much to welcome in both the draft NPF3 and the draft SPP, but definitions are important. I will take the opportunity today to push the minister on the way that he has framed the purpose and objectives in the NPF, because the minister’s suggestion that economic benefit should trump other considerations would be a step backwards. There has been a healthy debate on that issue in discussions on the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill. Third parties such as the Law Society of Scotland, Scottish Environment LINK and Unison have flagged up their concerns that, whereas the term “sustainable development” has been used throughout the lifetime of the Scottish Parliament, is in our own legislation and has international status, European Union status and UK status, the term “sustainable economic growth” potentially means all things to all people and could justify short-term change that would have long-term negative impact. To put “sustainable economic growth” above “sustainable development” in the SPP is to put them the wrong way round. I accept that, as the minister said, we are in a recession and are experiencing a severe economic downturn, and I understand the ambition to ensure that NPF3 and the SPP contribute to economic recovery—that is absolutely essential. However, we need to take a long-term perspective, too. If we are to deliver the sustainable, low-carbon Scotland that the Scottish Government motion refers to, we need to ensure that all development contributes to both the social and environmental objectives that are encompassed by sustainable development, alongside contributing to our economic objectives. That is why we have flagged up that we are still not on the right trajectory to deliver either our short or long-term commitments on climate change. If we are being honest, we all know that some of the big gains that we have made on climate change emissions have been as a result of the recession. We need to make sure that, as we come out of recession, we do so without sacrificing those gains, as that would leave future generations with even harder challenges. Planning is fundamental to delivering the vision of a sustainable Scotland. NPF3 will enable national priorities to be established that can be the basis of public and private investment. It should be a long-term commitment by the Scottish Government that gives a degree of certainty for business investment. Identifying sites is not sufficient. Articles about rising house prices have begun to appear, suggesting to us that things are getting better on housing, but that is an indication of housing shortage rather than of a healthy housing market. There is an increasing premium on existing housing because there is a severe shortage of new build. In fact, we are at a historic low. Not since the second world war have we had so few new housing starts. There is a huge economic cost to the country and to the construction industry from the small number of housing starts: there is the economic cost of a lack of jobs and there is a cost to our capacity to grow. There is a major social price to pay, too. Last month, the minister spoke at an Association of Women in Property event, at which he questioned whether we could expect the private sector to continue to contribute in the hard times to some of the infrastructure that local authorities now routinely expect to come as part of the planning process. There is a debate to be had on that. On one level the minister is right—private house-building companies are facing immense challenges in developing sites—but if we simply say that the requirements to contribute infrastructure should be reduced, that leaves the basic question of how that shortfall will be made up. In the current economic climate, local authorities are already strapped for cash. Although many are pursuing innovative investment strategies—through tax incremental financing schemes, for example—if contributions to roads and schools do not come alongside new development, we will not get the high-quality communities to which we aspire. There is simply no straightforward alternative, and the Scottish Government needs to understand that.

That could mean roads, public transport infrastructure, schools or energy, and we need to be much more specific. For example, because of the lack of investment from the Scottish Government, the City of Edinburgh Council is having to put its own money into housing associations in order to get any new investment for social housing, and there is a massive crisis in the city. If the Scottish Government is not requiring private development to put in the money, and is not itself prepared to put in the money, it is requiring local government to so. The Government needs to be honest about that and to accept the impact that it will have on community development. Local authorities and housing associations have been hit by a double whammy of cuts in housing investment from the SNP Government and the impact of welfare reform from the Tory Government, which together have completely undermined the economics of affordable social rented housing. We are in the middle of a crisis, and the policy that is on paper in the SPP is not going to happen in reality. If we factor in the changing demographics highlighted by the Christie commission, we see that there are even more challenges to local planning authorities in relation to new models of community development that meet the needs of a growing elderly population. I do not believe that what is written on the pages of the SPP will deliver on the minister’s ambitions, because investment will be key. One of the issues highlighted in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 was low-carbon housing, which is relevant to the intervention that the minister has just made. The act did not simply address the issue as one of individual house design; it was about the need for community renewable heat and power schemes. Given the massive increases in costs for domestic energy and heat, that is an issue not for NPF4 but for now. Given the carbon emissions that come from housing, I wondered when reading the Government motion why energy infrastructure is not on the list alongside transport and digital infrastructure, because there is a market failure not only in housing but in affordable heat and power as well. It is only when local authorities such as Aberdeen City Council have gone out to make things happen that such schemes have worked. That issue is not flagged up in the housing section and, although there is a section on energy, we have all been so focused on renewables from wind farms that the fundamental issue of sourcing heat and power for urban communities and for housing has not been joined up. If community renewables are to be part of our vision for our towns, villages and cities, they will not just happen by accident. They do not simply have to be planned for; they need political leadership from the Scottish Government. I have a couple of minutes left, so in my closing remarks I want to list a couple of other important issues. The Royal Town Planning Institute is right to welcome a renewed focus on town centres. We have all seen the report published in the past week or so showing that there is a possibility that, over the next four years, 25 per cent of retail units in town centres will go. The ambition of the SPP is good, but we need a bit more oomph. We need to put more emphasis on housing and residential developments in our city centres, because there has been a flight of people from our city centres. People want to live in city centres but, if all our developments are mixed commercial developments, our town centres will not survive. We must ensure that they are sustainable in the long run. I also want to say something about green infrastructure receiving huge support for tourism, nature conservation and low-carbon lifestyles generally. There are references in the SPP to long-distance walking and cycle routes. That is great, but it must be complemented by investment, which means the Scottish Government investing more on national routes and greenlighting investment in local communities too. We saw the ambition at the pedal on Parliament demonstration last month. The key point being made there was that people need to be able to use their bikes from their house to wherever they are going, but our streets are simply not safe enough. The issue is not just about long-term routes; it is about local routes, as well. My final point is that there is a total absence of any proposals for new national parks. Even if a new national park were suggested in NPF3, it would still be years and years away. Surely it is time for our national parks in Loch Lomond and the Trossachs and the Cairngorms to be joined by another national park. What about our first marine and coastal national park? There is a lot in the NPF about our seas, coastal communities and ports development, which is welcome, but that makes the absence of a national park in our coastal and marine areas even more striking.

The SPP is about the how and the NPF is about the where, as the RTPI says. I have focused on the purpose of planning and what should be in the purpose as set out by the SPP. Sustainable development must be the driver, not an afterthought, and at the moment the SPP does not have it the right way round. I move amendment S4M-06933.3, to insert at end: “, however notes that the Scottish Government has failed to meet its second climate change target; understands that the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 sets a clear need for policies and investment; further understands that the planning system plays a key role in helping to ensure that Scotland achieves sustainable development and that sustainable communities are essential to deliver on the targets adopted by the Scottish Government.”

I am delighted to follow that. My point, which was a serious one, related to housing—even though new jobs are being created as we speak, the housing market has not turned round. I was told at a recent council briefing that the social housing investment process is broken. A key problem is that, although there is aspiration across the country and land that has been cleared and has planning permission, the developers cannot afford to put houses on to the plots. That is a huge issue in Edinburgh. The minister will be aware that having a five-year land supply that is viable, capable of being developed and marketable is a difficult issue. On paper, that may look totally sensible but, in Edinburgh, for example, where the local plan is about to be delivered, the council had thought that it was about to get thousands of new houses from the waterfront development as Malcolm Chisholm mentioned, but there is now a massive shortfall from that site. That will not be made up easily anywhere else in the city—certainly not instantly. I understand that the local authority will be asked to increase dramatically the amount of available land. The developers say that they can build just more than 5,000 houses in the next five years. However, there is land for 42,000 houses. There is a gap between land that is identified for development and land that has planning clearance but where there simply is not the money to develop it. In Edinburgh, we could end up with a free-for-all. However brownfield sites are described—they are also described as formerly developed or gap sites—they will not be as attractive as green-belt land. The minister needs to take a sharp look at that issue. We must ensure that there is not a free-for-all. We must get away from the position in which land is available and identified for development but the developers cannot make it work. That goes to the heart of issues to do with public and private sector investment. What has happened with the Scottish Government’s investment in housing is not helping. I hope that the minister will agree to meet me. The issue was raised by the City of Edinburgh Council in its quarterly planning briefing. It also came up in a discussion that we had with a number of local authorities around Edinburgh, because other authorities do not want to take up Edinburgh’s housing slack. It has become a regional issue but, at the end of the day, no one will win because the land will not become available for development and we will not get the industry development or the houses that we need. Planning is seen as the problem rather than the solution. Planning cannot be the obstruction to development; it must be about how we get the right development and a positive process for shaping our communities for future development. That is about all our aspirations for development. There is a particular requirement on members to ensure that our communities understand that there is a national planning framework and that, once the Government has agreed the priorities and the matter has been through the parliamentary process, the projects in it will in effect be approved. Therefore, the framework is a major issue for our constituents. Although there has been innovative work, I am not sure whether all our constituents who live in affected areas will be aware of the framework, so there is a challenge in that regard. An issue that I will focus on is what the tools are for the job and who is carrying out the planning. A number of members have talked about the need to have faster planning and decision making. There is a tension here, to which Malcolm Chisholm referred. It is correct to have a much more up-front investment in planning consultation, but applications still need to meet the demands of communities, the planning system and the development industry. Reconciling those demands when they are different is the job of planning. We must highlight that, although the minister is asking planning authorities to move faster, they have to do so with fewer planners. There are also fewer people in other council departments to support them. A Unison survey on planning staff came out today, which talks about the reduction in the number of planners in our local authorities: 60 per cent of planners who were interviewed described the level of cuts as “major” or “severe”; 53 per cent believe that there are further major or severe cuts to come, and 87 per cent believe that the overall service that is provided to the public is being “adversely affected”. Therefore, there are major challenges in delivering the kind of planning system that we want. We need a planning system that is responsive and swift yet deals with ever more complexity. However, there are major challenges in delivering on all the objectives in the draft Scottish planning policy document. To provide the right kind of infrastructure for development, for energy, for digital communications, for transport or for reduced CO2 emissions requires a process whereby applications are tested against all those objectives. That will not always be achieved through a tick-box exercise but will often require a proper evaluation and judgment. The bit at the end that Malcolm Chisholm talked about—the occasions when the Scottish Government needs to look at decisions that have been rubber-stamped at local level—also needs to be right. All of that comes back to what the purpose of planning is. As I said in my opening remarks, sustainable development should be our starting point and economic growth must be part of that process. Whether we are in a recession or just in difficult economic times, I do not really care, but the point is that thousands upon thousands of young people are not getting jobs. Young people with five standard grades, who historically would never have got those standard grades, are entering a labour market where there are no jobs. We need to take economic issues into account but, as I said in my opening remarks, economic issues cannot trump everything else. Patrick Harvie rose— The draft SPP document starts off with “Sustainable Economic Growth” and then goes on to “Sustainable Development”, whereas those should be the other way round. Climate change also needs to be factored in as part of that process. I will take a brief intervention from Patrick Harvie. Presiding Officer, do I have eight minutes?

My point is that, regardless of whether we are in good times or tough times, the decisions need to be right because they will be with us for the long term. We need to create jobs and to support industry, but we need to do that on the basis of thinking through the impacts. That is why the policy should not start off with sustainable economic growth, which cannot be defined properly. Sustainable development, which is included in legislation at international, European, UK and Scottish levels, should be our starting point. This is not about being against development but about being in favour of the right development and ensuring that we get that right for future generations. The planning system must be about the long term as well as the short term. When planning gets it right, it delivers exciting things, such as national parks, the west Highland way and the cleaning up of the legacy of industrial sites in Falkirk and Stirling. Given the right resource, planning can deliver a huge amount, but it needs the right objectives—

The draft Scottish planning policy document is the place to get that framework right.

Could the minister update us on progress on building that grid infrastructure? I understand that there are currently some significant delays in the system.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with NHS Lothian. (S4O-02187)

Is the cabinet secretary concerned about the serious capacity issues at the Royal infirmary of Edinburgh, where in March one in five patients waited for more than four hours in the accident and emergency unit? Given that the ERI could, due to staff shortages, soon be taking in extra patients from St John’s hospital, what assurance can the cabinet secretary give that the staff, who are working flat out, will be given the resources that they urgently need in order to serve patients to the best of their ability?

I welcome the fact that there are regular discussions between the health secretary’s officials and NHS Lothian. However, to return to the question that Jim Eadie asked, are there any possibilities of changing this particular contract, especially given the huge costs to patient care and to the operation of the Royal infirmary and the problem with cancelled operations and the consequent delays?

This debate goes to the heart of the challenge of long-term demographic change and to the heart of the short-term challenges that already face health boards, those who commission care services and, crucially, older people and their families, who are looking for quality services to support them in living good-quality lives. A bit of a reality check is needed. We could all see what the amendment was about; in fact, the cabinet secretary’s opening speech demonstrated that in spades. I quite like the cabinet secretary’s new improved interpretation of his quotation from two weeks ago, as it perfectly sets up what I was going to say. He says that he is against any hospital closures and that, in terms of the needs of older people in Scotland, we do not need to close any beds in the long term, but NHS Lothian’s strategic clinical framework says otherwise. There is no getting away from that, with respect to older people. The framework states: “Less hospital inpatient care may mean we need fewer hospital beds, with those that we do need provided in appropriate and fit for purpose accommodation.” I want to highlight the massive pressures that already exist in NHS Lothian. I welcome the extra beds that are being put in place in the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, but the Royal Victoria hospital, which was specifically for older people, was closed. It had to be reopened within months because of the short-term capacity problems in the ERI. There is also a question mark over three more hospitals. I do not need to go into the cabinet secretary’s quotation in depth, because that has already been done. However, it is vital that, before any decisions are taken on those smaller hospitals, a replacement strategy is in place that is funded and is clear about the numbers of people who need to be looked after, about the range of types of care, and that facilities are in place for that. The closure of the Royal Victoria teaches that lesson, as does the situation in respect of the new sick kids hospital and the replacement hospital for the department of clinical neuroscience in Lothian, because the money was not in place in time to build the facilities. I do not need to lecture members about the cash-strapped nature of NHS Lothian, because it has been well documented. However, we need the health secretary to engage with the reality of his funding decisions. The BMA has made it clear that real-terms spending on the health service is reducing. We therefore need guarantees on replacement plans. As my colleague Ian Murray MP put it, the needs of “some of the most frail and vulnerable people in the city ... are not necessarily best met in a community setting.” We need a proper and honest debate about that. As Jackie Baillie said, the closure of the five Cairn homes is a timely reminder that we must be concerned about more than just the health element of integration of healthcare and social care, because the social care element is in crisis and faces real problems now. There is a particular problem for the City of Edinburgh Council in that the five Cairn homes are very sheltered accommodation that is not financially sustainable, according to Cairn. However, its model of very sheltered housing is precisely the sort of provision that we will need more of, rather than less. The Cairn closure proposals have, understandably, created stress and worry for the families involved. As one relative put it, having searched in vain for alternative accommodation: “There is nothing that will give elderly frail people a dignified and independent (with support) way of life.” That refers to the people about whom Alex Neil talked in his opening remarks: the increasing numbers of over-75s, many of whom will want to live in their own homes with support, or who will need to live in very sheltered accommodation or care homes. However, there is simply not enough funding to go around. I am told by my colleagues in the City of Edinburgh Council that they will need to rebuild or refurbish eight care homes. They provided a new one in Drumbrae, but they simply do not have the capital to build, never mind to staff, more new care homes. The problem is therefore a current one rather than a long-term one. We need from the health secretary an honest commitment, not just glib statements at conferences, and we need an understanding of the reality on the ground and action on it.

At what point will we be able quantify the cost of the potential options for addressing the priorities in terms of those flood risk areas?

The member’s points are very valid. Edinburgh was unlucky in just missing the 80 per cent funding cut-off, which means that the scheme has ended up being funded by the council, and I welcome the member’s lobbying of the minister. However, does the member agree that in the areas that have experienced a disproportionate amount of flooding, the investment has been a huge burden for those taxpayers to bear? Do we need to consider a national approach that is not just about bidding but enables local authorities to have some certainty on this issue?

In the 14 years since the Parliament was established, there have been numerous debates on flooding. We have made a lot of progress over that period with regard to planning policy and investment. In that sense, it is particularly disappointing that we have to have this debate today, but it has been difficult to get a sense of what will happen after 30 June, what the transitional arrangements will be and what the new regime will look like. Clearly, the insurance industry is attempting to reduce its costs and deal with the fact that there are increasing incidences of flooding. The Stop Climate Chaos briefing quotes Scottish Government figures that suggest that the risk of flooding might double in some areas by the end of the century. That is the context for this debate; the situation is a real challenge. Members spoke passionately about the problems that their constituents have experienced and how some of them have faced those problems not only once but twice or more. That is a human cost. People feel nervous every time it rains heavily. There is also a huge economic cost because of the damage to industry and the lost opportunity. Nigel Don questioned whether we can allow some areas to be economically unviable. Will some people’s houses or businesses become worthless? What is the social and economic impact of that? All those points must concentrate our mind on what practical things we can do—and there is a lot that we can do. We must do everything that we can to push the insurance industry to act with corporate social responsibility so that, while those big companies make money from providing us with insurance, they do so with a sense of social justice and solidarity underpinning their business. I hope that the minister will take up those crucial issues in all his discussions and that they are on the agenda with the UK Government and the industry. The 14 per cent of people who live in high flood risk areas and cannot get insurance need a voice. They need to know what will happen and that there will be something to support them, whether that is the insurance industry or Government stepping in as a last resort. The most intelligent approach would be for the insurance industry, supported by Government, to ensure that we have a cost-effective insurance industry. As Alex Johnstone said, both the Government and the industry involve an element of cross-subsidy and social protection across the country. Whether the border is that between Scotland and England or England and Wales, or whether it is between people in Glasgow and Renfrewshire or between people in different parts of the Lothians, the problem is growing across the country, so it is an issue that must concern us all. Some practical things can be done. All councils have now bitten the bullet and said that they are happy for the industry to access the relevant database. If the debate achieves nothing else, it will have at least achieved a timescale for that to happen. I hope that the minister will be tough and push as hard as he can to ensure that the licensing regime comes into place as soon as possible. That is crucial because it will mean that there will be no place for an insurance company to hide or say that it did not know about some information. There are different views among the insurers about how important that will be, but it is important that there should be a proper set of information to allow risk to be judged. The second issue that I want to comment on is resilient buildings. The Parliament can make building regulations, and it is possible for the minister to require more resilient reinstatement. That makes sense—not only in the long term, but the medium term—for buildings that might potentially be flooded. If flooded again, a more resilient building will cost less for reinstatement the second time, so it also makes sense financially. Perhaps the Scottish Government needs to push on the issue to see whether more resilient reinstatement can be brought about through changes to building standards. Helen Eadie spoke very effectively on that matter. Other members spoke about the benefit gained by knowing about potential flooding and how it might happen again. We know that flood risk is impossible to eradicate completely. A short-term marginal investment could bring large long-term benefits for householders and businesses. That would be a very practical thing to do. Members also mentioned the issue of planning. I draw members’ attention to the fact that there is a consultation on Scottish planning policy. A fairly significant part of the document talks about flood risk. Although we all convince ourselves that planning procedures in Scotland now mean that there is no building on flood risk areas, the detail in the planning policy does not quite match that aspiration. There are always planning applications that come in and there may be an argument about it. For example, members have heard evidence that brownfield development makes a huge amount of sense for some parts of Glasgow, but some of those developments will be in flood risk areas. What we need is not no development but intelligent development—knowing all the facts and risks and then building in resilience and mitigation. Alex Johnstone’s mentioned run-offs. The issue is not just about the building of structures but the management of the land thereafter. For example, people routinely convert their gardens from grass to concrete. That makes a difference, but people do not necessarily have that information. A few members talked about the need to bang heads together, and Maureen Watt talked about her experience in that regard. We have a lot of expertise in Scotland, but not everyone who needs that expertise has automatic access to it. Whether we are talking about planning committees or builders, we need to ensure that everyone knows enough when planning decisions are taken. I hope that members will consider the planning policy document and ensure that the precautionary principle is built into the final version as strongly as possible—the same goes for building standards, too. The Accounts Commission published a good document recently, which highlighted cost-effective flood management investment. There is an issue to do with sustainable flood management; there is also an issue about the cost of flood management projects. Marco Biagi quite rightly mentioned the Edinburgh scheme, which is expensive. There are issues to do with delay in that regard and there are issues to do with expertise across the country. Flood management works need to be more sustainable, in the context of both the cost and the environment.

I thank the member very much for taking an intervention. I want to ask him specifically about the resilience of buildings, which the petition raised. The minister commented that he thought that it might be onerous for the insurance industry to have to reinstate properties to a higher level so that they are flood resistant or resilient. Does the committee have a view on that? Would it like to explore the matter further?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with NHS Lothian regarding the board’s investigation of readmission rates. (S4O-02040)

NHS Lothian is facing well-documented capacity issues and the fact that more than 11 per cent of medical patients are being readmitted will add to that pressure. A recent audit of the Edinburgh royal infirmary found that the hospital was at 110 per cent capacity, with more than one in five patients hit by delayed discharge. What additional funds is the Scottish Government providing to enable local authorities to deliver on the four-week target that the minister set from this month, given that the six-week targets were still not being met in 15 out of the past 20 quarters?

I, too, thank John Pentland for ensuring that we have this debate today. I also thank Families Against Corporate Killers and the thousands of trade union representatives for the hard work that they do to keep the issue of safety at work on our agenda and on employers’ agendas too. Health and safety is not a burden on industry. A good health and safety regime is a sign of company values; it is something to be proud of. It is not just about protection for workers, companies and public sector organisations. As others have said, when something goes wrong, it can impact on neighbouring communities, lives can be put at risk and there can be a detrimental impact on the local environment. The legionnaire’s outbreak in Edinburgh saw local communities hit and lives lost. I am told that, due to council cutbacks by the previous council leadership, vital time was lost in getting the investigation going and that cuts to and pressures on the Health and Safety Executive also had an impact. We need to learn the lessons of that experience. We need expertise across the country that is capable of instant mobilisation as soon as incidents occur. It is vital that evidence is not lost, that there is accountability and that lessons can be learned. Again close to home in Edinburgh, we still do not have transparency about what happened on the fateful night when firefighter Ewan Williamson lost his life fighting the fire in the Balmoral bar. That was nearly four years ago. Although I welcome the fact that the Crown Office has now instituted legal proceedings, Ewan Williamson’s family and his Fire Brigades Union colleagues are still waiting for a proper inquiry to establish the facts, learn lessons and make sure that FBU members who put their lives on the line for us every day are supported by knowing what happened. Yesterday, a new report by the Inspectorate of Prosecution in Scotland raised important concerns. It praised the high standards and work of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service health and safety division but expressed worries about the length of time that it takes to conclude cases. It says that we need more accountability and we need action. I think that we need to look at the issue of staff turnover—and the loss of valuable expertise and knowledge—which is increasingly a concern throughout the public sector in Scotland. I hope that the minister will comment on that. There is something that the Scottish Government could do now, which is to consider Patricia Ferguson’s member’s bill and ensure that we speed up the process of fatal accident inquiries, that vital lessons are learned and that we do not have to wait years before there is accountability. The forthcoming procurement bill is an opportunity to ensure that the health and safety track record of companies is part of the procurement process. On Sunday, we will commemorate international workers memorial day. As citizens, we all need to make a stand and demand that our Governments, companies and public sector organisations do all that they can to promote effective health and safety regimes. As other members have said, yesterday’s tragic deaths in Dhaka show that we all—as citizens and as consumers—need to ask that our companies have a duty of care to their employees, not just in Scotland and the United Kingdom but throughout the globe.

I am glad that the amendment has been put in front of us. We debated the issue at stage 1 and again at stage 2. My sense is that we could address it today or wait another five years. It is clear that, if we do not agree to the amendment, some of the deepest conflicts will remain. This is our opportunity to put in place a rigorous framework and ensure that things are done coherently. I strongly support the amendment that Anne McTaggart has moved. It will not keep everybody happy because high hedge disputes tend to be of long standing and involve deeply held views, but it will provide a resolution process. That is what the amendment is about and I hope that the minister will be able to support it. The discussion at stage 1 and stage 2 was good. If the amendment was agreed to, it would strengthen the bill. Of course we would have to review it over time, but it is better to make the change at this stage rather than come back in five years’ time, wishing that we had done it and having to allocate more parliamentary time to the matter. I support the amendment.

I take the hint, Presiding Officer. Like other colleagues, I point out that this legislation has been a long time coming and builds on the work of many people; indeed, my former colleague Scott Barrie had two goes at promoting a bill on this issue in the Parliament. For all the reasons that others highlighted in the earlier debate on amendments, it is important that we get the detail of the bill right. First, I thank Mark McDonald for picking up this issue and steering it to today’s concluding debate. I also thank the committee clerks, everyone who submitted evidence to the committee, MSPs more widely in considering the bill and the committee for its work in scrutinising it. The bill’s crucial purpose is to put in place a process to resolve neighbour disputes about high hedges that people believe are interfering with the reasonable enjoyment of their domestic property. The process that will now be in place to enable applications to be made to the relevant local authority and to give it the power to settle disputes between neighbours about high hedges is a step welcomed by the many people who find their lives disrupted by the fact that they cannot get a resolution on a matter that is preventing them from enjoying their property. The bill does not mean that everybody will be happy at the end of the day, because the process is about dispute resolution. The onus will be on the local authority to take everybody’s views into account and consider whether a hedge is having an adverse effect. The bill gives a local authority the opportunity to issue a high hedge notice to require the hedge owner to remedy the problem and prevent it from recurring. There is also a big stick at the end of the process to enable the authority to do the work itself and recover the costs. I share Mark McDonald’s hope that the new framework will concentrate minds to the extent that some of the long-standing disputes will be resolved through negotiation, without having to go through the process set out in the bill. Mark McDonald outlined the fact that the provisions are not free—that will also concentrate many people’s minds. Although there is a relatively small number of disputes, a key part of the bill is that it will offer the prospect of dispute resolution and allow people to move on. Anyone who has taken representations or evidence from a constituent who is involved in such a dispute will be aware that it dominates their lives and prevents them from moving on. I hope that the bill will be of use to many of those people. The fact that there is a right of appeal to the Scottish ministers against the decision of an authority on any high hedge notice makes sense and provides an effective check and balance to the system. Labour signed up to the principles of the bill when it was introduced but, at the stage 1 debate, we argued for a close look at the detail of the bill, especially the definition. We were concerned that some of the most difficult disputes would not be addressed by the bill and that it would be years before the Parliament was likely to return to the issue. Our discussion on the amendments showed that there is no appetite among the majority of members in the chamber to come back to the bill early doors. I am therefore particularly glad that Mark McDonald and the minister were prepared to consider Anne McTaggart’s amendment and to work with her to agree wording that they could support during today’s stage 3 consideration. The campaign group Scothedge conducted a survey in 2009 that concluded that almost one fifth of respondents suffered from the impact of deciduous hedges, such as beech or rows of deciduous trees, so I am very glad that we have been able to strengthen the bill. The worry that there would be a huge number of high hedge complaints and cases following the introduction of the legislation in England has not transpired. Although the bill must be monitored, adding the tree preservation order to the new process gives us a robust system all round. The representations from the SWT and RSPB Scotland provide a timely reminder that the local Government staff who are responsible for implementing the dispute resolution procedure will need clear guidance from the Scottish Government on survey work and clear policy criteria so that a view can be reached on the issues that they will have to act on locally. I very much welcome the Minister for Local Government and Planning’s January letter, which he followed up with useful information about the meeting that was held on Monday. I am glad that the SWT and RSPB Scotland will be involved in the process, because getting all the stakeholders round the table will be crucial to the success of the bill. We look forward to voting in favour of the bill.

Thank you, Presiding Officer—that might be quite dangerous. We will get a good result with the bill which, as everyone has said, has been a long time coming. We were able to carry out a good, thorough scrutiny of the bill as it was introduced to Parliament, which has been beneficial. At the end of the day, the bill as it is passed will be a lot stronger; it will relate to many more people who are involved in damaging, prolonged disputes. It will be of help to many constituents—that will not necessarily be in every constituency in Scotland but, where there are problems, it will be useful. I welcome the fact that Mark McDonald, the member in charge of the bill, was prepared to take a fresh look at amendments from across the chamber, regardless of who they came from. He was prepared to think about the merits of the amendments and the long-term impact of the bill. It is good that we will all be broadly able to support the bill when the vote comes. Along with Christine Grahame, I think that we were right not to go with single trees. It was right to extend the definition, but the process of tree preservation orders already exists and the bill will complement that process. Anne McTaggart made a comment about the detailed impact of the bill that was absolutely right: sometimes people not being prepared to maintain hedges—or to take responsibility for doing so—is part of the problem. It is about ensuring that people feel some sense of accountability and responsibility. Jackie Baillie’s list of problems that constituents have brought to her and other members’ comments highlight that for many people, these are real problems that are currently incapable of resolution. The bill will help with that. We now need to focus on the implementation of the bill. There is much that we can learn from and build on in the experience of similar legislation in other parts of the UK, in particular how best-practice guidance works and how people might be encouraged to resolve a dispute before using the procedures that we are approving. I am keen that the biodiversity issues that have been flagged up are factored in along with the other criteria that will be examined. Expertise needs to be developed across our local authorities if the bill is to be implemented successfully, particularly bearing in mind that many of the people who will be responsible for that already have relatively heavy workloads. For that reason, I welcome the fact that the minister is discussing the idea of Scottish Government support to provide a core of expertise to local authorities. I do not see that support as involving somebody being in place for all time; it is about the early stages of implementing the bill. That is the key point when workshops or seminars or support about what is in the guidance will be critical and when people need to build their expertise. That is the point at which it will be most useful. I suspect that not all local authorities will draw on that expertise, but people should have that opportunity so that the bill is implemented successfully. At stage 1, we had a lengthy debate that came out of exchanges across the chamber about the impact of suburban housing development, poor-quality design by developers and the lack of long-term consideration given to structural tree planting or landscaping, with nobody sitting down and thinking, “In 20 or 30 years, what will this community be like? What will be the impact of the landscape that we are putting in place now?” I hope that the new Scottish planning policy that will address the place-making issues that the minister referred to will be of practical use to local authorities in scrutinising applications and also to developers in ensuring that we get strong, good-quality proposals that use natural heritage, tree planting and hedges in a constructive, practical way. I hope that they will think about the future practicalities for the people who live in those developments, to ensure that they remain high-quality and attractive developments to live in. It has been a good debate. I hope that, although it is not a silver bullet, the bill will improve people’s lives. At the end of the day, that is why we are all here. For those reasons, I am delighted to support the bill.

I add my congratulations to James Kelly on securing the debate. It was an immense privilege to be in Malawi last week—along with Alex Fergusson and Fergus Cochrane, one of the Parliament’s senior clerks—as part of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association delegation. It was an incredibly busy five days. Alex and I blogged on our visit: I did a daily blog and Alex provided a fantastic blog at the end of the week, in which he summed up his thoughts. As someone who has now visited Malawi twice, it was clear to me from my second visit that Malawi continues to face huge challenges on health issues, especially—as colleagues have mentioned—on HIV and AIDS and maternal health. Although I feel that the projects that we visited are making a positive contribution, we need to see long-term, sustainable health projects. Access to education—particularly access to secondary school education for young girls—remains vital for the future of Malawi. The third issue that Malawi faces is the economic challenge, which includes the cost of food and the problem of inflation. Those issues are affecting Malawians on a daily basis. We could sense the real challenge that ordinary Malawians are experiencing. There is much that we can be proud of. The 2005 agreement, to which James Kelly’s motion refers, should be our starting point. We have a fantastic historical relationship with Malawi, but I report to members that the people of Malawi and its Parliament regard that 2005 co-operation agreement as a living document that is incredibly important to their country. It is highly valued. Last week, we saw fantastic local projects in action. Earlier today, at the meeting with Annie Lennox, Patricia Ferguson commented on the fact that 80,000 Scots have a direct link with Malawi. In a country of 5 million, that represents an immense resource. Our challenge is to develop the strategy and a sustainable long-term relationship. On our visit, we looked at local projects. Practical links have been established with our twins in the Malawi Parliament—10 MSPs are twinned with 10 members of the National Assembly of Malawi. We delivered a workshop on financial scrutiny and audit, and we took part in the women’s caucus seminar, which focused on empowering women. A huge exchange of knowledge and expertise is going on, and making that a long-term relationship is the key for us in Scotland. I was privileged to visit the constituency of my parliamentary twin, Christina Chiwoko. We visited the joyful mothers project, which is a local project that looks after young babies who lost their mothers during childbirth. I think that that was one of the most moving experiences that I will ever have. I spoke to the chief of a village with six families in it. He had a new granddaughter. It should have been a fantastic celebration, but two days previously his daughter-in-law had died in the process of giving birth. As well as hearing about that family’s tragic experience and the village coming together to support the young baby, we heard about the village not being able to make the most of its agricultural produce. When the weather is good in Malawi, the people produce fantastic fruit and vegetables—but they cannot sell them to anyone. Those rural villages do not have the agricultural co-operatives that our farming communities have, and that is a real issue. In fact, my second visit highlighted to me those kinds of agricultural and economic development issues, especially in relation to smallholder farmers. Both the Government and the Parliament need to think about how we address such issues in our work with Malawi; after all, as with health and education, we have a huge amount of expertise in this area. The fair trade movement provides a massive stimulus, but I have to wonder what more we can do to support smallholders, many of whom are rural women farmers. As part of our technical assistance programme, we gave a seminar on financial accountability and scrutiny in the Scottish Parliament. On the journey there we wondered how exciting that would be, but I have to say that the questions from the Malawian MPs showed the importance of the issue to them. We take it for granted that if we want a minister to come before a committee to account for themselves and the budget they will come and be asked serious questions; in Malawi, however, those kinds of democratic structures are younger and not as strong.

In that case, I will let Alex Fergusson talk about the fantastic women’s seminar. For me, the key question that the Malawian MPs asked was how they could scrutinise our work in this Parliament, the work of non-governmental organisations and donor Governments’ investment in their country and communities. There is the Scotland Malawi Partnership; we now have the Malawi Scotland Partnership. There are two sides to this relationship and the fact is that it will be sustained only if it is a relationship of equals.

In my speech in the debate on the draft order last month, I said that that was our chance to comment on the Scottish Government’s priorities and to highlight our unhappiness about its centralisation agenda and its budget allocations. On the day, Scottish National Party spin doctors had to work really hard; they had to work overtime to finesse the damage that the impact of the settlement caused in Aberdeen. We do not see today’s order as being a cause for celebration, but we understand that the money needs to go to local government today. We understand that every council leader would rather accept the proposed deal than no deal, and we know that local authorities have no real option but to sign up to it. There will be negative consequences in every part of Scotland. One academic has noted that it is a tighter squeeze with even less flexibility than the Tories ever managed. We live in tough times, and local authority finances face an unprecedented squeeze. Today, we have an Accounts Commission report that identifies a significant rise in the level of debt that is being sustained by local authorities. Their challenge is that their capacity to service that debt and the repayments has not increased, but their need to build new infrastructure to support services still has to be met year in, year out.

I will give way briefly on the point about debt.

If Mark McDonald had read his agenda on the day, he would have noted that that was the draft local government finance order. Today, we are discussing the actual finance order. There is a distinction, and it is important to log that point. As I said in my speech, we had a chance to make our points. Today, we are resolutely focused on what needs to be done now to improve the quality of life in our communities and to protect people who are suffering the impact of economic uncertainty. The council tax freeze of which John Swinney is so proud is underfunded, and the strings that come with today’s package mean that the Scottish Government does not just set the money for every authority; it also requires a commitment on how revenue is actually spent. It sets the parameters. In his report to the Parliament’s Finance Committee, Professor Bell highlighted the uncertainty around local government funding, and his recommendations focused more on local government funding than anything else.

No, I will not. I will get on. It is a great pity that the Local Government and Regeneration Committee did not invite ministers to talk about the local government element of the budget. Pressure on local government services will continue to grow over the next year. Only last week, members debated the growing challenge of demographic change and the need to improve health and social care services. We all know that the Christie commission identified the need to focus on tackling social inequalities and to build capacity in our communities, but the combination of the UK Government’s austerity and welfare polices has meant that times are hard for people on low incomes. Child poverty is rising, families are being hit by dramatic rises in fuel costs and 25 per cent of our young people are unable to get a college place or a job. That is the context of what we think is a constructive amendment. We want to work to ensure that every opportunity is taken to help people through these tough times and to provide the resources to provide practical support.

I will give way on the point about a constructive approach.

That is because we were focusing on housing, which is crucial to local government. I will come on to that, Mr Swinney, because your underfunding of housing is creating the problem that we are attempting to address. If you speak to local government officers, they will tell you that the funding system for social housing is broken—end of story. We need to tackle that.

Across Scotland, advice services and councils are, as we speak, redeploying staff to gear up for the impact of the bedroom tax, but more needs to be done. That is why, in our amendment, we ask the Scottish Government to do more to “mitigate the impact of the ... bedroom tax”.

No. I have already taken interventions. There is another squeeze that is being caused by the transfer of council tax moneys minus 10 per cent. The Welsh Assembly Government met that shortfall in full. In Scotland, local authorities had to find £17 million this year, and there is no promise of funding going forward. Last month, Scottish council leaders called on the Scottish Government to make up that shortfall. I am told that their decision to do so was unanimous, which is significant. Council leaders are looking at their budgets, and they know that there will be shortfalls as a direct result of the UK Government’s decision to pay housing benefit directly to tenants. Yesterday, the BBC reported that the pilots show that there will be a massive 30 per cent increase in arrears. That should concern all of us. It is bad news for councils and tenants, and it is a huge financial problem. As a Parliament, we need to focus on what we can do together now. I ask the SNP Government to work with us across the chamber. There is much that we can agree on: we need to support people through these tough times and enable our local authorities to get the financial support to do what they need to do. I move amendment S4M-05924.1, to insert at end: “but, in so doing, considers that the Scottish Government should mitigate the impact of the so-called bedroom tax and respond positively to COSLA’s call for the Scottish Government to fully fund the replacement scheme for council tax benefit as the National Assembly for Wales has done.”

No one has really argued effectively against our amendment, with the honourable exception of Margaret Mitchell. Today, the issue is that we have a very tight set of constraints on local government. Today’s Accounts Commission report is a real wake-up call. That is the context for our discussion. The Accounts Commission reports a 39 per cent increase in local authority debt levels in the past five years. That is on the cabinet secretary’s watch. Does he have concerns about that? How does it square with this year’s whopping £52 million capital spend cut for local authorities? That will simply make a bad situation worse. How sustainable is local government finance? Given the financial straitjacket that the Scottish Government has put local authorities in, what does it intend to do to tackle that problem? The Accounts Commission recommends more financial and project management skills, and particularly business planning skills, in local government. When we debated the draft order last month, I highlighted the loss of staff across local authorities. Local authorities have taken the biggest hit in staff numbers—disproportionately so—in the public sector. What impact has that loss of expertise had on the quality and terms of service delivery? The need for effective service delivery becomes even more acute when there is less money around. The predictions are that there will be less money next year, too. Does the SNP have concerns about the ability of local authorities to employ sufficient staff to provide the crucial financial expertise and project and risk management skills that we urgently need? What of the impact of last year’s loss of 14,000 staff from local authorities, given that the same is predicted again this year? Quite apart from the human impact of that on families, there is also an impact on hard-pressed communities. It means less money in our local economy, less money being spent on local goods and less money for our local businesses. Since the SNP came to power seven years ago, it has made great play of its partnership with local authorities, yet this has been a centralising Government, as is demonstrated by the order before us today. The concordat has failed our local communities. It is a way for the Scottish Government to control local authorities’ purse strings and to pass all the blame to them when things go wrong. The proposal in our amendment would be a small but significant step towards allowing local authorities to manage their cash more effectively, and it would have a huge impact on our constituents and the people who will suffer from the iniquitous bedroom tax and the welfare reforms that the Tories are pushing on us. We must do what we can do. It is a dented shield, but it is still a shield. Let us use that shield properly.

I welcome the opportunity to lead the debate, and I thank members from across the Parliament who signed my motion. I place on record my thanks to the enough food for everyone if campaign for its support in briefing members ahead of the debate and to groups such as Oxfam, the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund and Save the Children for giving us such superb briefings. My motion starts with the simple statement that, around the world, 870 million people, or one in eight of the total population, are affected by chronic undernourishment. Every year, 2.3 million children die of malnutrition, and those who survive experience long-term health impacts that limit their development. Those facts are a global scandal and highlight the inequalities that still exist between the world’s developing and developed countries. Of the 870 million undernourished people in the world, the overwhelming majority live in developing countries. They experience higher levels of poverty and have low incomes and poor healthcare, education and nutrition. In the developing world in particular, those challenges are compounded by conflicts, natural disasters and climate change, which put further pressure on food security. In recent decades, action has been taken on hunger at international level and some progress has been made, but not enough. The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization stated, in publishing its latest figures on undernourishment, that the millennium development goal of halving the proportion of hungry people by 2015 is still achievable. However, although the proportion of people who are hungry dropped from nearly 19 per cent to 12.5 per cent over the past two decades, the world’s population has grown, so the reduction in the number of people who are hungry has not been as pronounced. Despite initial progress towards the MDG target, we now have the impact of the global financial crisis. In fact, in Africa, the number of people who go hungry has increased in recent years. Research by Save the Children shows that, in 2012, the number of hungry children in the world rose for the first time in a decade. The if campaign is crucial in putting the issue on our agenda. It is the largest coalition of its kind since the make poverty history campaign and brings together nearly 150 development organisations that cover a broad range of interests, including some of the United Kingdom’s best-known and respected charities. More than 50,000 people have signed up to support the campaign, and there have been more than 90,000 tweets about it. The campaign has backing from high-profile figures such as Bill Gates, Desmond Tutu and Joyce Banda. We need to reach a tipping point at which the calls for action are so loud that world leaders cannot ignore them. This year, 2013, can be the beginning of the end for global hunger, but only if we act together at all levels of government and society. Many of the Scottish organisations that are involved have embraced a proactive approach, through the network of international development organisations in Scotland—NIDOS—whose recent travelling exhibition, Scotland versus poverty, drew attention to our response to global poverty and hunger. I was proud to welcome NIDOS to our Parliament in January. This Parliament and Scottish Governments past and present have rightly sought to support international development. Our close links with Malawi, in particular, will be visible this year as we celebrate the bicentenary of the birth of David Livingstone. However, as the if manifesto points out, there is much more that we in Scotland can do now to support, protect, inspire, learn and improve as part of our commitment to the developing world. For example, we can take action on climate change. Crop yields could fall by half in parts of Africa by 2020 and up to a third in Asia by 2050. Support to help smallholder farmers to adapt to extreme weather is fundamental to tackling hunger. Our Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 has been described as world leading; we now need to go faster. The if campaign has an on-going commitment from the Scottish Government to the international development fund and the climate justice fund. Given that the Government supports those funds, I would be interested to hear from the minister how they will be developed in future. There is also Fairtrade fortnight. At the start of this week, it was announced that Scotland has achieved fair-trade nation status. We should be proud of that achievement and do more to support fair trade and ethical purchasing. As the if campaign points out, tax avoidance by big business and wealthy individuals denies developing countries vital resources that could be used to combat hunger. There are opportunities for the Scottish Government to lead by example and further support ethical purchasing decisions through the forthcoming procurement reform bill. Transparent reporting, to assess the direct and indirect impact of the Scottish Government’s policies on the developing world, would strengthen the approach. Support for the development of sustainable agriculture is key. The poorest farmers are losing out, because land grabs are taking away their agricultural land, which is being given over to non-food crops. The if campaign highlights that the responsibility for tackling the problems that face the developing world rests with all of us. Fantastic work on global citizenship is going on in Scotland’s schools to teach young people to understand international issues and their role and responsibility in bringing change. However, demand for development education centres, which provide professional support for that fantastic work, is outstripping supply, so some teachers and pupils are missing out. I hope that the minister will reflect on that challenge and say what the Scottish Government is doing to ensure that there is enough support for global citizenship learning throughout our schools. At a recent meeting of the cross-party group on international development, the minister said that the Scottish Government is giving close consideration to the objectives of the if campaign. I hope to hear today from the minister what he and his Government will do to provide active support. The campaign’s four main themes at UK level are aid, land, tax and transparency. The UK takes on the presidency of the G8 this year, so we should be well placed to set a positive example and put world hunger firmly on the agenda. Today, I hope that we will show that the Scottish Parliament continues to be fully engaged with and committed to the issues. I hope that we can send a message to the Scottish and UK Governments that we want everyone to make 2013 the beginning of the end for global hunger.

I thank the committee for the work that it has done so far and, in particular, I thank the witnesses who have given evidence. It is particularly interesting and extremely useful to read some of the analysis that has been produced by people from the academic community and from those who are involved on the front line in delivering services. In my opening remarks, I want to concentrate on the context in which this whole debate takes place, highlight some of the partnerships that exist and perhaps talk a bit about some of the challenges. In my closing remarks, I will focus on how the benchmarking strand leads into strand 3, which is on service delivery and reorganisation. It is important to understand what is currently happening to service delivery in our communities and how things might be delivered in future. From reading the report, it seems to me that we need to test the ambition against the reality, which means testing the ambition of changing the way in which public services are delivered with the actual experience on the ground. That feeds into the issue of outcomes. It is absolutely crucial to think about what the actual outcomes are for individuals and communities from the changes that are taking place through public sector reform. I very much agree with Kevin Stewart’s opening comment that the context is that we have less resource available, both financially and in terms of staff, at a time when we face ever-greater challenges on a scale that we perhaps cannot really imagine. If we stand back and think about the timing, we can see that public expenditure pretty much doubled during the first eight years of the Scottish Parliament, whereas over the next six years there will be significant reductions in expenditure at the same time as huge increases in demand. Therefore, there is no question about the need to think about how our public services are delivered. However, that pressure on public services will itself bring challenges, because delivering the same outcomes or greater while putting less into the system will be a huge challenge. I may comment further in my closing remarks on what John Swinney said, but his comment that the obstacles are neither credible nor real needs to be challenged. Some of the obstacles that public sector organisations face are incredibly real and they are credible. For example, given the budget settlement for local government over the past couple of years, it is true that local authorities are now getting less money, while the operation of the council tax freeze acts to ratchet down the amount of funding available. Local authorities have been put in a straitjacket, because any agreement to protect certain services within the budget will always mean that there is a disproportionate impact on other services—

No, I must get on. I will take comments later, but I have only six minutes. That reduced level of resources is compounded by the impact of United Kingdom Government cuts. As the SCVO commented—I can see why the Local Government and Regeneration Committee members might be sensitive about this, but the SCVO made an essential point—the combination of less resources going into local authorities with the impact of welfare reform could prove to be a tipping point for local government services.

I very much welcome that. I have read through all the paperwork that has come into the committee. I think that the SCVO is flagging up the need for a reality check. At one level, people are happy to see the third sector involved in delivery, but on the other hand the third sector is not included at the table when services are being designed or commissioned. That is a key issue for strand 3, so I very much hope that the committee will be able to explore that in depth. The issue is that services will have less, not just in terms of cash resources but in terms of staff resources. There were 14,000 fewer local authority staff last year and there will be another 14,000 fewer this year. It is crucial for local authorities to balance their books, but that reduction in staff numbers matters because it will mean that local authorities cannot simply deal with business as usual. When local authorities are changing services, renegotiating and staffing community planning partnerships, the same people are not necessarily involved from year to year. One key point that comes through in the committee’s report on partnerships is about strategic leadership being provided by people in all organisations. The issue applies not just to local government, because people are being lost from the public sector generally. The people who set up partnerships need to be able to follow them through in the long run. That needs to be thought through.

No. I took an intervention a moment ago, and I have only 40 seconds left. Building relationships is crucial. As Robert Black has pointed out, the issue is about not just the current pressures that our public sector is under, but the future demands. The Christie commission majored on that. To give an example, last week I had a visit from a group of people from a third sector organisation that looks after older ethnic minority people. Their question to me was, “Where are the public sector organisations to look after and support our parents?” At present, that organisation provides day-care services, but there is no capacity locally for long-term care to be delivered specifically for ethnic minority communities.

I want to finish on that point, because it is about the new challenges that are coming on top of the challenges that we already have. That must define the debate for the future.

In evidence to the committee it was said that the key things that are needed to help to deliver change, given the huge obstacles that we have all talked about and danced around—the figures that I have used are from the Scottish Parliament information centre and the Scottish Government—are shared vision, strategic leadership and sharing best practice and expertise in a transparent way. Those things probably strike a chord with us all, across the parties, but the issue is delivering on those things. They sound self-evident, but different parts of the public sector will have different priorities and may not share a vision. Local authorities will have not just different political leaderships, but different types of areas to serve, and that will of necessity give a different flavour. Stewart Stevenson and John Finnie made points about extreme rurality. It must be acknowledged at the outset that the perspective in such areas is very different from an inner-city perspective. That does not mean that we cannot have shared overall ambitions, but it will obviously lead to different types of service delivery. Strategic leadership is key. John Pentland used a striking phrase. He talked about haphazard strategy that is light and reactive. I can think of quite a few circumstances in different organisations in which that would be true. How can strategic leadership be built when there are reasonably regular changes in political leadership and also different leaderships as a result of senior members of staff moving on? There has been quite a significant churn in leadership. Building a shared vision and strategic leadership that is not short term is therefore not as straightforward as we might think. Sharing best practice and expertise is an issue that the committee could usefully look at in strand 3, given that quite a few of the witnesses highlighted the need to ensure that benchmarking compares similar circumstances or like with like. That does not mean that there might not be wider lessons from different circumstances that might also be worth exploring. One reason why the shared services agenda is so difficult when it comes to doing things in a transparent way is that there are different reporting mechanisms, political demands and desires about timetabling. That point needs to be factored in. The perspective of local government is different from—

No, let me develop this point. The perspective of local government is bound to be different from that of central Government agencies, but it is also different from that of the third sector. Different agendas are brought to the table, and that just needs to be factored in when thinking about transparency. As a few members have mentioned, the key issue is what our services are for, so a focus on why we have collective service provision must be what drives change. The Christie commission principles are extremely useful in identifying the pursuit of social justice as a key goal of government, regardless of which party is in charge or what level of government we are talking about. Preventative spend is justified where it challenges deep-rooted inequalities and poverty and the crushing of ambition that scars far too many of our communities. We also need to focus on the long-term intergenerational challenges. To address those, many of the policy solutions need to be in place now—tackling the long-term intergenerational stuff is about the decisions that we make now. To draw an analogy with tackling climate change, we could focus on 2020, but it is what we do now that will help us to deliver in 2020. Willie Rennie chastised me for focusing on cuts, although they are the reality. However, the point that I was making is that the cuts make things harder. When I talk to local government staff members who are not at the top level, they tell me that the reality is one of chasing the agendas in a context of transitional funding in which they are trying to deal with things from year to year. There are real challenges in terms of getting the right outcomes. We need service delivery that not only provides the service now but is potentially transformational in the process of providing that service. That needs people to buy in at different levels. A key point that I want to emphasise for strand 3 is the need to think about how we build social capacity in communities, whether that is through training, economic activity or using the debate around community planning partnerships to deliver wider community benefits from the investment that goes into services. That is a really important area. We need to take a really hard look at the different options for new ways to deliver services, including the whole issue of putting services out to tender. We need to compare that with co-ops, with service-level agreements and with the commissioning of services. That is the issue that I think the SCVO was trying to tease out, but it is as big an issue for local authorities and other public sector organisations as it is for the third sector. We need to try to pin down the mix of benefits to individuals and community benefit—those two things need to be discussed in parallel. Finally, I think that North Lanarkshire Council made a really good statement of principle: “Services should be built around people and not the agencies responsible for delivering them. A thorough understanding of residents and service users, needs and expectations is essential in designing cost-effective services.” That is a very good starting point for strand 3—

That would let the committee pick up issues to do with co-location, the trade-off between efficiency and effectiveness and the use of different service providers. That would be a good point to look at in strand 3.

The committee was set up under statute by this Parliament. Is it not unacceptable that, rather than the minister volunteering that information today, the committee members have all resigned due to their feeling that the minister was completely uninterested in their work? Given that the committee has done some good work in the past on council remuneration and arm’s-length external organisations, would it not have been more appropriate to do work on this far in advance of all three members feeling that they had no option but to resign?

Given the recent concerns of public health officials in NHS Lothian about the unexplained rise in HAIs, what discussions has the First Minister’s Government had with public health officials in NHS Lothian? What assurances can he give that the health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment target will be met?

These are indeed tough times for local government. The order that we are considering shows that we cannot trust the Scottish National Party to protect local services. As ever, the cabinet secretary is pretending that the settlement represents a good deal for local government and that it will protect local services. We all know that that is a complete fiction. Today’s debate is our chance to hold the SNP Government to account and to put on record the impact of the SNP’s budget settlement on local services across the country. That story needs to be told. This year, the Local Government and Regeneration Committee did not even take evidence from the cabinet secretary or the Minister for Local Government and Planning on the budget proposals, so we have had no chance to scrutinise the implications of the budget cuts that are made by the order under consideration.

No, we have only a short time. [Interruption.] I might take an intervention later, but I am only 50-odd seconds into my speech. The challenges that local government in Scotland faces are stark as funding is squeezed. This time last year, the SNP Government passed on the brunt of its cuts—83 per cent of them, in total—to local government. That provides the backdrop to this year’s budget, which still represents a real-terms cut. It will put further pressure on hard-pressed local authorities, which will have to make increasingly difficult decisions. Yesterday, the SNP pushed through cuts to housing, further education and the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme. It was not a budget for jobs. There is a massive underspend on non-profit-distributing schemes and, today, a whopping £52 million has been chopped off capital spending for local government. Today’s financial settlement will mean that local government will again be forced into a financial straitjacket, and will be forced to reduce staff numbers and the services that they provide. Make no mistake—the consequences will be felt by families and local businesses across the country.

Thanks very much, Presiding Officer. Mr Swinney will know, if he listened to what Ken Macintosh said yesterday, that the impact that housing is having on local government is central. We know that the social housing system is broken and needs to be fixed. That is why we suggested putting so much money into housing in the budget proposals that we made yesterday. That would impact materially on local government. It is not a case of putting up lots of one-bedroom flats tomorrow; it is about getting local companies going and encouraging the building of houses across the country. That would make a real difference to local government tax payers. This year, we have seen a further 2.2 per cent real-terms decrease in local government funding, and that is after the money for police and fire services has been removed from the budget line. Let us not forget, either, that the Scottish Government is trying to sneak through redundancies from police and fire boards before the national services are set up in a few weeks’ time. This year, the trend continues, with local government core funding falling as a share of the Government budget. However, every time I raise the issue of SNP cuts in the chamber, local government ministers praise the “generous” settlement. I put it on record that I think that the business rates incentive scheme is a great idea, but what is its context? The toughest economic climate for decades, with shops disappearing daily. That issue was debated in the chamber earlier this afternoon. Local government needs to be funded effectively. We know that the die was cast by yesterday’s budget, but I point out for the record that most of the key services that we and our constituents rely on daily are provided by local government’s budget choices, which are hamstrung by the SNP Government’s choices. That means tough choices across the country. We are beginning to see increased charging for care services, newly qualified teachers finding it hard to get permanent posts and youth unemployment rocketing. That is the context for the budget ambitions that were announced yesterday. We need to get people back into work and get the shovels in the ground for the projects that the SNP loves to talk about. Alongside the loss of vital services, hard-working council staff are bearing the brunt of the cuts. Since 2008, 25,000 local government jobs have gone, which impacts on councils’ capacity to deliver services and on the economy, and it removes money from people’s pockets that is then not spent in local shops and businesses. We know from Treasury figures that the loss of 51,000 public sector jobs means the loss of 52,000 private sector jobs. That is the squeeze that is being put on our local economies. Ministers tend to trumpet the council tax freeze, but although more and more money goes into the local government budget as the years go on, it is not enough to fill the gap. The true cost of the freeze is nearer £100 million a year—that is the squeeze that local authorities feel day and daily. The cabinet secretary said that the Scottish Government has generously offered £23 million towards the £40 million gap created by the cut that the UK Government made to council tax benefit when it devolved it to the Scottish Government. In Wales, the Labour Welsh Assembly Government is providing for the whole of the 10 per cent gap this year. Meanwhile, our councils in Scotland are taking a hit of £17 million. We will hear this afternoon that there are no negative consequences for hard-pressed council tax payers. The SNP’s regularly suggested local income tax solution, however, is hidden away in a filing cabinet somewhere in Victoria Quay, not to be allowed out until after the referendum. That is no solution for hard-pressed council tax payers. The upshot is that for all the talk about partnership, local authorities do not have flexibility. They have to sign up to what the Government proposes, otherwise they will face huge financial consequences and, what is worse, so will their constituents. In our election campaigns across the country last year, Labour highlighted supporting people through these tough economic times by investing in local jobs and training, in our schools and in support for carers. Our Labour council colleagues are now doing their utter best to protect and improve services, working with local businesses and investing in training through their own schemes, even though their hands are tied behind their backs by an increasingly centralising SNP Government. Today, we got the welcome news that the Edinburgh trams will be included in the national concessionary scheme. We all thought that that was great news until we looked at the detail: there is no commitment to any cash and it is left up to the local authority to sort out the details. No surprise there, then; passing the buck as usual. We want to tackle the social injustice and inequalities in our communities that have become more acute in these tough times. Whether it is families trapped by debt, children being denied the best start in life or people facing the future without decent care, local government has the potential to make a difference in addressing those serious social inequalities, but it needs the resources to make the difference to people’s lives that they want. Next year’s budgets will be even tougher as the impact of Tory welfare reform kicks in. The Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2013 will only hamper economic recovery across Scotland and damage the lives of vulnerable people who rely on our local government services. Today’s settlement is therefore not good news, and SNP backbenchers know it.

Will Mr Stewart take an intervention on that?

Who does the minister think would construct the houses? It is perfectly obvious that local authorities and housing associations would do it.

5. To ask the Scottish Government when it expects NHS Lothian to achieve NHS Scotland resource allocation parity. (S4O-01773)

The formula has not kept pace with Lothian’s expanding population and services have been stretched. Any additional NRAC funding that is received this year will immediately be eroded as the board pays back the Scottish Government’s waiting times loan. This year, the board remains £50 million below the target allocation. That fundamental underresourcing is at the heart of NHS Lothian’s problems. Can the cabinet secretary provide assurance that he will look to address the funding gap sooner rather than later in order to take into account the key issues that are arising due to a rising population in the Lothians?

Given that, as has already been pointed out, the bill has been a long time coming, it is crucial that we get it right. It builds on the previous work of and discussions held by former MSP Scott Barrie, who had two goes at getting a member’s bill through Parliament. I very much welcome the fact that Mark McDonald has picked up the issue in his own bill. I also welcome Mr McDonald’s helpful opening comments, which have given the chamber a sense of how he will respond to some of the committee’s recommendations. It is always useful to have a sense before stage 2 of what the member in charge of a bill is happy to negotiate over. I agree that we can learn from and build on the experience of similar legislation in the rest of the UK. The issue that stood out for me was that of best practice guidance, and we need to build on experience in that respect to ensure that the bill has a decent chance of having the positive impact that we all want it to have in providing a framework for resolving disputes. Crucially, the bill also offers the prospect of assisting both members of the public and local authorities, which are charged with implementing its provisions. The issue is not limited to a particular part of Scotland; indeed, it is a source of conflict for many members of the public. Like other members, I have had a certain amount of casework on the subject although, interestingly, it has related not to hedges but to matters that I suspect the bill will not cover. Another interesting development is that the introduction of and debate over the bill has been enough to settle some of those conflicts in advance of the new powers being introduced. My experience is that disputes that have been going on for some time and have become established are by their nature difficult to resolve, and anything that pushes people to concentrate their minds and reflect on the fact that not resolving matters amicably with their neighbours will have consequences and costs will be good. Many of us have such direct knowledge. Given the importance of reaching a fair resolution, a right of appeal and clarity about the process, too, will be important. The bill’s laudable aim, as has been well summarised elsewhere, is to identify a means to address the problem of disputes between neighbours where high hedges have become a point of issue and one set of neighbours form the view that the aforementioned high hedge has interfered with their reasonable enjoyment. Whether the bill gets it right when it is implemented will be the test, but the Labour Party has no hesitation in signing up to the principle behind the bill, alongside the very many people who responded to Mark McDonald’s consultation. Nevertheless, we need to look at the detail. There has already been discussion about whether the definition in the bill gets the balance right. I encourage the committee to spend a good bit of time on that issue at stage 2; after all, this is our chance to get right a piece of legislation that has been hanging around for some time now. Even if is difficult and even if people are not happy with where it ends up, we should still have that discussion in a bit of depth. The discussions that have been had so far have been helpful, but the definition is an absolutely crucial issue. The Scottish Government’s involvement is central to getting the matter right, so I welcome the minister’s confirmation that discussions will be held.

Among the final points that I intended to make is that the committee will need to consider the Subordinate Legislation Committee’s comments on that very carefully. People on both sides of the argument will want to know that the issue has been settled one way or the other. That is why I encourage the committee to feel free to take its time at stage 2 on that because I predict that, regardless of where the committee ends up, the matter will come back for years to come. Let us make the most of the chance to discuss it. As I was about to say, I welcome the minister’s commitment to enter into discussions on whether to have a central tree officer. Arguably, that will be fundamental to the success of the bill in the early years. Therefore, I hope that the minister will firm up his comments by the time that we reach stage 3. Given that the principle of cost recovery regimes is that they encourage people to agree in principle, if the fees are to reflect the costs of action, a central resource could be cost effective for everyone, particularly if it allowed local authorities to seek expertise. That would make a lot of sense because it would keep down costs across the country. The evidence suggests that, although authorities have tree officers to deal with TPOs, the number of tree officers has been cut back—they have been hard hit by staffing cutbacks over the past few years. The provision of new expertise, new information and a central resource would be money well spent, particularly in the early years to ensure that the legislation got off to a good start. Let me briefly cover the definition—

Witnesses on both sides of the debate were concerned about the issue of definition. Let me give a flavour of a couple of the comments that I received. One respondent noted that leylandii that are too high will not be covered, because existing Scots law states that, if any damage would result from trimming, one may not trim. Somebody else commented that the trees that the neighbour has in her garden grow 50 feet tall, but although there are more than 17 of them, they would not be covered under narrow proposals in the bill. Another person commented that we should not leave the same loophole as exists in the English high-hedges law. It is crucial that we debate the issue at stage 2 because people are waiting in the hope that we will come down on one side of the argument or the other.

The Subordinate Legislation Committee’s comments also need to be taken on board. I welcome the fact that we are at stage 1. The relationship with TPOs and Scottish planning policies will also be important, and I hope that this afternoon’s debate will explore that.

The committee wanted to focus on the definition because once the bill has been passed and enacted it will be with us for quite a few years. We wanted to reflect on comments that we received after the draft bill was published, during the stage 1 committee discussions and after the committee’s report was published. We have no revising chamber in the Scottish Parliament, so Stuart McMillan’s comments about the need for review are spot on; we will need to review the legislation. We need to set the parameters for review at the outset. It is about acknowledging that not everyone agrees on the definition. We need that discussion up front, so that we are clear that we are not just monitoring the legislation for the sake of it. Whatever the committee decides on the detail, which will be hugely significant for other members at stage 3, we want it to scope the issues that remain outstanding or that merit further consideration and monitoring. That is equally important for local authorities and for the Scottish Government, who will be key players in monitoring the legislation. I was struck by the comments in the committee’s report in relation to what Mark McDonald said about potential changes to the legislation and the difficulty of giving a yes or no answer on the purpose of a statutory instrument. It is worth Parliament’s while to bottom out some of the issues in that regard, so that when we go back to our constituents and when Scothedge lobbies us again, we can give clear answers. We must ensure that the decision on the definition is taken in the light of not just the first recommendations that we received but what we heard during our subsequent consideration of them. Early consultation gives Parliament the capacity to do that, but the process at stages 2 and 3 is quite fast. It is not that we supported the bill in committee and are now against it; it is about teasing out the issues.

Yes, I will take an intervention from the convener of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee.

I thank Kevin Stewart for that lengthy intervention. I think that I understand his point. As he convenes the committee, he will know the range of different views. It is not that we are saying that he has not done his job; it is more that we want to test out the bill. The comments that Christine Grahame made on many members’ past experience show that this is the time to test it out. We do not get to play around with it at stage 3. Once the committee has basically given us the framework at stage 2, it is really unlikely that we will change things dramatically at stage 3. We all accept that. I will reflect on the relationship between the bill, the tree preservation order regime and the planning process. Those issues are crucial, as well. The introduction of the bill has been much driven by people’s right to privacy and to a living environment that they value. There are lessons in that for the planning of developments. It is necessary to think through what a development will look like in 20, 30 or 40 years. Most people do not think about that; they think about where the grass is and what kind of plants are there initially, but landscaping, trees and hedges are fundamental. I hope that the discussion that we are having can be fed back further up in the planning process, not only to planners but to developers, too. Those matters are crucial to our built environment. That point links to biodiversity. When a new development is created beside an existing woodland, the woodland provides a backdrop and quality to the housing, but it must be a compatible backdrop. The bill highlights the need for a bit of joined-up thinking early doors when developments are being planned. The residents 30 or 40 years later are the ones who will live with those calculations and the decisions of the local authority planning committee, the planners or the developers. That is why the definition is important. What we put in the bill in a few weeks’ time will shape the debate for years to come. It has taken us so long to get to this stage that we must ensure that we test it out to the best of our ability at stage 2 so that, when we come to stage 3, the amendments that are lodged are easy to deal with and are not fundamental to the bill.

I am not trying to tease out just the process by which a review would be carried out. Mark McDonald said: “The definition could be amended to include, for example, deciduous hedgerows as opposed to evergreens or semi-evergreens.”—[Official Report, Local Government and Regeneration Committee, 19 December 2012; c 1576.] Other people have mentioned the inclusion of trees. Is not it important to narrow down why some things are being suggested for inclusion and why other things have been explicitly excluded? After doing that, we can get to the best process for amending the definition in the future.

4. To ask the Scottish Government when it will decide on how much support it will provide for the concessionary travel scheme. (S4O-01762)

Surely the reality is that we will now see bus fares rise and more services lost. In the end, the price will be paid across the country by hard-pressed low-income bus users and pensioners, who will find that it is more expensive to use the bus or that there is simply no longer a bus on which to use their pass.

What analysis has been carried out of the impact of the public bodies duty on reducing greenhouse gas emissions? Will the sustainable procurement bill provide for the public sector to set carbon targets in the contracts that it issues?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to tackle unemployment in Lothian. (S4O-01713)

There have already been high-profile casualties in the retail sector this year, with Jessops, HMV and Blockbuster entering administration. Among those three chains, there are 15 stores in Edinburgh alone, of which seven have been confirmed for closure. Will the minister give an update on what action the Scottish Government is taking to support workers at those stores, who are at risk of losing their jobs? Will he provide further information on news that the restructuring specialist Hilco has bought HMV’s debt and the impact that that might have on the future of that retailer?

I welcome the opportunity to focus on the fact that the planning system is a vital process that enables development to be shaped by democratically elected representatives, with most day-to-day decisions being taken by our local authorities. That is a great responsibility for the elected representatives who speak up for and facilitate the involvement of local communities and individuals, and for the developers who are keen to make the best use of our land and buildings. The process needs to be transparent and efficient; it also needs to be shaped by the priorities of the day. Local authorities’ own development plans are vital in providing opportunities for communities and developers to say how they think that areas might be developed or improved, or protected from inappropriate change. Given that the debate is taking place in the context of the raft of changes that the minister is proposing, the Scottish Government’s policy direction is important. It needs to be clear and properly justified, and the Government needs to be accountable to Parliament on it. We particularly need to test the reality of what sustainable economic development means in the context of the planning system. That system shapes our communities. Unlike many other local authority services, it is not seen as a front-line service, but it is fundamental to our communities’ health and success. The Scottish National Party Government’s report card on the issue would read, “Could do better.” We are still waiting for the marine plan. By the time that it appears, most of the important decisions, which it was envisaged that the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 would shape, will have been made, although addressing that was the whole point of designating the marine plan’s purpose in the act. Local authorities are under huge pressure generally as a result of the SNP’s budget allocations last year, under which local authorities took 83 per cent of the cuts. The approvals regime for fracking proposals also lacks clarity. One challenge across the chamber today is for members to ask the minister the right questions to find out the rationale behind his proposals. The proposals are technical, but they will have important ramifications for our communities and the processes by which they are shaped. One of the most important findings in a report on consultation responses was that “There is a general view that the ability of stakeholders to participate” fully “in the process is being” limited, so “confidence in the system is being lost.” That conclusion has not been addressed head-on and has been left hanging, and the minister did not mention it. I hope that, in closing the debate, he will reflect on how members of the community view how the planning system works. The financial pressure under which local authorities are operating needs to be acknowledged, as that sets the context for the allocation of resources. Planning needs to be properly resourced. It does not—understandably—have the emotional pull of other services, but it is fundamental. The proposed 20 per cent increase in planning fees will not fix the long-term challenge. The Royal Town Planning Institute supports that rise as a pragmatic move, but it is right to ask for a more sensible approach in the long term that looks at performance and funding. The RTPI criticises the idea that struggling or underperforming local authorities should be punished rather than incentivised to improve performance. I have to be convinced that a statutory mechanism will deliver the culture change that the minister was right to say is needed. Analysis needs to be looked at before the high-level political group gets going. What analysis has been commissioned of the impact of local authorities shedding experienced staff from their planning departments? How will comparisons be made between authorities? At the end of the day, who will tick the box that says pass or fail? Will that be done by the minister or his officials? What will planning authorities’ role be? There are challenges that could make a difficult situation worse, which none of us wants. On an issue on which I would like more detail, the minister implied that authorities that said that they were struggling to deal with wind farm developments would be allocated resources. It would be useful to have more clarity on how that funding will be allocated. What difference will funding for simply one year make? I do not see this year as the top year for the number of applications, so I am interested in the minister’s comments on that. I am also interested in whether all the £673,000 will be used for that purpose and in the other projects that will be supported. It is important to support the development of new skills and knowledge in relation to other energy-related proposals, such as the requirements on energy efficiency and on-site renewables that were part of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. Three years on, how are local authorities dealing with that issue? How are those skills being spread to the private sector? How will the planning officers who enforce the planning process develop such skills and knowledge? There is concern about the detail of the application of such issues. A particular issue is the training and policy support for local authorities that are dealing with fracking proposals. It is tough enough to deal with renewables developments—that relates not just to onshore wind technology but to the scale and number of applications—but there is a raft of new technologies and challenges. A range of environmental impacts and procedures needs to be tackled. The procedures in relation to fracking are opaque. Clarity is required to ensure proper and effective scrutiny of such proposals at every stage of the process. When we raised such concerns in the chamber with the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism, Fergus Ewing, he merely gave a robust defence of the industry’s potential. He did not engage with concerns that have been expressed to many members about the lack of due process or the potential long-term impact of those proposals on our local environments and communities. Crucially, he also did not engage with concerns about the robust measurement of how such proposals might impact on our climate change targets. Those concerns should be addressed within the new SPP that the minister is developing. It is a gap that needs to be filled. When I read the document that was published yesterday, I am concerned that it is difficult to see the explanation and justification of the minister’s new proposals and how they will be implemented. The document that we have all had since yesterday gives us the headlines but not the understanding and the arguments. That is particularly true of the section on simplifying and streamlining processes. It is vital that we are able to scrutinise what the Scottish Government is doing. Christine Grahame was right to raise what looks like a relatively minor change that could have major ramifications for our communities. Sometimes conditions turn an unacceptable or damaging development into one that local communities can accept and live with. However, mitigating requirements could be quietly dropped without alerting communities that might have been through several complex consultation exercises. Even if there is another consultation at the end of the process, people will have been through the up-front consultation and the formal consultation. In my region, I can think of applications that have been through five or six processes. When that happens, people can miss the bit at the end, which can be when the real decision that makes the difference is slid through. The minister commented on forestry and private tracks, which have been raised several times in the chamber. They often scar our landscapes and there are no controls over them. I am really disappointed by the lack of action from the minister. I cannot see how his approach can be justified when other types of development that are vital to our rural economy, in areas such as renewables, tourism, recreation, sporting estates and nature conservation programmes, do not benefit from those rights. The minister did not give us the detail in his comments, and we have been given no justification in writing. The only paperwork that I have seen says that private land and farming management interests were against the proposals, but others were in favour. How is Scottish Natural Heritage meant to monitor the issue? The issue is not new. There is already a lot of evidence out there and, as I said, the matter has been raised in the chamber before. This feels like a cop-out. I hope that the minister will come back to the issue with more intent. The section on next steps in planning reform is particularly lacking in detail. We need to see the Scottish Government’s intentions. Why have environmental requirements been picked on and watered down? What is meant by “more proportionality”? That is an easy thing to say, but what are the likely implications for planning proposals and the mitigation of their impact? No one could disagree that shorter and more focused documents would be good. We have all seen lengthy documentation that goes around the houses and covers a large number of issues while missing out the key environmental issues. We need to see the detail. Let us have a proper look at what causes the delay. Let us look at the management of the system. Let us look at how much delay is caused by the lack of resources available to local authorities, and how much is to do with the slow response times of stakeholders affecting the process. That issue is mentioned in several of the submissions to the Scottish Government. Which organisations hold up the process? How well do the Scottish Government’s departments and organisations perform? Again, we have little information in that area, but I cannot see why local authorities should be penalised when part of the problem might be caused by the minister’s department or other Scottish Government organisations. We need to see a bit more about the priorities for strategic development plans. Is the problem with their content to do with implementation? What will the priorities be in the review of the SPP? What is meant by the need to review the SPP in light of the economic downturn? What changes will come in and what issues will be given less of a priority? We need more clarity. Missing out on the justification of certain proposals is not good government. That might mean avoiding falling out with interest groups in the short term, but it does not give us clarity and it does not enable the whole raft of stakeholders to really understand what is at the heart of what the Scottish Government is doing. Our amendment is focused on the two issues that we feel the Scottish Government needs to address: the resources that are available to tackle the change that is needed in local authorities; and the lack of clarity around fracking. I look forward to hearing the Conservatives’ proposals on enforcement. Enforcement is absolutely key to many of the issues that I have been talking about. I hope that the minister will listen to the arguments and that he will act. I move amendment S4M-05358.2, to insert after “wind turbines”: “but notes the significant financial pressures that local authorities are facing and the lack of clarity on hydraulic fracturing proposals”.

I mentioned the Royal Town Planning Institute in the context of the whole issue of performance. It is appropriate to flag up areas with which people are happy and areas with which people are unhappy. At no point did I suggest that the Royal Town Planning Institute is against absolutely everything that the Scottish Government is proposing, and I do not think that the member could or should have inferred that from my speech.

This has been a good debate. We have been able to discuss a range of issues, and I hope that we have shed some light on where the Scottish Government is going, to assist people who have a strong interest in the planning process and are following the debate. We deliberately did not lodge a “delete everything and insert” amendment, because it is important that there is a debate. To an extent, planning is and must be cross party, but that does not mean that there are no politics in the issue. We have different views about the values that underpin the planning system. As Christine Grahame said towards the end of her speech, a key issue in the 2006 act was the attempt to give communities greater opportunities to hear about potential developments before developers signed on the dotted line. Once a planning application is in play, it is entirely up to the developer to amend it, which can mean that everyone is boxed in. Developers end up going down a certain track, although a change at the start of the process would have been less costly and would have made the development more acceptable. That is one reason why we pushed so strongly for the 2006 act. Christine Grahame was also right to mention the third-party right of appeal. In the end, we did not go for that. However, at the time, we negotiated out of ministers a right of notification, so that in certain circumstances in which local authorities departed from development plans or ignored people’s comments, communities would have the right to refer an application to the Scottish Government. That right was inserted before 2007, but it was taken away in 2009. That was a mistake, because power was taken away from communities. That takes me back to the point that I made in my opening speech about there being dissatisfaction with the planning system. We need to consider why people find it hard to relate to planning. We cannot walk away from the challenge of resources, which member after member mentioned. The system could be better organised in local authorities and resources could be applied differently, to some extent, but in the overall context of the reduced resources that local authorities are dealing with and the number of people who are moving out of local government, there is a challenge for planning. Because planning is not a statutory system in the way that schools are—in the sense of how the system is delivered—it is very much for the local authority to determine how to deliver its policies. There is a challenge in that regard, which is evident not just in the delays in dealing with some applications but in the lack of resource that local authorities can target at new issues.

No. I want to develop my point a little. An increase in planning fees will not address the whole resources issue in the planning system. A member—it might have been Mark Griffin—said that people are not very interested in development plans, which is true. However, development plans are a hugely important part of the decision-making process in local authorities. There is an issue to do with how local authorities communicate with people and involve them in setting the framework for the process by which applications are decided. Cost is fundamental. We do not currently have full cost recovery through fees and there would be a huge uplift in fees if we did. I understand the difficulty of making such a decision. However, the fact remains that given their resources, it will be extremely difficult for local authorities to do the radical work to which the minister aspires. A move to a system that penalises people who are struggling would take us in the wrong direction. The issues are difficult and it was important to highlight them in the debate. I hope that the minister will reflect on the debate. Members from different parties talked about the problem of resources. We cannot escape the fact that local authorities have their hands tied. They are having to get rid of staff to make the books balance.

It is probably fairer to say that it takes some of the pressure off the system and that it is a better deployment of those resources. My own council is able to do it because officers take the lead on certain decisions and councillors are simply not involved at all. That relates partly to the deployment of councillors’ resources and time, but it relates also to the amount of paper that goes round a department. That is part of the solution, but we need to understand the scale of the challenge and simply dealing with that issue, without looking at the overall funding situation, is not going to deal with it. Comments from the Scottish Property Federation, which colleagues have not referred to much in the chamber, referred to the huge challenge of the process—from buying land, to the application process, to the construction process—to end up with a development that may not be occupied for a matter of years. That is hugely costly, so the working party that the minister has set up is hugely important because, at the moment, councils cannot afford to resource the system that we need if we are to meet the targets that the minister talks about councils aspiring to. That is the problem, and that is where we are at the moment. Small amounts of new money for renewables are helpful to let local authorities deal with a situation in a one-off sense, but they will not help them to deal with processing major applications with significant traffic and environmental impact assessment papers that need to be processed, never mind the consultation process. The solution that the minister has come up with will not solve the problem in the long run. More political discussion is required. The other major point in our amendment was about fracking. My colleagues Claire Baker and Claudia Beamish have done a lot of research—they have gone round local authorities and there is both a planning and a licensing aspect to the problem. It is not as simple as saying that if it is one type of development, it is in one box and if it is another type of development, it is in another box. The problem is that such developments cross the planning and licensing regulatory regimes. The research that we have carried out shows that the process is complicated. Local authorities are granting permission through delegated powers for borehole drilling, which is used to extract coal-bed methane, and for exploratory work. For hydraulic fracturing to begin, the operator needs a licence from the Department of Energy and Climate Change, a licence from SEPA and a licence from the Health and Safety Executive. However, it is not always clear whether local authorities have a further scrutiny role if the activity is to move from exploratory, or extraction without fracking, to the use of hydraulic fracking. Questions need to be asked and, after surveying local authorities, we are convinced that the minister needs to look further at the issue. We want to highlight the confusion and the lack of democratic accountability and scrutiny around the issue. Guidelines are needed from the Scottish Government. If clarity could be provided, it would help developers and communities; crucially, it would enable local authorities to deploy their resources more effectively. There is an issue about new types of development. We have spent quite a lot of time in the chamber today talking about renewables. We dispute Margaret Mitchell’s comment that wind development is a regressive form of development. We simply do not accept that. The challenge is in the number of proposed developments, because it is hard for local authorities to deal with them, it is hard for communities to keep up and if there are serial developments happening in an area, there are major concerns about the scale of development.

That is the key issue. Our amendment is a constructive amendment; it is meant to add to the debate. It has been a good debate and I hope that the minister will listen to the comments from around the chamber. It is interesting that it is more than a cross-party debate because there are members with experience of being planners and councillors, who understand how the system works. In reforming the system, the minister must be mindful of that. It is not acceptable just to make a statement that something will happen. The impact must be monitored because in planning it is about checks and balances and democratic accountability. Those must be factored into any change.

Will the member give way?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what cultural legacy the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs expects for the Lothians following the 2014 Commonwealth games. (S4O-01662)

I thank the minister for his answer and the information about the £4 million fund in particular. Will local authorities in the Lothians be able to use that fund to support them in building partnerships with other Commonwealth countries and territories to deliver the second team initiative, or will it be a different fund? Will they be linked or will they be separate funding initiatives?

I, too, congratulate Malcolm Chisholm on securing this debate, because it is important to celebrate Zero Tolerance’s 20 years of work. There have been achievements. Mr Chisholm’s motion is right to point out that the early days of campaigning were “pioneering”, because violence against women simply was not seen as a political issue and had to be forced on to the agenda. Women activists such as Margaret McGregor, who chaired the City of Edinburgh Council’s women’s committee, campaigned to put violence against women on the agenda and, crucially, supported investment for organisations such as Rape Crisis Scotland to ensure that women had support. Women’s committees across the country were vital in ensuring that our councils acted and Zero Tolerance’s work in promoting awareness, carrying out research and issuing campaigning literature—particularly the hard-hitting campaigns that Malcolm Chisholm quoted—were hugely important in challenging outdated sexist attitudes. Indeed, for the past 20 years, women have been campaigning to change outdated sexist views on issues such as rape, domestic abuse and sexual violence. However, those issues must still be brought to the fore and, in this debate, we should not only celebrate the hard work of these women but sympathise with the women who have experienced abuse or intimidation. Most of us cannot even begin to imagine how their lives have been scarred. We must also debate the progress that has been made in, for example, the legislation that this Parliament has passed. The Parliament’s first ever committee act, which was promoted and driven by our former colleague Maureen McMillan, was the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001, which gave protection to victims of domestic violence in unmarried relationships and, in more recent times, we have had the Forced Marriage (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Act 2011. No matter whether we are talking about our Parliament or our councils, women’s voices in our political institutions have to be heard and given legitimacy. The Zero Tolerance briefing makes it clear that far too many women in Scotland experience high levels of violence. In 2011-12, reported rapes rose by 19 per cent and, as Annabel Goldie mentioned, domestic abuse reported to the police rose by 7 per cent. Those figures are unacceptable; we need to add our voices to opposing that violence. The bills proposed by Rhoda Grant and Sandra White pose some hard questions for the Parliament about the purchase of sex and the impact on women of the attitudes towards women that are promoted by lap dancing. We must seize those bills to promote a wide debate across Scotland and modernise attitudes. We must do everything that we can, whether through legislation or policy, to transform the inequality that women experience because the evidence is that we live in an unequal society. The campaign also needs the support of men, whether it is support from Gil Paterson and Malcolm Chisholm in the chamber, or the work of Graeme Pearson—who is sitting beside me—when he was a senior police officer to ensure the provision of police support. We need the support of men, too. All of us are needed to tackle domestic and sexual violence and the intimidation that women experience. Our challenge is to tackle inequality and the outdated sexist attitudes that objectify and tolerate violence against women, however it comes at them. I hope that the minister, when summing up, will focus on what the Scottish Government is committed to do to ensure that, in these times of austerity, the issue of violence against women is not put on the back burner. The Government will have support across the chamber. Anne McTaggart was right to highlight that local authorities face huge financial pressures. That must not lead to the downgrading of support for the preventative work that is done by groups such as Zero Tolerance, the community campaigns that Anne McTaggart referred to, and the vital work of our rape crisis centres. That work must continue; it needs our support. I hope that Malcolm Chisholm’s debate will focus future action and support.

Is the First Minister aware of the fears of NHS Lothian staff, who are reporting tremendous pressure on beds at the Edinburgh royal infirmary and the Western general in what the health board has described as unprecedented demand? Will the First Minister ask his health secretary to engage with the reality of what is happening in our national health service instead of issuing complacent reassurances?

Will the cabinet secretary accept that there was systemic underfunding at the heart of the scandal in NHS Lothian and that significant improvements are still required? Will he admit that his £10 million loan needs to be direct funding for new staff and clinical facilities to tackle the waiting times backlog?

I welcome the minister’s clear preference for Remploy workers to be TUPE-ed across, so that they retain their terms and conditions. Given the concerns about Redrock’s bid for the Wigan and Edinburgh factories, will the minister add his support to calls for a co-operative and social enterprise solution for the Edinburgh Remploy factory?

2. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will meet the remaining annual emissions targets set out in the Climate Change (Annual Targets) (Scotland) Order 2010. (S4O-01599)

Even the Scottish Government admits that there is a gap between the emissions reductions as a result of current policy objectives and the meeting of our future targets. Will the new RPP that the minister mentioned include the policies in devolved areas that the United Kingdom Committee on Climate Change believes need to be rolled out, such as demand-side transport management, agriculture and land use?

One of the key issues that people have been raising is how the different regulatory regimes join up. In the context of planning and the climate change obligations, is there not an argument in favour of the precautionary principle, particularly in view of the potential of methane escaping during any such works and having severe climate implications, given that it is significantly more dangerous than CO2?

In the first eight years of this Parliament, Labour allocated huge increases to health, which enabled the system to recover from the previous round of Tory cuts and improved the patient experience, the quality and range of services and, crucially, the terms and conditions of NHS staff. Alex Neil has a cheek to criticise Labour, given that his predecessor refused to accept NHS Lothian’s plea for Edinburgh’s new sick kids hospital to be built through conventional spending. It will be years late and it will be funded under the non-profit-distributing model. Last month, the cabinet secretary criticised NHS Lothian as being in the second division and Audit Scotland revealed that our NHS is on an amber warning. Today, the SNP’s amendment deletes that warning from the Labour motion. In fact, it deletes the problems that Jackie Baillie has correctly identified. The SNP cannot Tipp-Ex out those problems. Our challenge is to air them in the chamber and come up with solutions. Staff reductions have put massive pressure on the remaining staff and undermined the quality of care that patients receive. The fact that interns are now being used to supplement hard-pressed nurses is simply not acceptable. The waiting times problem in Lothian has blown open the reality in our NHS today. The systematic fiddling of the figures that we have discussed before, the subversion of patients’ rights and the fact that the waiting lists were a complete fiction still need to be addressed. How on earth can the SNP Government assert that “all NHS boards have met their financial targets on revenue and capital”? What does that mean? It is completely fictitious. In NHS Lothian alone, the estimate earlier this year was that it would cost about £20 million just to address the backlog and deal with the hundreds of people who had not had their waiting times honoured. Last week, the board papers stated that the estimate of the amount needed is now more than £26 million. Those figures demonstrate that the capacity to meet the Government’s targets on waiting times is simply not there. To use the cabinet secretary’s phrase, there is a systemic problem. I would be interested to hear the cabinet secretary’s comments about the level at which the NHS runs bed capacity in the light of this week’s report from the Dr Foster unit at Imperial College. It is stark: “When bed occupancy tips the 85% mark the system goes into overdrive - and things start to give. For patients that means quality of care may suffer.” How does that equate to what is happening in our hospitals in Scotland? It feels very much like what is happening in Lothian, where the problems have piled up one after another. Only last month, the board was forced to reopen the Royal Victoria hospital, which was mothballed earlier this year, to create the extra capacity to get us all through the winter. There simply are not the resources available to get older people out of our hospitals and into care that is appropriate for them when they need it. That is a current problem in the NHS.

The problem is not just bed capacity, but insufficient staff in key clinical areas. I could have spent my four minutes just reading out recent press headlines. The symbolism in this chamber of the First Minister being dragged into the issue of the children’s ward at St John’s shows the mess that the SNP has created. The SNP’s promises on the NHS cannot be trusted. The previous health secretary, Nicola Sturgeon, was fully aware of the problems and it is Alex Neil’s job to sort them out. We are all waiting.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Like Alex Neil, I made a visit to an accident and emergency department this year, but mine was as a result of an accident rather than an official visit. A key point that was made to me was that there is a major problem with access to beds for people who come in through accident and emergency, which I think is at the root of the Royal Victoria issue. It would be good if the cabinet secretary could keep his eye on that, because the lack of alternative places to which people can go is partly what is creating major pressures on the Edinburgh royal infirmary.

Did the Cabinet Secretary for Justice not let the cat out of the bag on the sustainability of local government services, given the thousands of jobs that have been lost over the past few years, and given that the Scottish Government’s funding regime is not delivering sustainable public services in Scotland?

This is not our first debate on supported employment and, I am sure, it will not be the last. However, when I look back over our previous debates and discussions, I think how hard they have been and am struck by the raft of good ideas and promises that have simply not been followed up. In the past few months, disabled workers in Edinburgh have faced a double blow with the loss of Blindcraft and then Remploy Edinburgh. I take issue with the previous speaker, because I think that we have sufficient powers at our disposal to be getting on and doing something more positive. After all, that is what we are here for. We are here to decide what is important to Parliament, to consider how we use the available levers of power and to think about the message that we should be sending about how our resources should be spent. That is what we should be doing today. I agree with colleagues across the chamber that we should be united in our condemnation of the UK Government’s philosophical approach and its absolutely appalling treatment of hard-working and loyal staff. We should not buy into the fiction that supported workplaces have not been successful—they have. However, regardless of their success or their potential, Remploy workplaces have been closed with an appalling lack of transparency in a process that has not allowed anyone to come in and take them over easily. The Royal National Institute of Blind People is absolutely right to say: “We understand the need for greater efficiency, but this should not come at the expense of the income and self-esteem of blind, partially sighted and other disabled people.” We should be looking at the excellent regional model that has been adopted in Glasgow and which links training and support for able-bodied and disabled workers, There is also merit in the approach that has been taken in Aberdeen. Both show what can be done when political resources and political leadership link across a region and the private sector is involved. Today we must ask what we can do. I very much welcome the minister’s commitment to bring to Parliament a scheme for helping former Remploy workers get back into work and his announcement that Redrock will pick up as many staff as it can in Edinburgh Remploy’s area. However, we also need to think about the many people who are seeking employment not only in Edinburgh, but in every constituency, who have some form of physical or mental disability. Our debates tend to be crisis debates that are held in response to a problem such as the closure of a factory or supported employment workshop. Instead, we need a proper strategy that not only recognises the importance of supported employment in a sheltered workplace, but seeks to give people with disabilities proper rights and proper access to the labour market. We cannot leave that to the market alone; Dennis Robertson was absolutely right to highlight how tough the current labour market is. Let us be honest: it is tough for everyone—young people, graduates and people who have lost their jobs through no fault of their own—but it must be tougher for the people we are talking about if all that an employer can see in them is their disability. We need to look at that issue, and I recommend to the minister the superb work that has been carried out by the Scottish Union of Supported Employment on the attitudes of employers and people with disabilities. Only half the disabled people in Scotland have access to work, although many more want access to employment. We know from research that employers value the work of their disabled employees. They rate highly the contribution that disabled employees make to the workplace, which is described as being “inspirational” when employers look at the barriers that people have overcome in order to play a full part in the workforce and at the strong desire and hard work ethic that people with disabilities bring to employment. We need to shout that from the rooftops and give employers the best practice and support, whether it be financial or advisory, or the political encouragement for them to take the step of employing people with disabilities. From us, that needs sustained interest and political priority. That is why I strongly support the recommendation in our amendment for “a permanent supported workplaces taskforce”. That is an excellent suggestion, which I hope the minister will support and act on. We have the occasional debate on the subject, but disabled people experience the problems daily. We must do better across the parties. The other suggestions in Patricia Ferguson’s amendment are superb. The minister has alluded to the fact that he will introduce a scheme similar to that which has been introduced by the Welsh Assembly Government, and I welcome that. The other suggestion in Patricia Ferguson’s amendment that should not be missed is the point about using procurement powers. I spoke to somebody who is reasonably senior in a public sector organisation about the impact of the closure of Remploy Edinburgh and I mentioned the Government’s commitment that every public sector organisation would have at least one supported employment contract. The person looked at me in a very embarrassed manner as I had to explain to her what the policy is; she could not tell me what was happening in her organisation. We need to know that when we speak to anybody in the public sector, they will be able to tell us—with pride—what contribution is being made to their organisation by supported employment, and not just the number of people whom it supports in employment. We need a sustained approach that we can all sign up to politically, and not just for the present Government’s term in office but in the future. The Remploy workers who have lost their jobs have worked for Remploy for decades. They have given their long-term commitment and support, and we should repay them. We should give them support and encouragement by giving a long-term commitment to support for a framework for employment, to public procurement encouragement to the private sector and, above all, to leadership from Government.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement, but I am disappointed by its contents. The settlement is no surprise, given that local services took the lion’s share of the cuts last year, but the reality is that it will be tough across Scotland. Most of the questions in Professor Bell’s report to the Finance Committee this year focused on local government, but we have yet to hear answers from the cabinet secretary to those vital questions. The cabinet secretary calls the budget “fair”, but where is the analysis of the impact on jobs and on the people who rely on services and who will see those services cut or face increased charges? As the Scottish Government publishes its paper on supporting growth, where is the acknowledgement that capital for local authorities has been slashed and that the squeeze on revenue will mean that prudential borrowing simply is not an option for the projects that are needed locally? Local companies rely on local authority projects and on people spending in local shops and businesses. The squeeze will not make things easy for them. The Scottish National Party likes to talk about shovel-ready projects and local authorities are ready with their shovels, but they do not have the cash to get social rented housing built again. That is a key building block for Scotland’s recovery. Where is the fairness for people who will find their services rationed and their charges increased? That is the cost of the underfunded council tax freeze. We need to know how many jobs will be lost, and there has been nothing about wages. We welcome the fact that the living wage is being adopted across Scotland, but how many jobs will go in our local authorities in the next 12 months?

Will the minister tell the Parliament about the proposed technology and route? Does he envisage conventional rail or maglev technology, as we proposed in the 2007 elections, being used? When will he publish details of his proposals? Does he not get it that cuts to the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme mean that commuters in the central belt are missing out on reduced journey times and that 2024 is a very long way off?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I welcome the debate today because it gives us a chance to bring to the chamber the debate that Scotland needs to have about the political choices that are facing us. The SNP Government has been in power since 2007, telling us that things will be better only if we have independence. That is the politics of the never-never. As the Opposition, our job is to hold the SNP Government to account now, to tell it like it is, and to expose the complacency and the assertions that simply do not stack up. Johann Lamont’s amendment is the key challenge to the SNP Government. It is about the reality of what is happening to people under SNP rule. We need a reality check. When the SNP put its manifesto out there in 2011, it knew what was coming down the tracks from the Tory Government and that funds would be tight, but it made promises that it is simply not keeping. Nowhere is that more evident than in what is happening in councils across the country. Last year’s budget choices by the SNP undermined the services that underpin and complement the universal services that the SNP motion talks about. Let us look at the reality of what is happening to bus services. I introduced free bus travel for the over 60s, so I understand the detail. I am deeply proud of the principle of free bus travel, and I know that it has transformed the lives of older people. However, that scheme is being undermined by cuts to the bus service operators grant, which has been the last straw for bus companies. Fuel costs are rising, passenger numbers have been hit by the recession and the funding for concessionary travel is simply not keeping pace with those rising costs. What is the result? Ministers might like to think about it. Fares have been put up for all passengers who do not qualify for free bus passes. To ministers, that will look like marginal costs, but to a hard-pressed bus user who has no alternative, it is real hardship. Since the SNP came to power in 2007, bus fares have risen by 19 per cent. Services are being slashed across the country. Last year alone, 136 bus routes were axed—that is the traffic commissioner for Scotland’s figure—which leaves local authorities to pick up the pieces. However, because of last year’s budget cuts, they do not have the cash to subsidise all the new services that are needed. That is the reality that the SNP ministers do not want to discuss. They proclaim the benefit of free bus passes without dealing with the inconvenient reality. We need to debate the political choices and we need a framework in which to debate them. Our political choices and our passion are driven by fairness, social justice and the desire to support our communities through these tough economic times. The political argument that the SNP makes in the motion is that all would be well if Scotland were independent. To say that Scotland would be the only country in Europe to escape any tough choices during the recession is not credible. No one out there believes that.

That point goes to the heart of the debate. The tax take from Norway’s citizens is not comparable to the low-tax regime that the SNP wants to impose—look at the cuts in corporation tax that the SNP wants to impose. All that adds up. The SNP is not owning up to the situation. Maureen Watt has just made my point. The funding for the council tax freeze is not enough to offset the straitjacket that the SNP has put in place. A key issue that Professor David Bell, adviser to the Finance Committee, asks Parliament to consider is not just the annual cost but the cumulative cost. We are now seeing the results of that in our communities.

I would love to take an intervention from Mr McDonald.

I spoke to our council colleagues in Stirling only the other week. They told me of the SNP’s mismanagement of Stirling Council’s budget, which led to overruns in the social care budget. That mismanagement was by the council’s former convener, who has now been promoted to even more responsibility. I think that that councillor is now known in Stirling as the five-jobs council member. The issue is about the reality. The problem of the pensioner who came to my surgery on Friday is that, in theory, her council tax is frozen, but in reality, a minor change to her pension has led to a big council tax hike. The SNP’s council tax freeze does absolutely nothing to protect her and her husband. Our proposed funded council tax freeze was for two years. Alex Neil was absolutely wrong to say that we “tried to outbid” the SNP. Local government funding needs to be sustainable, and we need an honest debate about that. We are talking not just about cuts to bus services, but about massive cuts to housing budgets and social care budgets and about huge job losses. The situation is not just bad news for individuals who will not have access to affordable rented housing, or to the care that an elderly or vulnerable relative needs, or for individuals who will lose their jobs; it is bad news for all our communities. The position is bad economics, too. Only today, the Institute for Public Policy Research called the SNP’s economic policy “financially illiterate”. The policy is bad for social justice and means that, under the SNP, people are hurting in communities across Scotland. That is why we pushed such issues centre stage in May, and people responded by supporting us in greater numbers. There is a headline universal care service for free personal care, but the reality is 15-minute care visits, hikes in costs for care homes and the privatisation of care services. When I met Unison representatives in Edinburgh last month, they told me about the reality of 15-minute care visits and of not being paid for their journey time. They must make 13 or 14 visits a day, which leads to stress, and staff turnover is higher because of that stress. Such jobs are not well paid and do not provide career development. That means poor-quality services for our most vulnerable older people and people with learning disabilities. That is the cost of the SNP’s council tax sleight of hand and that is why Johann Lamont is right to say that we cannot trust the SNP. We need to allocate resources and to ensure that services are fit for purpose and that they fit social justice and protect our communities through these tough economic times. Those are our principles. That is why Labour is not scared of the debate and why we think that it is absolutely essential.

The point is not that we are against universalism. The SNP has got rid of universal services such as free central heating—[Interruption.] On Alex Neil’s watch, the SNP removed the free central heating scheme and it is now means tested. The issue is which services are universal and how those services are defined. [Interruption.] If the member is being reflective, that is the debate that we are trying to have.

Will the member give way?

2. To ask the Scottish Government on what date it will publish its national marine plan. (S4O-01427)

I thank the cabinet secretary for the timetable. The fast pace of development in the marine environment, including in the renewables and aquaculture sectors, was a key reason why the Parliament legislated for a marine plan in the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010. Is there scope to prioritise and bring forward the plan, so that it can provide certainty for industry and lead developments in such sectors, rather than being led by them?

I also welcome Humza Yousaf to his first debate as minister. I have seen him at so many events recently that I am almost surprised that this is his first actual debate. The subject of the debate is a good choice of topic, and the timing of the debate is good. It is appropriate that, given the forthcoming celebrations of David Livingstone’s bicentenary, we reflect on the special relationship between Scotland and Malawi. However, we should reflect on not only what has been achieved but what more can be done in the future, and I want to do both in my speech today. As part of a Scottish Parliament visit to Malawi several years ago, I saw for myself the practical impact of support from the Scottish Government, civic organisations and charities that are based in Scotland. I was also struck by the contribution of individuals. Maureen Watt mentioned research on the contribution of Scottish civic society. It is important that that point is on the record, as civic society is not only a phenomenal financial resource but an incredible human resource. A phenomenal number of retired teachers and medics have gone to Malawi and basically put their life experiences and finances into helping out small communities. We should record that. A welcome part of the Scottish Government’s motion is that it reflects the importance of what we can do on climate change and renewables. That is important. If we are to make a contribution to tackling the extreme poverty in Malawi and to helping Malawi to develop a fairer and more environmentally sustainable economy, it is crucial that we do not ignore climate change and renewable energy. There are big opportunities there. Patricia Ferguson’s amendment will strengthen the Government’s motion. It highlights the importance of the Malawi Government and of civic and governmental work. It is particularly important to welcome the new leadership of President Joyce Banda. In our work as a Parliament, we must acknowledge that the delivery of the millennium development goals is absolutely dependent on ensuring that a gender analysis underpins that work. We will not achieve the goals unless women’s equality is at the heart and an explicit part of development work. I therefore welcome the comments that Siobhan McMahon and Claudia Beamish made about the importance of the culture challenge in Malawi and the need to provide our support for educational opportunities for girls. That is absolutely crucial if the country is to move forward. Another issue is about strengthening the role of the Malawian Parliament. The work of the CPA has been highlighted effectively. Sandra White was right to point to that. It is long-term work, and it is important that we strengthen and deepen it. The pairing system that Patricia Ferguson mentioned is a good practical approach. Nothing concentrates the mind more than realising the complete absence of resources that Malawian parliamentarians have to carry out their work. Speaking off the record, probably all members will moan about the resources that we have, but if we compared our experience with that of Malawian parliamentarians we would find that it is another world—they do not have anything like the resources that we have. We take so many things for granted, so it was important for members to make that point. How do we move forward? We need to continue to provide educational opportunities and, as Patricia Ferguson highlighted, to support the work on HIV and maternal health projects. One of my memories of Malawi is of seeing the joy of people in a small village when they were given a pushbike with a flatbed trailer attached. That was their ambulance for getting pregnant women to hospital to give birth in a safer environment. That was shocking to me at the time, and the joy of those people showed how far apart we are. Other members have talked about the complete difference between the countries. In the past, we have talked about co-operative and fair trade movements helping to ensure that Malawian farmers get a fair deal for their crops and adding value through processing in Malawi. That has been mentioned again today. The climate change agenda poses a massive threat to health and farming in Malawi. Clean water, which we again take for granted, is vital. The water supply and the maintenance of it are crucial. It is about not just establishing boreholes but keeping them working; it is about not just installing water pumps but mending them when they break. One thing that Scotland could do is to transfer engineering skills. That must be part of our assistance, and I hope that ministers will reflect on the possibility of technical training as well as academic support. Energy is a key issue. Bruce Crawford gave the stark statistic that 93 per cent of Malawi’s population do not have access to electricity. We could do much to support Malawi on that: there are appropriate and available technologies that are small scale and relatively straightforward and which could work without the need to build a grid. However, the challenge is that they are far too expensive. In this country, we support the use of such technologies with significant subsidies. Members can imagine how much harder that is in Malawi. Another issue is the skills base for developing renewables. I hope that ministers will reflect on the support that the Government and Scottish Enterprise could give. We could encourage some of our big energy companies in Scotland, which are global players, to take some of their corporate social responsibility activities in the direction of Malawi. I saw a project for Scottish and Southern Energy—a steel birthing unit that was powered by solar energy. That is a straightforward thing to do and it would not involve a huge amount for a big company. A strategy to bring that effort into play would be good. There are a number of practical options for supporting Malawi. Scholarships are good. As for technical colleges, the skills that are needed are not readily available in Malawi. We have enough of a problem with such skills in Scotland; members can imagine the challenge in Malawi. Helping with business start-ups and adding value to farmers’ work are practical things that we could do. The percentage of people who do not have access to electricity in Malawi means that people chop down trees for firewood. They use it to cook and to sell, which is a double whammy: it is bad for Malawi in climate change terms, because it removes the carbon sink, and it is incredibly bad for people’s health. Cooking inside with firewood leads to massive numbers of respiratory problems. There is every reason in the world for us to support renewables, but we must do so not only by helping with the technology transfer but by thinking about the funding to support renewables. There have been fantastic speeches in the debate, which has shown the Parliament at its best. It has been great for MSPs to be able to talk about projects in their regions, such as schools that are doing fantastic work. In my region, we have seen the Malawi Underprivileged Mothers—MUMs—initiative, in which Linda McDonald has done fantastic work to raise money for meals in Malawi. We are talking about exchanging expertise and the benefits that Malawi and Scotland receive. Liam McArthur and John Park talked about the sustained contribution that we have made over the years. That is something that the Parliament has done, and I hope that we keep the priority for Malawi. The relationship has deepened and is real, and it lets us go beneath the surface, which is important. The relationship is massively valued in Malawi. As we look to the bicentenary of David Livingstone’s birth, we should see it not just as a historical relationship but as a relationship for the future in education and training, health and clean water, and a fairer, stronger economy in Malawi. We could all be proud of that. The debate has demonstrated the massive support across the Parliament for doing more and for building on what has been done not just by the Government but by civic society and individuals. By working together, all of us can make an impact and a contribution. That is what the debate is all about—how the Parliament makes a contribution to global justice and climate justice. Doing our bit means doing our bit in Scotland and helping in Malawi, too.

12. To ask the Scottish Government when it will set the non-domestic rates poundage for 2013-14. (S4O-01407)

The minister will be aware of calls from Scottish Chambers of Commerce for business rates for 2013-14 to be frozen in the light of the 5.6 per cent increase in this year’s rates, which was triggered by the high level of the retail prices index in September last year when it hit a 20-year spike. Will the minister state what discussions he has had with Scottish Chambers of Commerce about its calls? Will he clarify whether the Scottish Government is considering freezing rates as Scottish Chambers of Commerce suggests?

I am concerned that the non-domestic rates proposals in the bill will create problems for many businesses and will not deliver on the SNP Government’s aspirations. Throughout the process of discussion on the bill, the most worrying aspect has been the lack of financial rigour in relation to the non-domestic rates proposals. Those proposals were announced in last year’s budget, and the Government declined to carry out a business and regulatory impact assessment on the basis that it would not be proportionate. Ministers see the amount of money involved as small in the context of the Scottish Government’s overall budget. I understand that, but the point is that the proposals will create major problems for businesses and representatives of business and retail interests as they struggle through these tough economic times. Given the potentially disastrous impact on businesses, it is simply unacceptable that the Parliament has not seen a proper impact assessment of the proposals. That is government by assertion. We know the problems that have been experienced in England on the back of similar legislation. There have been demolitions and a stalling of speculative investment in town centres. For some businesses, it has simply been the last straw. Many commercial and retail properties are empty because of the recession and the lack of demand in the economy. That is why we have consistently argued for a proper assessment of the proposals since the Finance Committee and the Local Government and Regeneration Committee took evidence on the bill. We know that the minister inherited the proposals when he was appointed and that he has argued that he needs to claw back £18 million to fix a hole in his budget. However, the hole in his budget was created by a decision by his own Government. It allocated 83 per cent of the cuts to the local government budget. That is why we proposed at stage 2 and propose again today that the changes to non-domestic rates should not come into effect without proper financial assessment, as opposed to a set of estimates, produced in-house by civil servants, that bear no relation to reality. Even the minister is not prepared to hazard a guess about how many properties will be brought back into use as a result of the bill. Every time that he has presented us with a reworking of the figures, the credibility of the proposals has been further shot to pieces. The point of a business and regulatory impact assessment is that not only will the minister and his officials have to treat it seriously, but the figures would be open to assessment, criticism and consultation for stakeholders and the Parliament. The concerns that committees, local authorities, business organisations and the Scottish Retail Consortium have raised need to be addressed. In relation to the public sector, the proposals will simply rob Peter to pay Paul. One arm of the public sector will pay money through extra non-domestic rates to the Scottish Government. The absence of a BRIA is unacceptable. I was deeply disappointed that the minister failed to take the opportunity to remedy the matter at stage 2, but I hope that he will do so today and that amendment 5 will be supported.

We supported Jim Hume’s amendment at stage 2 because there had been no proper consultation on and assessment of the Government’s proposals. When the SNP Government came to power, it claimed that it would govern as if it were a minority Government, but I think that this bill truly demolishes that claim. There is no sign of the Government listening or being prepared to listen to what is being said, however critical, by people either within or outside the Parliament. Jim Hume’s amendment 1 would enable the bill to go forward and allow local authorities to pick up on the provisions on getting empty houses back into use. The amendment would give the Government the time to do the right work and bring forward a credible set of proposals. However, I suspect that the minister will not accept amendment 1 today, and that is why Gavin Brown’s amendment 13 is welcome. I do not normally support sunset clauses, but given the huge uncertainty, the lack of credibility and the lack of financial justification that the Government has put forward, I think that it would be appropriate to require Parliament to come back and affirm whether it wants to continue with the provisions. It would also be entirely appropriate to put ministers through the discipline of justifying the proposals again. Another reason why I support amendment 13 is its provisions on post-legislative scrutiny. The minister has offered, very kindly, to do his own post-legislative scrutiny. That is a useful contribution, but the problem is that, if that work is done to the same standard as was evident in the preparation for the bill, it will not properly test the impact of the provisions. That is why the requirement for post-legislative scrutiny should be stated in the bill. We should have a proper assessment of what happens from the beginning of financial year 2013 and from the beginning of financial year 2014. We need scrutiny not by and for the Government, but scrutiny by the Parliament that is reported to us and done to the strictures set out—

The number of buildings that have been demolished and the actual amount of non-domestic rates that has been collected for unoccupied properties should be assessed. There should be a proper consultation and a proper report to the Parliament.

I ask the minister to say what progress has been made with negotiations. Reassurances were given at the committee. We understand that a change is being proposed, but what is key is how that affects the ordinary tenants mentioned by Tavish Scott—tenants on whom there could be an impact, through no fault of their own. Our concern is to ensure that the Scottish Government addresses the issue.

I thank those who gave evidence to the committees that dealt with the bill, the organisations that lobbied us, and the committee clerks. From the outset, Labour has been clear that we share the objective of bringing empty properties—whether they are commercial or residential—back into productive use. It is in no one’s interests that properties lie empty, bring down an area and are vulnerable to vandalism, and that the best use is not made of them. We also understand the financial pressure that the Scottish Government faces, and particularly the minister’s challenge of trying to deal with the reality of the finance secretary’s decisions on his budget. We have been prepared to listen to the arguments, to consider the representations that have been made, and to judge whether the bill can be made fit for purpose. In relation to the handling of the bill, there is a huge contrast between the provisions on non-domestic rates and those on empty housing. I will take them in turn. On non-domestic rates, we know of the experience of similar measures in England. Since those measures were introduced, we have had a recession and a banking crisis, and it is clear that they have not delivered on ministers’ aspirations; indeed, they have actually made things worse. On the basis of the evidence that has been presented, we do not believe that the proposals in the bill will do what the minister believes they will do. Throughout the process, there has been a lack of rigour in calculating the bill’s potential impact, particularly in relation to non-domestic rates. The financial projections that were initially submitted to the Finance Committee were woefully unconvincing and fell apart under scrutiny. The revised projections to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee were more back-of-the-envelope stuff. Every time we get another projection, we know that there will be a big hole in it and that the key issues will not have been properly looked at. We have not had a proper business and regulatory impact assessment, which would have let the Parliament test the evidence in the light of comments on the projections by interested parties. That is a fundamental weakness, because the financial projections are simply untested assertions. Moreover, the experience in England does not show only the impact on business; it shows that the amount of money that the minister has claimed will be raised will not actually materialise. The business community simply does not believe that the proposals will help; rather, it believes that they will make matters worse at a terrible time for Scottish business. The main reason why business and commercial properties are unoccupied is that there is a lack of demand, and the proposals do not address that basic problem, even with the minor changes that the minister has made. Compared with the overall budget, the projected amount that the Scottish Government claims the measure will raise is relatively small. However, in the current economic climate, given the lack of demand and the difficulty of securing finance for development, the proposals have the ability to have a disproportionate effect on business and the public sector. A proper assessment should have been carried out. We made those points during the Tory debate on the proposals for empty property non-domestic rates, during stages 1 and 2 and again today, and I am deeply disappointed that the minister has not been prepared to acknowledge the weight of criticism or the weight of the evidence that has been put to him. The regulations that will follow will be submitted on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. There will be no opportunity to amend them, and Scottish National Party ministers will use their majority to push them through, regardless of their impact. We all know that. The truth is that our local councils are struggling. They took 83 per cent of the Scottish Government’s budget cuts last year, they are facing an underfunded council tax freeze, and we all know that thousands of jobs are disappearing in them.

The evidence that was presented to the committee and MSPs. There are not only demolitions in the industrial sector; there are demolitions in the commercial sector.

No. I have answered the minister’s question. He asked about the evidence, and I have told him what it is. We have been told—by town centre managers, I think—that the amount of speculative development has fallen off the face of a cliff. Therefore, there have been problems.

No. I want to get on and address the minister’s other point about estimates. Glasgow City Council estimates that, on its own, it will take more than £1 million of the hit from the increase in non-domestic rates. I wonder whether the minister disagrees with that estimate.

I will repeat it for the minister’s benefit. The information that was submitted to me by Glasgow City Council is that it alone will have to pay more than £1 million as part of the non-domestic rates increase.

I gave the minister the source: I said that it related to town centre managers. I am sure that that was the reference that we got. I will certainly check the evidence after today. The minister has not disputed the information from Glasgow City Council. The council will potentially pay a big chunk of the projected £16 million. I cannot see how that will automatically bring empty properties back into use. There is a reason why properties are empty, and just clobbering people is not going to help. This short bill will produce major financial problems for businesses that are struggling to get through these tough economic times. Only this morning, the Clydesdale Bank reported that it had suffered an 80 per cent increase in bad debts due to the drop in the value of commercial property. That is the real backdrop to the bill. The most that we can hope for is scrutiny after the bill is enacted so that Parliament can return to the proposals. In relation to the provisions on bringing empty housing back into use, the proposals on their own are not likely to be enough, but they may be useful to local authorities as an option and as part of the kit that they have in their toolbox to regenerate communities. Although we do not believe that the proposals as they relate to housing are perfect, at least they have been the subject of consultation, so stakeholders have been able to submit their views, a number of which have improved the bill that is in front of us. It is the detail that will be important. Shelter’s empty homes campaign has highlighted that there are thousands of properties that could be rented or sold and brought back into productive use. The principle of using councils’ flexibility in relation to council tax to act as a stimulus alongside other assistance to house owners is one that we support. The test will be whether councils have the staff and resources to make use of the provisions. The bill that is in front of us is deeply flawed and will remain unfinished business for us. We will go back to the minister and repeat the evidence that has been given to us through the committee and by a number of stakeholders. We do not believe the minister’s figures, and we do not believe that his proposals will deliver what he claims. We do not believe that the bill will deliver on bringing back empty properties into productive use.

Members have highlighted their fears about the impact that the bill is likely to have on our hard-pressed business community. Labour members started from the principle of supporting the idea behind the bill of bringing empty properties back into use, so we interrogated the proposals and listened to the concerns that were raised by stakeholders. John Pentland and Michael McMahon both highlighted the procedural problems with the handling of the bill and the evidence that was presented on the bill. No doubt the minister will remonstrate with those who bring him unhappy news, but the number of major shopping centres being constructed is at a 20-year low. That is partly due to the recession but, in representations to us, the organisation that deals with the construction of shopping centres in the UK has been firmly of the view that the additional burden that would result from businesses losing their empty property rates relief once they had built new properties is a financial risk that they cannot afford to take. Their financial calculations have been altered not only by the impact of the recession—by people not shopping—but by the lack of finance from banks. Problems in the business sector have been reported to us. We know that the number of empty properties in England and Wales has increased from 5 to 15 per cent during the period concerned. We welcome the changes with regard to empty housing that have been made to the bill. Local authorities will now have the appropriate discretion and can decide when, how and where to use the provisions in the bill. They will be able to place more realistic penalties on those who do not co-operate by providing the appropriate information. However, we all know that the provisions in the bill on their own will not be enough to bring back into use the estimated 23,000 homes that Shelter estimates are lying vacant. Shelter is right to say that a package of measures is needed, including advice and information for the owners of empty homes and incentives such as loans and grants to bring homes back into use. Glasgow City Council has suggested that the power to use enforced sale procedures, which exists in England, should be included in the community empowerment and renewal bill. I hope that the minister will give that suggestion serious consideration. Such a power would enable the council to force a property sale without the requirement for a public inquiry, and the council would not have to own the property. I hope that the minister will look at the proposal positively. We all know that councils are cash strapped. One of their main concerns is whether they have the staff and the resources to put in place the mechanisms that will enable them to use the powers in the bill in practice. Councils are working extremely hard to deal with the huge pressure on them, particularly on their housing departments, to help people who are struggling to make ends meet and keep their houses, following the Tory welfare reforms. Those are the circumstances in which the legislation will be tested. We question how extensively the powers will be used by local authorities. They will not be a magic bullet. The Scottish Government could do more to provide publicity and information so that the legislation is drawn to householders’ attention and they are informed about the provisions. The minister should make a commitment on that. When the statutory instrument is passed by the Parliament—as it no doubt will be—clarity for householders and other affected stakeholders will be crucial, so that they understand the process. As a result of the massive unpopularity and problems on the non-domestic rates side, the housing element of the bill has not received the same representations and lobbying as it might otherwise have done. The minister will have to ensure that there is maximum publicity and that local authorities are supported by decent guidance on how the statutory instrument will be implemented. There is a supreme irony in the fact that the Scottish Government is using the council tax—a tax that it does not believe in or think credible, and which it is committed to abolishing—to bring empty homes back into productive use. I would be interested to hear from the minister in his closing remarks how he thinks that abolishing council tax and introducing the hated local income tax would help in the circumstance of bringing empty properties back into use. As many members have said, the bill contains fundamental flaws. We think that the SNP should have taken the non-domestic rates element off the table and explored it properly before bringing it back to the chamber. The bill will be voted through, regardless of the representations that have been made. The minister will not get his £18 million—he has already revised that down to £16 million—but businesses will take the hit for this policy. It will make their struggle to get through the economic times in which we are living and to create jobs harder. There have been some positive elements in the housing provisions, but not enough to make us vote for the bill. The NDR proposals are fundamentally flawed and the SNP Government is letting down the business community by not acknowledging the problems that the bill will create. It is right that local authorities will have access to new powers on housing, which they think will make a positive difference. However, we believe that the Scottish Government has set the potential increase too high, and we hope that local authorities will reflect on that view when they come to use those powers. Council flexibility and local strategic approaches will be vital, because the powers on their own will not be enough. House owners will need support. People with empty properties have not automatically decided to have those properties empty; there are many reasons why people’s properties are unoccupied. People will need support with marketing their properties and with gaining tenants, which is why we think that a proper approach is needed. The bill will not be sufficient. The guidelines that will accompany the proposals will be crucial and the Scottish Government needs to get the detail right. The key point is that this will be unfinished business for all of us. There are many unanswered questions and concerns about the proposals, and the detail will be absolutely crucial. I do not believe that this will be our last discussion on the bill. We will have to come back to the bill, because it will create more problems than it can ever solve. It will be Parliament’s job to scrutinise the minister’s actions and put pressure on him so that the bill will not be left where it is, and so that more action will be taken to give businesses and hard-pressed householders practical help, not just give them a problem with the bill.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Listen to the question.

The debate has been an excellent start. Johann Lamont has called time on the SNP’s fantasy economics. As an Opposition, our job is to tell it like it is and to bring up the issues that our constituents raise with us day after day. I was out meeting constituents across the road in Dumbiedykes on Friday, and the debate there was more sophisticated than our debate today, because people know that there are tough choices to make. Our job is to analyse and look at the pressures on the budget and to come up with solutions. The 30,000 people who have lost their jobs since 2008 will not be comforted by the knowledge that Kenny Gibson thinks that they are wastage. What a scandalous comment that was. Last year alone, 14,500 council jobs went.

I am sure that a reading of the Official Report will back up the comments that I just made. Last week, officers in North Lanarkshire and Glasgow highlighted the possibility of another 2,500 jobs being lost. That will not kick-start our economy or help us to come out of recession. Labour local authority leaders have made it clear that they are making the toughest decisions for a generation.

No, thank you. The problem is that we have had five years of an unfunded council tax freeze. We need only look at Professor Bell’s comments to the Finance Committee last week to see that we need to take the situation seriously.

A direct impact is being felt in relation to local government’s ability to use its resources to help people to get through the recession from which we are suffering. Local government services face a double whammy—less support from the SNP Government but even greater reliance on it for resources. That is why our devolution commission will look not just at powers for the Scottish Parliament but at powers for local government, which needs to be treated with respect and to have the opportunity to provide the services for which the public have voted. We did not devolve powers from the British state just to have an increasingly centralised Scottish state.

I do not know whether colleagues have read John Swinney’s letter to local government, which tells us everything that we need to know about the relationship between the SNP and local government and about the partnership that is meant to be in place. The letter says, “We expect you to sign up to the council tax freeze—if you don’t, your finances will be clobbered. We expect you to stick to the precise letter on teacher numbers and probationers—and, by the way, don’t bother replying unless you refuse our terms.” That is written in the letter, which I have highlighted for Mr Swinney.

My objections are, first, that teacher numbers have fallen and, secondly, that the cabinet secretary is passing the buck to local authorities for all the difficult decisions that are coming in the budget. People know what is happening. They know that their care services are being squeezed. Staff are making 15-minute visits—many are being paid the absolute minimum—and those who are least able to object are suffering. People can see what is happening to their relatives and they want better. Jackie Baillie was absolutely right to raise those issues. The Government’s amendment completely gives the game away. Everything has to be seen through the prism of the referendum and how to win votes for it. The SNP is desperate not to have this debate about the reality that people face today. We need to help people through the recession, but the SNP Government has put local authorities in a financial straitjacket and has wasted precious taxpayers’ money—because there is a cost to the underfunded council tax freeze.

No, thank you. Only 20 per cent of local government’s funding is now raised locally, and 80 per cent of last year’s budget cuts were made to local government services. If SNP members do not believe that that is a problem, they need only listen to SNP councils. Perth and Kinross Council is considering closing 10 kids clubs; Clackmannanshire Council plans a £200,000 cut in adult care; Argyll and Bute Council is privatising home care services—

No, let these points be heard in the chamber. Nobody has really talked about the detail of what is happening in our local authorities. “Efficiencies and reduced staffing numbers can only be achieved by being more focused about what we do and how we do it ... There is simply no prospect of this level of funding gap being met without service provision being affected.” Those are the words of an SNP council.

It is in the cabinet secretary’s letter that if Glasgow City Council puts one penny on its council tax it will lose £70 million. The council knows the cabinet secretary’s policy until the next election. What is the alternative from the SNP? I have not heard one back bencher mention the SNP’s hated local income tax, which is meant to be its alternative to the financial straitjacket that local government has been put in. There is a con there as well: the last time that we heard about it, it was going to be 3p in the pound more, but it actually needed to be 6p more. By the end of this session of Parliament, the underfunding of the council tax freeze will have put thousands of people on the dole, but it does not need to be like that—that is the point of this debate. We must consider what the choices are in a mature and rational way.

No, thank you. It is difficult to do that in this chamber, but the debate has started. SNP members should know that the debate is now taking place in kitchens and businesses across the country. People are asking to look at the detail of the SNP’s policies. Rather than getting better police services throughout the country, we will see a colossal waste of money because the SNP was not prepared to listen to us on local funding for local police services. We have been suggesting alternatives. Today, however, a local job creation scheme has been delivered: the First Minister has appointed his 13th spin doctor. Again, that tells us everything that we need to know about the Government. Last week, we had the scandal of the pension deal for the new fire chief, who has been taken on again but with a bigger salary. That is not fair and it is not good economics, never mind the fact that the first announcement that our new national police chief had to make was about losing 3,000 jobs from among the back-room civilians who keep our communities safe. None of that is fair and none of it is good economics. Excuse us if we do our job by pointing out the obvious, but the SNP Government has been getting the big decisions on public finance wrong. There are young people who are desperate to get skills and there are employers who are desperate to employ young people with skills so that our economy can grow. The SNP told us that no FE courses would be scrapped. However, that is SNP fantasy. Courses have not been stopped, but they are not running this year, so people cannot get on them. That is a cruel sleight of hand for young people who are desperate to get a start in life. Last year’s SNP budget cuts are hitting FE colleges hard. They are hitting the young people who desperately need those skills. The Government is pulling up the ladder on those young people. This is about skills, qualifications and making sure that our economy and our country have a future. Today, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations has blown the whistle on housing. There is absolutely no chance of the SNP Government meeting its social rented housing targets. That comes after a year in which 12,000 construction workers have lost their jobs. It does not have to be this way. Many of us in the chamber agree that the Tory Government is cutting too fast and too deep, but instead of protecting people, the SNP Government is making things worse. As Ken Macintosh said two weeks ago, the SNP’s proposed budget is not a budget for jobs. That is why Johann Lamont has called for the issues to be properly discussed. We need to call time on fantasy politics.

On the cost of transport, bus fares are up and services are being cut, yet, astonishingly, this Government has knocked back £350 million from Network Rail to improve our rail infrastructure. You could not make it up—and this is in a time of recession. We need to face the reality. The Christie commission talks about demographic changes heading our way, but the SNP is too busy nation building to look at what is happening to our nation now. Members should not take my word for it; they should listen to SNP councils and to the late Margaret Ewing. The last time that the Tories were in power, she said: “we must concentrate help on the groups on whom most concern about risks has focused—the elderly, the sick, the disabled and the very young. No one can disagree with that”.—[Official Report, House of Commons, 28 October 1993; Vol 230, c 1042.] That was true in 1993 and it is true today.

First of all, I thank the students from the campaign for fair access to the legal profession who got in touch to alert me to their concerns about changes to funding for students who wish to take the diploma in professional legal practice. Without their commitment, we would not be having this debate. I also thank colleagues across the chamber for being prepared to sign my motion and support my call for action. Changes to loans available for the DPLP have made it harder for students from low-income backgrounds to become lawyers. Although there are more loans, they are smaller and do not begin to cover students’ living costs. The changes simply make a bad situation worse. Answers to parliamentary questions that I have lodged suggest that the situation was not expected and is actually an unintended consequence; nevertheless, it needs to be addressed. I was first alerted to the challenge facing students by my constituent, Helen. Although an award-winning student, she is now £20,000 in debt. Students should not have to face such huge financial barriers. As the National Union of Students reports, five times as many entrants to LLB degrees come from the least deprived backgrounds as come from the most deprived backgrounds. If a student wants to become a qualified lawyer, the postgraduate diploma is essential, as it provides the required vocational skills and knowledge. It is interesting that in England, universities are increasingly incorporating those vocational elements into undergraduate degree courses. In Scotland, we now have a major access problem for students on low incomes, due to the lack of decent loans to cover maintenance costs. The DPLP is only one of seven years of commitment that the vast majority of potential Scottish lawyers must sign up to: the four-year honours degree; the DPLP; then two years’ professional practice on very modest salaries of around £16,000. Seven long years is a very long time for people to have to support themselves and possibly their family; the cost of paying that back is substantial. It should concern us all that the postgraduate tuition fee loan, which was introduced for 2012-13, covers the cost of tuition for up to a maximum of only £3,400, despite course fees alone being considerably higher. It is not cheap, which means that students have to borrow money from elsewhere or have already saved the thousands that are required to pay their fees and support themselves. The postgraduate and career development loan is an unsuitable alternative source of funding for students from low-income backgrounds because of interest levels and restricted payment conditions, which are a major barrier to those students. Repayment of the loan begins almost immediately after graduation, irrespective of a student’s income, and in the current climate there is no guarantee of gaining employment in the legal profession and affording the repayments. Banks are charging higher fees and interest rates, and are much more risk averse. The measures limit the career options of many students in Lothian and across the country. They certainly do not widen access to the legal profession. It has been suggested to me that I should not be concerned, as the income generation opportunities for lawyers are excellent. That may be the case for some, but should that be the driving motivation for all our prospective lawyers? What price social justice? What sort of legal system will we end up with? The profession will end up the preserve of those who can afford seven years of limited income and to build up significant debt, which is not an attractive prospect during a recession. An inevitable consequence of the expense of the DPLP is that it forces graduates to seek the legal traineeships that will lead to the maximum financial returns. I am told that the majority of trainees end up working for larger legal firms in Edinburgh; less than 10 per cent of them work for sole practitioners. That has clear implications for the provision of legal services in less commercially viable areas. In rural areas, health boards can commission staff to work as doctors in communities. What about the provision of legal services in rural areas? In the long run, what will attract people to set up practices when there are much more lucrative options to be followed in our cities? The channelling of new graduates into large legal firms also has implications for less lucrative fields. As an MSP, I have referred many constituents to students at the University of Edinburgh for free legal advice. Will students be able to provide that service in future, when they will have to work? Affordable access to legal advice is already hard to come by. Spreading loans more thinly and offering a lower amount will mean that students who come from lower income circumstances will be deeply disadvantaged. We should be concerned not just for those students, who will find it harder to stay the course over the full seven years, but for the health of the profession as a whole. As the campaign for fair access to the legal profession put it, “A representative legal profession underpins a fair legal system and a just society.” I welcome the support of NUS Scotland, which has added its voice to the call for Scottish Government action. In the responses to all the parliamentary questions that I have asked, I have not seen any acknowledgement from the Scottish National Party Government that it understands the concerns. We all know that money is tight. Surely, that is all the more reason to have a proper rationale for how investment in the next generation of lawyers is spent. I hope that the Minister for Learning, Science and Scotland’s Languages commits to act. Scotland cannot afford a legal system that is closed to all except those from the highest-income backgrounds; it is not fair and it will not lead to a legal system that is built on the principles of access to all. It will not let us build the Scotland that we all aspire to. I propose that a summit is convened that pulls together students, NUS Scotland, the Law Society of Scotland, representatives from a variety of legal firms and universities and members of the Justice Committee and the Education and Culture Committee. A range of solutions could be developed and there would be no loss of face for the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning were he to do it. We would welcome and support his actions and then find a way forward together. We have to do better. We need a legal system that is open and accessible. That is important for our students who are struggling now and for generations to come.

Will the member give way on that point?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. I strongly agree that the national planning framework presents an opportunity to focus public and private sector investment on national priorities. Does the minister agree with the Royal Town Planning Institute, which has called for a review of progress on NPF2 projects? It is important that we learn the lessons of success and barriers, to inform the delivery of NPF3. We need to focus on national developments that will bring economic prosperity and put Scotland firmly on a low-carbon path. It is instructive that although expansion at Glasgow and Edinburgh airports was a key objective in NPF2, proposed rail links to both airports and investment in the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme have been either dumped or drastically reduced. The Government talks the talk on jobs and green growth but fails to deliver on the ground. In the context of strengthening our contacts with the rest of the world, the failure of Scottish National Party MPs to turn up to yesterday’s debate at Westminster on the west coast main line franchise calls into question the SNP’s commitment to rail. If we are to deliver national developments, we need big thinking, big investment and big decisions. My criticism is that there is no sense of that from today’s document. Rather than having a list of projects, do not we need NPF3 to develop into a coherent national physical plan that joins up Government strategies and plans and gives us a vision, so that leaders from every sector in Scotland can buy into that vision and work to deliver it?

I welcome the opportunity to debate the progress of the proposed community empowerment and renewable—that is a Freudian slip; I mean “renewal”—bill. For Scottish Labour, this is very much unfinished business. Our flagship right-to-buy legislation in the first session gave communities in rural areas the capacity to utilise land to the benefit of those areas. People were attracted to move to those areas and create economic prosperity. Crucially, it enabled some of our most remote rural communities to maximise the opportunities that came from the people and the land. We believe that it is crucial that we learn the lessons of community successes. Community development and finance were critical. To pick up on the minister’s points about Gigha, what the community there has been able to do in regeneration, attracting people to the island and developing renewables is inspirational. That has been done to the point at which the community is pretty much self-sufficient. It has made fantastic use of different types of renewable energy, and it has made opportunities for tourism developments on the island. Big money was needed to make that work.

No. The member would have to ask the minister that question. The point that I am making is that investment, wherever it comes from—whether from HIE, the Big Lottery Fund or the Scottish Government—is crucial in unlocking the door so that communities can make the most of developments. Effective community management, co-operative models and different types of ownership models are crucial for long-term success in urban communities, too, but that is not acknowledged in the Scottish Government’s consultation paper. My purpose in lodging the amendment was to ask parties across the chamber to give the legislation the political priority that is needed to make it effective and to add to the menu of options in the consultation document. I welcome the minister’s initial support for our amendment and will try not to put him off that support before decision time. I have some sympathy for the critique in the Conservative amendment, as many people have said to me that the bill could be seen as a deliberate counterbalance to the Scottish National Party’s growing reputation as a centralising Government. Whether we are talking about our police and fire services, our colleges or the SNP’s criticisms of local government when it does not do its bidding, the SNP’s track record on subsidiarity is not perfect. We have never seen the Scottish Parliament as being the place where power should rest. Rather, we are committed to devolving to local authorities and devolving from them as well. That is the challenge of the bill. The challenge should not be seen as being only for local authorities—there is also a challenge for our national health service, Scottish Water and the Scottish Government. I hope that the minister will be prepared to have tough arguments with his Cabinet colleagues to identify opportunities that simply will not be realised without political will. We very much welcome the discussion of the bill, and we have a raft of ideas that we want to see reflected and incorporated in it. In particular, I want to highlight two issues in respect of which we would like a different flavour to come through in the consultation. First, we would like a shift in the principles that underpin the bill. The consultation paper’s introduction implies that the bill’s purpose is to achieve “sustainable economic growth”. We do not necessarily disagree with that objective, but we think that it is crucial to ensure that inequalities across communities are addressed in the bill. The Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations makes some powerful points in that regard. That approach is important philosophically because, without it, there is nothing to guide the difficult decisions that need to be taken and the bill could inadvertently lead to the widening of inequalities by favouring those who already have the capacity to take action to be successful. We believe that that approach will help to underpin the bill. It goes to the heart of how we identify communities, whether they are communities of interest or geographical communities. Therefore, we will argue for the principles of social justice and equality to underpin the ambition behind the bill. Many public services exist not because of market failure but because we believe that the provision of services and the exercise of rights can be delivered and shaped in a more cost-effective and comprehensive way through collective action. We think that public services are important and, in freeing up local resources, whether land or buildings, that test will need to take place at a local level as well. That is why it is disappointing that the consultation exercise unfortunately fails to refer to the role of councillors. The COSLA paper talks about that. It would have been good if the Government’s consultation noted that councillors reflect the aspirations of communities and are often the key champions in communities, generating support for initiatives to make better use of resources, whether that involves asking outside bodies for resources or making difficult decisions within councils to unlock resources. The role of councillors needs to be acknowledged because they have a legitimacy that comes from the electoral process. They also have to weigh up individual community ambitions against wider collective ambitions. That is a tension that should run through this document and needs to be explored further. One of the lessons that can be learned from rural areas’ experience of the right-to-buy agenda is that disadvantaged areas do not automatically have the range of expertise that is needed in the development of community assets. Capacity building and skills development are key. That point is made very effectively by Planning Aid for Scotland. As they go through the consultation process, ministers must reflect on the crossovers and linkages between existing land reform legislation and the new bill. I would like the minister to clarify the role of the land reform review group and how he sees it feeding into the consultation. There needs to be a join-up between land reform and right to buy in urban areas and in rural areas. That was the case following the initial land reform legislation, which is why we saw it as unfinished business. There are communities that are sometimes seen as rural and sometimes seen as urban. We need to ensure that there is a seamless join-up in terms of the ground rules. I would like the minister to flesh out the issue of access to privately owned land, which was a key issue with regard to the rural right to buy. It is not fleshed out in the consultation. I think that the minister is giving himself more time, but I would like to know what he thinks the ground rules should be. It is, potentially, a radical element of the bill in the context of urban communities, but the consultation gives us no indication of the Scottish Government’s intention in relation to the bill. The Carnegie Trust and the Scottish Sports Association suggest that having a register of assets would be a key tool to get things moving. I would like there to be some debate about whether that register should just be for the public sector or whether it should include the private sector as well.

I take that point, but I think that there is a point about leadership, how the role of Government is utilised and what the Government’s aspirations are for the legislation. That is why it is important to link social justice to the economic aspirations and understand the reality of disadvantaged communities that need extra support. The co-operative movement is a key way to lock in economic development and social progress at a local level. My final comment is on the community empowerment elements of the bill. Some tremendous best practice has been developed over the past decade, but without community capacity building it will be difficult for the potential of community renewal and regeneration to be achieved in practice. As COSLA noted, issues such as poverty, poor education, poor health and poor transport can act as barriers to bringing about empowerment that brings real change. That is why we regard it as fundamental for social justice aspirations to be built into the bill’s philosophical aspirations. That is why I think that the vision behind the bill is important, because it needs to direct us. I accept that consultation will help flesh out the detail of the proposals, but the bill also needs a driving ambition behind it. I think that we had that in the land reform legislation in the first session of Parliament. The bill could provide fantastic opportunities, such as community cafes, renewables co-operatives, new allotments and gardens and new businesses harnessing derelict and empty buildings. There are many examples across the country of rural communities making superb progress in land use and we now need to match that in our urban communities. There is a transformative and radical potential, but only if we all seize the day. I look forward to the rest of the debate. I move amendment S4M-04061.2, to insert at end: “, and notes in particular the need to learn lessons from the successes and experiences of rural communities exercising their right to buy using the legislation introduced in the first parliamentary session and acknowledges that support for communities and access to finance was critical and that effective community management and cooperative models are key to the long-term success of empowering and renewing communities.”

Today’s debate has been good, as it has demonstrated the huge number of opportunities that we as representatives see, not only in our regions but throughout the country, that could come from the bill if we collectively get it right. We have heard examples of best practice in community ownership and management from members on all sides of the chamber. I could talk at length about the experience of a local community sports facility in my region. It was built by the community and they did all the fundraising, but they could not manage it successfully. It ended up going to a leisure company and the city council, and it has now been passed to a different community organisation called Basketball Scotland. We need to look at all the experiences in the round. Community ownership is about not just buildings, but management—Alison Johnstone talked about the need for marketing and financial skills. Members have mentioned the issue of generating revenue, for which a whole set of complex skills is needed depending on the complexity of the projects. Support in that regard is crucial. In my constituency, the backgreens initiative has flourished behind a mix of private and housing association tenement properties. The land was previously just left to rot, and it has now been transformed and brought back into use to make those areas much more attractive. Again, there was an issue around management skills, and external support and a bit of finance were needed to pump prime the project. The Inch park was formerly run by the council and is now run by the local community. Again, it needed external support to make it work. I was just going to congratulate Margo MacDonald on raising the issue of the Edinburgh velodrome, but she has left the chamber. The velodrome is a good example of a facility that, although currently not fit for purpose, would need only a bit of investment to bring it up to scratch and enable it to be managed thereafter. We have volunteers and people with skills. In the context of building on the Olympics, we need to use land better and build for activity, but we also need to think through the management issues, because those are not always straightforward. Communities can be good at raising funds, but the skills for managing a project thereafter and making it successful require another layer of experience. I will make a suggestion to the minister that the Scottish Sports Association has made to me. The Scottish Government could take a look at how it as an organisation could facilitate volunteering, and that model could then be used by other public sector organisations and by the private sector. I am thinking in particular of financial management skills, which, although they might often be the bread-and-butter skills that someone uses in their day job, may in a local community be a vital skill that the community cannot afford to buy in. We need to use that enthusiasm and experience and think about the assets that we have across the public sector at a national and local level. National public sector assets have not been mentioned very much today. Alison Johnstone mentioned the fantastic example of NHS Lothian transforming unused land into allotments that are now benefiting patients and the local community. However, the health board is not keen to give the land away in perpetuity, although it is happy to lease it. The detail that the minister will get—I hope—in response to the consultation is crucial. Short-term leases can suit public sector organisations that have long-term aspirations for the land, but not the short-term capacity to use it, and the land could be used by other people for things such as allotments or community gardens. However, longer-term leases are crucial if community groups are to attract lottery or trust funding, or if they want to invest on the ground. It is important that we think through the detail of leases, because they can be used in different circumstances and for different community groups. I will give members a current example of a no-win situation. The Scottish Prison Service is about to sell off the prison officers’ club at Saughton, which is a fantastic local club that is run by the prison officers for the local community and the officers themselves. It may be lost because the SPS is determined to sell the land to the highest bidder. We must be up front about that type of conflict. There will be conflicts, whether at a national or a local level, but I hope that the bill will set a different framework to take into account wider community interests or to trade off some of those interests. It has been suggested to me that there should be someone at a council level—if the council can manage that—who looks at assets and thinks about the different categories. The council might want to sell some assets to the highest bidder in order to reinvest at a wider level across the community, but other assets might be much more appropriate for community disposal or for community management. The national asset register is a good idea and I am keen to see that happen. Community ownership and co-operatives are important models and we wanted to add them to the debate because we want to see an investment that generates benefits locally, so that the accountability can be captured and the direct benefit can be seen. Colleagues across the chamber have talked about community trust models and renewables models. I want to put on the record that I think that Co-operative Development Scotland could be a key agent in helping to support communities and in giving them the skills and the expertise to mobilise and to maximise opportunities from land and building. One theme that has emerged across the chamber is that given the detail and the complexity of trusts and the complexity of financial management, it is important to ensure that the relevant skills are available in local communities. That help has got to be there from the start.

There are some absolutely fantastic examples, particularly in the Highlands, where community renewables developments have been taken forward. Community Energy Scotland has been critical to that. The co-operative movement has also been supportive. However, it is about having the financial management and things such as risk management. If communities are building renewables or taking over a building there are health and safety issues, so support for local communities is crucial. That support is there, but it needs to be made available. One suggestion was to consider guidance—that might be worth looking at when the minister is pulling together the different ideas. I would be keen to hear in the minister’s winding-up speech how he will manage the consultation process. An extended process has been opened up—the minister will report back on the draft bill as it comes forward. I suspect that all the members have found that the challenge in preparing for the debate was that it is quite a short period of time to go through the different key sections in the bill. Each section of the bill could have generated quite a useful discussion this afternoon. We need to think about how we break down the bill between the chamber and the Local Government and Regeneration Committee—I think that Anne McTaggart made that point—to ensure that each section gets the debate that it deserves. I want to highlight the issue of dangerous buildings that was included in the consultation—Malcolm Chisholm mentioned it. It is a controversial and a complex area. I suggest that the minister gets his officials to explore why the provisions in the 2006 act have not been used by local authorities. That is a critical issue to address before we bring in new legislation. I look at the issue in Edinburgh—we have had the statutory notices fiasco where there are powers to take the money back. It is a really complex issue and my constituents would like it to be explored in detail.

I totally support David Stewart’s aims, but the detail is crucial. There have been some fantastic speeches. Let us come back and debate this again—this is definitely not the last word on it. I was delighted to be in a formerly privately-owned tavern last night in Newtongrange. Lord Lothian gave it back to the community. Let us look at not just the public sector in terms of community land disposal, but the private sector and what it can bring to the table.

I welcome Margaret Burgess to her new post and wish her all the best for the future. We look forward to debating with her a number of major issues in relation to providing new housing for Scotland. I thank the three committees that have scrutinised the bill, I thank the clerks for their work and I thank consultees for their evidence. In a draft of my speech, I thanked the Minister for Local Government and Planning for his work—he might not be aware that rumours flew round Holyrood yesterday that he would be promoted, so we are interested to see him back at his desk. I come to the heart of the issue. We agree with the objective of reducing the number of empty business properties and empty houses, but we still have serious concerns about the lack of rigour that underpins the SNP Government’s proposals. I will come back to the announcement of the non-domestic rates proposals without a formal consultation exercise. We can tell from reading the representations how critical that was to people’s view of the bill. The bill is so short and its three and a half pages contain so little detail that it is understandable that people are concerned. The minister mentioned the criticism of the lack of a BRIA. The Local Government and Regeneration Committee was not given credible answers to its questions. In the context of a huge budget, the amount of money involved might not look huge to the minister and John Swinney—who I see has left the chamber—but it is a life-or-death issue for the individual businesses that are deeply concerned that they will be affected. The matter is important and we remain convinced that a consultation and a BRIA should have been conducted on the proposals. Our view remains that not undertaking them was unacceptable, because many unanswered questions remain.

My problem is that the minister has not formally reported those conversations to us. He has given us a selection of the changes that he intends to make at stage 2, but I still have not seen a written response to the committee’s recommendations, which is a fundamental part of the process in the Parliament. If what he has said this afternoon had been in a statement, we would have had an hour’s notice in which we could look over and reflect on his comments and decide to welcome some of them in detail and have a go at kicking him around the park on others. In a stage 1 debate on the bill’s principles, when the details of the short bill are fundamental, it is difficult for us to deal with the issues without a formal written response to the committee’s recommendations. That issue is fundamental because, once the bill’s principles are agreed to tonight—as I imagine that they will be—we will open the amendment stage. From tonight, we will be able to lodge amendments, but we still do not have a record of the Scottish Government’s views on the committee’s detailed recommendations. I ask the minister, in summing up or immediately after the debate, to give us a date for producing written recommendations and a response to the committee’s recommendations. That is fundamental. I welcome the discussions with stakeholders, but we are getting a partial representation of them. We cannot see which stakeholders were and were not included. Business organisations are deeply concerned about the bill’s negative impact on businesses, given the economic downturn.

No—I want to get on. The Welsh Assembly Government looked at the evidence on the impact of the non-domestic rates provisions that came into play in England and it did not go there—it took a different approach with the business community. I regret that the bill will enable the minister to go full steam ahead after today’s debate. We will attempt to ensure that the detailed concerns that were raised in relation to both the financial memorandum and the implementation of the bill are properly addressed at stage 2. Today, we have had a partial explanation of some of the changes that the minister wants to make, but that does not cover all the amendments that the minister will lodge. He will be assisting the democratic process greatly—not just for us in making representations and drafting our amendments but, crucially, for the business community, which is external to the Parliament—if he ensures that we have the maximum discussion at stage 2. As Kevin Stewart said, that is crucial. We all look forward to that debate, but we need to be properly equipped to take part in it. Businesses argue that properties are empty because of a lack of demand and that commercial properties are rarely left empty on purpose. Since the introduction of similar proposals in England, we have seen older buildings being demolished rather than regenerated and businesses have gone under. There is concern that the proposals could further destabilise economic recovery. Bank finance is still an issue, with potential pressure on property owners if they have to pay higher non-domestic rates without new rental income. At the same time, new tenants are still struggling to get finance. How will ministers avoid increased levels of demolition? In the current economic climate, 14 per cent of retail units are already lying empty and many shops are teetering on the brink. Scottish Chambers of Commerce has suggested that the proposals could lead to up to 40 per cent of units lying empty over the next two years.

I need to make progress. The committee found it surprising that there had been no attempt to estimate the number of commercial properties that will be brought back into use as a result of the bill’s empty property relief proposals. Furthermore, no evidence was presented that reoccupation rates had increased in England as a result of increases in non-domestic rates. There are issues about the detail and about the financial impact of the bill on not just the public sector, but, crucially, the business communities. I will make clear some of the problems that have been raised by local government, because the proposals will affect not just the business communities. Falkirk Council expressed the concern that, in the current adverse economic climate, the NDR proposals could further constrain redevelopment and regeneration. It is worried about potentially unattractive gap sites emerging in retail locations and having a negative impact on rental values as landlords seek to offload their liability by slashing rents.

No, I need to make progress. Highland Council expressed concerns about absentee landlords, the volatility of the commercial property market and the poor condition of many empty commercial properties. It is important that local authorities’ concerns are brought to the chamber today, because nobody has yet raised those concerns. There are also issues relating to the empty homes provisions, on which we think that more detail is needed. We support the ambition of the proposals but, as Shelter has commented, we need wider support for owners of empty properties to bring properties back into use—that is critical. Some of the measures to which the minister has referred this afternoon will be helpful and we will look at them in detail. A key issue is the cost of implementing the bill and, if the bill is to be effective in relation to empty houses, ministerial guidance will be crucial. It is not just a question of the statutory instrument. Will the minister bring draft guidance before the Parliament? Will we see it before we debate the bill in detail at stage 2? Will we see the detail of the statutory instruments before stage 2? Without that, the debate at stage 2 will be difficult to conduct because we will not have the detail that the minister will bring forward thereafter. Waverley Housing suggested some key measures that would help to deliver the objectives of the bill. The minister has not mentioned housing association grant funding today, which we know has been slashed in the past year. Registered social landlords will need additional support if they are to buy empty houses so that they can refurbish them and rent them out. Glasgow City Council expressed concerns about the administrative costs of implementing the empty homes proposals and argued for enforced sale procedures to enable it to buy empty properties and bring them back into use. Fife Council argued that real consideration is needed of the administration and the ability to collect the charges that will be levied. It is concerned that the charges will be difficult to collect from some owners of empty properties. Those issues will need to be addressed at stage 2. Some questions remain outstanding even after the new comments that the minister has put on the record this afternoon. If the Parliament is to be effective, we need more information from the minister before we launch into stage 2. There are a couple of weeks left and I hope that we will get a detailed written response to the recommendations that were made. I reread the evidence last night and it is clear that there is support for the ambition of bringing empty properties back into use, but also that there is no agreement. In fact, there are deep worries that some of the elements of the bill will make matters worse. The lack of a BRIA has added to that concern. At stage 2, we will attempt to amend the bill and to be constructive, as the minister has encouraged us to be. However, without detailed knowledge of the Government’s position in advance of stage 2, it is difficult for Opposition parties to come up with detailed proposals on such a short enabling bill. Many respondents expressed their support for the principles of the bill, but the detail will be crucial. The fact that, two months after the committee reported, we do not have a response from the Government is a problem. We want to see the details. I hope that the minister will publish his response before stage 2. That would mean that we would have a meaningful debate. This debate is an opportunity for the minister to answer more of the questions that were raised during the Conservative Party debate in June and by the three committees that have reported on the bill. I hope that he will take that opportunity in his closing speech.

Will the member give way?

I have two points for Mr McDonald. First, our problem is with the lack of rigour and the lack of confidence that we have in the figures that underpin the bill, and that is exactly the same as it was on the day it was introduced. It is the minister’s intentions that are changing; the page that we have before of us has not changed. Secondly, I was quoting Waverley Housing Association and asking the minister to address the points that it has made. The minister needs to respond to the points that have been made throughout the process.

Does the minister have a timescale for when he intends to bring forward statutory instruments that relate to the two parts of the bill on which there has been most discussion this afternoon?

17. To ask the Scottish Government what proportion and number of students studying for a diploma in legal practice in 2012-13 will receive the maximum postgraduate tuition fee loan. (S4O-01242)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his reply. Will he outline the rationale for the decision to change postgraduate student allowances scheme funding for DLP students from grant funding to a loan system and what impact that has had on the cost of the scheme?

How is the Scottish Government working to promote access to information, public participation and access to environmental justice—which was one of the three key themes that were identified in the final version of the Rio+20 agreement—in Scotland and globally?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will instigate a public inquiry into the outbreak of legionella in Edinburgh. (S4F-00810)

Indeed. The evidence that was given to the Health and Sport Committee this week left many questions unanswered. It was suggested that there might be technical changes in relation to cooling towers, which could reduce the possibility of future outbreaks. What will the First Minister do to ensure that we get a proper inquiry so that lessons will be learned swiftly and action will be taken to protect public health? Firefighter Ewan Williamson died on 12 July in Dalry nearly three years ago, but his family and fellow firefighters are still waiting for vital questions to be answered. Can the First Minister promise that communities will not have to wait that long this time and that we will get a proper inquiry and answers to the questions that are of concern to the whole community?

As Lewis Macdonald has made clear, these amendments go to the heart of our police force’s future shape and are vital in ensuring effective policing in every part of Scotland. We support the better use of national resources for policing, but it is crucial that such an approach be balanced with improved local accountability. I strongly support Labour’s amendments in this group, because they are about ensuring accountability and getting clarity on what is available for policing. In Edinburgh, for example, the police board’s investment in policing is regularly topped up with local police officers who serve our communities in dedicated posts but, for that to continue, we need to know the baseline not just now but every year thereafter. Such a key financial safeguard should be in this bill. Local police plans should set the shape of policing in our local communities. We need to see a picture of what local policing can be expected by people. There will always be a tension between national and local delivery, but with local councillors serving on boards we will get accountability—it will not come from the new centralised national police force. Without clarity on funding and the staffing resource that is to be deployed, there will be less influence, less accountability and less sensitivity to policing in our local communities. That will be a huge missed opportunity. It cannot be in the interest of good government and it is certainly not in the interests of transparency. Where will the complaints from our local communities go? Will they end up with the national police board, on the ministers’ desks, or in the Parliament? We are centralising our national police force, but it does not need to be like that. As Lewis Macdonald pointed out, we will squander huge amounts of resources that the bill could have made available for policing on our streets and in our communities. COSLA is clear that it wants a more integrated local community service through our police. That could be achieved through these amendments. They would give us democratic scrutiny and engagement and deliver better outcomes for our communities, so I ask the minister to reconsider. This is about strengthening our national police force so that it is balanced by local accountability. The bill will take us in the wrong direction. If the cabinet secretary and his back benchers do not support our amendments today, it will be unfinished business for the Labour Party. This is not the bill that the Parliament should pass.

Today’s debate on the detail in the bill has demonstrated the SNP’s centralising instincts—

No, there is no irony, minister. I will explain. Although there is a powerful argument for better national policing, that must be balanced with effective accountability and local input. Ministers have today not allowed that to be added to the text of the bill. Other parties in the chamber disagree with the SNP on that matter, and today is a missed opportunity. I am disappointed that local councillors will not play a full enough part in the process, and I thought that Kevin Stewart’s arguments this morning totally undermined the SNP’s case.

No, I will not—the member has had his time. Local circumstances are different, and there is a discipline that comes from knowing that one must account to people. I know from my mailbag that it is local policing, working with local agencies, that makes people feel safer. For most of us, that is the only time that we will meet our local police. I believe that we will return to that issue. Unison’s Dave Watson commented this morning that there will be centralisation at a cost, with privatisation to come. Ministers have said nothing today to refute or allay those fears. The proposed committee will need proper consultation. It will not be a Justice 2 Committee, but a committee of an entirely different character. We will all need to pause for breath on that, and the matter will need to be handled carefully and sensitively. The jury is out on that proposal. There are good things about having a national police force, but that must be counterbalanced by local input. The bill is a missed opportunity, and we will have to come back and improve on it in the future.

I welcome the debate that the Conservatives have stimulated. I also agree with most of the motion. However, I want to give the Scottish National Party the chance to do the right thing and to give us the proper evidence. We have before us a proposal that is at best not proven. There are huge concerns about its potential impact—particularly on our business community—and huge uncertainty surrounding the SNP Government’s projected costs. The figure of £18 million has been completely rubbished by so many commentators that it needs to be explored. We understand the principle behind the proposal, but we are in tough times and it is our job in this chamber to ask whether the proposal will help or hinder our town centres. It is simply not good enough to be given Government assertions. We need evidence—robust evidence—and that is simply not on offer from the SNP Government. The Finance Committee, having explored the evidence presented to it, produced a damning report. It asked questions, it interrogated the evidence and it concluded that the proposal had not been properly considered or justified. That matters. The Parliament should not pass legislation without rigorous scrutiny and proper justification. I have read a series of explanations from ministers as to why they did not conduct a business and regulatory impact assessment. The explanations are simply not credible. When the SNP Government was elected last year, it said that it would govern as if it was a minority Government. We all know that if it was a minority Government, it would sit down and talk to members across the chamber and it would listen to the business community. A minority Government would be more focused on ensuring that the proper evidence was in front of us all when we debate this legislation. There is still time. My amendment acknowledges the Finance Committee’s disappointment in the lack of an assessment.

Without a business and regulatory impact assessment, the Government is listening without having properly considered the evidence. That is the key issue. The Government amendment is an act of self-congratulation; if there were a prize for that, the minister would surely be in the top three. However, this is a serious issue. It is simply not acceptable for members to be asked to support the bill without proper scrutiny, given the major concerns that have been submitted to the Parliament. Evidence from England has to be considered. The number of unoccupied properties has risen as the economic downturn has gripped. Properties have been demolished rather than let. That means that when the economy picks up, those properties will not be available. It has been suggested that companies are becoming insolvent rather than being stuck with higher business rates. In Wales, as has been mentioned, our Labour colleagues have gone for a completely different approach. They have commissioned a detailed independent expert report. It acknowledges that although business rates are a major source of taxation, the changes to the current business rates regime would not be a panacea for wider economic challenges. Crucially, it highlights the complexity of the property sector. We are not getting that sense of understanding from the minister. There is also the impact on the public sector. For all the minister’s supposed assurances to the committee, he cannot be definitive about the impact on the public sector either. The figure of £18 million is illusory. We know from the evidence to the Finance Committee and the Local Government and Regeneration Committee that the business community is deeply worried about the proposals. Yesterday’s comments by the Scottish Chambers of Commerce testify to that. The Federation of Small Businesses has called for an investigation into whether property rates relief acts as a block to or a driver of economic activity. There are too many unanswered questions. The reassurance that we have heard again this morning—that nobody need worry because the Scottish Government is consulting on the detail of the rates—is arrogant and worrying. That approach completely prejudges the outcome of parliamentary scrutiny. We have not yet had the Local Government and Regeneration Committee’s report or the stage 1 debate on the bill. There is no transparency in the process, which is run by ministers. The SNP has a working majority, but it should still treat the Parliament with respect. There should be full consultation on the proposals, followed by parliamentary scrutiny, not the other way round. When we deal with the regulations, the SNP’s overall majority will mean that they are simply nodded through, so there will be no opportunity to change the proposals. Good government demands effective parliamentary scrutiny. The Finance Committee considered that there should be a business and regulatory impact assessment, and we agree. The SNP Government is incurring costs for businesses and local councils without proper consideration. Our amendment is constructive. The Crofting Reform etc Bill was delayed to enable the Labour-led Scottish Government to consider major objections to part of it. That Government took its time and brought that bill back. More recently, the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill was delayed for proper consideration. We are in hard times and there are tough decisions to be made. There is too much at stake for us not to get it right. I move amendment S4M-03397.2, to leave out from “, and therefore calls” to end and insert: “; welcomes efforts to regenerate local economies and encourage occupancy in town centres but is concerned that the Scottish Government’s plans to reduce empty property relief through the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc.) (Scotland) Bill may not achieve its stated aim, may have a detrimental effect on business and the economy and may, in fact, cost the public sector considerable sums of money; calls on the Scottish Government to conduct a business and regulatory impact assessment (BRIA) immediately and to provide the Parliament with detailed information on how many commercial properties will be brought back into use as a result of these proposals; also calls on the Scottish Government to delay further consideration of the bill until the Parliament can consider the findings of the BRIA and other evidence, and urges the Scottish Government to consider other measures to incentivise local government to invest in economic development, such as allowing councils to keep a proportion of business rates raised through increased economic activity.”

Will the minister take an intervention?

How credible did Gavin Brown find the minister’s assertions about why we were not going to get a BRIA?

Will the Scottish Government undertake an assessment of the overall progress of the public sector under all three parts of the public sector duties? If so, how will that be done and when will the results be published?

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what work it is doing to improve the local environment around the canal network. (S4O-01136)

I very much welcome the minister’s answer. In Edinburgh, the Fountainbridge canalside initiative has been formed by local enthusiasts to promote better environmental quality, an urban orchard, allotments and increased biodiversity. What support is available to help such groups to progress their plans and bring them to fruition?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment that wider lessons will be learned from this experience. I will ask about the long-term impact on NHS Lothian. I, too, offer our gratitude to the NHS staff in Lothian for pulling out all the stops to treat the patients who are currently experiencing legionnaire’s disease. Will the Scottish Government assist NHS Lothian, which has been under pressure on waiting times, to ensure that it can get up and running and respond after this event? Will there be support from the Scottish Government to enable it to do that?

After the gathering in 2009, many businesses were not paid for services that they had provided in good faith. What safeguards will the First Minister ensure are put in place to prevent businesses from losing out again?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to secure a visit to Scotland by Aung San Suu Kyi during her planned visit to the United Kingdom in June 2012. (S4O-01056)

I very much welcome the Government’s support for a visit to Scotland. For Edinburgh, giving Aung San Suu Kyi freedom of the city in 2005 was an important political statement of sympathy with her campaign for democracy in Burma. Groups such as Burma Assist and the Burma Educational Scholarship Trust, of which I am a trustee, support young people in particular, in Burma. The cabinet secretary’s preparedness to promote a visit to Scotland will be of huge significance to the many people who have campaigned for a more democratic Burma. When Aung San Suu Kyi was asked how, on a scale from 1 to 10, she ranked Burma’s progress towards democracy, she answered: “We are on the way to one.” There is a long way to go.

Will the minister take an intervention on that point?

Will the minister take an intervention on that point?

I want to focus on the NHS Lothian report, because the revelations that emerged are deeply disturbing. From an individual report that highlighted the unacceptable offer of treatment for NHS Lothian patients in England, a systematic approach to manipulating waiting time figures and a culture of bullying were exposed. The investigation of the management culture in NHS Lothian has provided evidence of suppression of information and an oppressive management style that contributed to a situation in which information on poor performance was not passed up the management structure, there was a no-bad-news culture, and staff were pressured to find solutions without support. That culture is clearly at odds with the stated values of the health board, which place patients first and foremost but put a premium on staff motivation and organisational reputation. Therefore, the report highlights tough questions that need to be answered. I am disappointed that the cabinet secretary commented only that what the report says went on was beyond the pale. We all agree that waiting times matter—patients value them and staff work hard to deliver them—and we all want people to have confidence in NHS Lothian and the NHS in every other part of Scotland, but the report identifies that there is clearly still a problem with hidden waiting times. Richard Simpson’s intervention highlighted that. The management culture in NHS Lothian, which allowed the situation to persist, existed for some time and the behaviour became viewed as normal by staff. That is unacceptable. Neil Findlay was absolutely right to say that it is not enough to acknowledge the dedication of staff. We have to look at the background of the report and the issues that were identified, and put together action. It is unacceptable for patients to be cared for by staff who are already under pressure without the additional stress of an oppressive management style. The unwillingness of staff to use whistleblowing policies due to a lack of confidence must concern every single member. Despite the clear evidence of bullying behaviour that the report identifies, the situation did not come to light for years rather than months. There are strong unions in NHS Lothian, but the staff did not go to them or whistleblow. There is a clear issue to do with staff being afraid. The report is shocking and, having read it, I still have questions for the cabinet secretary. Did the Scottish Government allow the former chief executive to leave during the inquiry? Was that passed up to the cabinet secretary or her officials by NHS Lothian? There is a clear governance and accountability issue in the report. As I said, I still have questions that I cannot answer even from reading such a detailed report. There is a paradox in it. NHS Lothian has won Investors in People accreditation, so it is clear that there is very good practice in it, but there is an oppressive management culture overall, and the report does not really pin that down. We cannot just brush over matters and look to the future. We must ask what the interrelationship is between reductions in staff numbers, pressures on funding and oppressive management cultures. It is not enough to have some good workshops in the future; we must ask whether those issues are related. It troubles me that it was patients who blew the whistle on waiting times. We would always expect staff to do that, but the staff in NHS Lothian were too afraid. Dr Richard Simpson’s proposal to establish a whistleblowers hotline is therefore crucial. There is evidence in England and Wales that that needs to be looked at. It is a clear issue on which we need to seek action. We have the report on NHS Lothian, but there are huge pressures and significant population increases. Delivering excellence with tight funding is acknowledged to be a challenge, but there are still unanswered questions, and I would like the minister to reflect on them in summing up.

Will the member take an intervention?

I would not for a moment dispute the fact that, with extra resources and superb management, there has been big progress. Will the minister focus on the problems that were identified in the NHS Lothian report? The key problem is that, with less money and less staff, there are pressures. How do we get it right? What are the lessons?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has received the report into the management culture at NHS Lothian and, if so, what lessons can be drawn from it. (S4O-00975)

I very much welcome that reply. Has the Scottish Government discussed with Audit Scotland the remit of its audit in light of the experience with NHS Lothian? Secondly, can the cabinet secretary give us a report on the joint working between the Scottish Government and NHS Lothian on the sustainable operational plan to ensure that patients are seen and treated within the legal treatment time guarantees?

I welcome the fact that the Conservative Party has chosen this topic for its business this morning. Although we agree to an extent on the importance of local decision making, we disagree on the details, and we have a good chance to debate the issue this morning. There is a tension between the provision of national services and decision making on local priorities. As Mr Mackay has loudly proclaimed, the Scottish National Party removed ring fencing, but it also devolved all the conflicts in implementing its manifesto decisions to local authorities and then removed the capacity for those authorities to implement them. The SNP did not even check how much it would cost. Many of those manifesto commitments have withered on the vine or been unceremoniously dumped. The backdrop to the debate is next week’s local government elections. The SNP has been silent for the past 24 hours, although Derek Mackay made up for that by giving us a full-on defence. The best form of defence is always attack, so I thank the minister for that. For Scottish Labour, next week’s elections are important in their own right. They are not about a stepping stone to independence; they are about the detailed decisions that are made in every one of our local authorities and communities. The elections are about the capacity for local authorities to provide services for communities throughout Scotland. That is why I am proud of our local manifesto production process. It was not a top-down approach. Every one of our local Labour teams—not all include councillors, and some of the teams are fighting seats where we do not currently have Labour councillors—decided what to put in their local manifestos. I am proud of that. There are common themes and values, but the detailed prescriptions may be different because the teams have worked on and developed their radical ideas with local communities and trade unions, and with local campaigners about the priorities and circumstances of their communities. That is how it should be. Our approach of listening to people was not accidental, it was deliberate. We believe that the local elections are about the capacity of local communities to be defended from the current financial situation and to develop their own priorities. We know that the Tory Government is cutting back too fast and too deep, and the fact that we are back in recession is testament to that. For all the rhetoric that we have had from Mr Mackay about protecting public services, the uncomfortable fact for the SNP is that it deliberately allocated 89 per cent of its budget cuts to local authorities. The absolute liberation from ring fencing is a false dawn, because the money is not there to do what the SNP said that it would do.

We debated that issue last time. It is not just about what the Scottish Government is funding, it is about what it will not let local authorities do in terms of funding. Look at the council tax benefit deal that was done last week. I totally empathise with COSLA. The deal on the table it was offered was £23 million if it contributed a bit versus nothing if it did not. I am told by my local authority contacts that the real deal is that the minister said that local authorities can use the money raised as a result of the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc) (Scotland) Bill. However, anyone who listened to the Finance Committee’s session yesterday will know that the SNP’s figures were absolutely demolished in the evidence given during the financial scrutiny of that bill. The suggestion is that it will not, as the Scottish Government claims, raise £18 million. For example, the £3.5 million that Glasgow City Council was getting in the last few weeks to help local youth unemployment will be wiped out by its contribution on council tax benefit. It is all smoke and mirrors. Please excuse us if we do not celebrate when that comes on top of the cuts and the changes to the bus service operators grant that were debated in the Parliament last week. Local SNP leaders are beginning to object to what their Government is doing—they are prepared to sign letters complaining about the Scottish Government’s decisions. Housing is another area where cuts have been made. That makes it difficult for local authorities to provide the housing that they desperately need for local people, when the level of people’s incomes—as a result of the recession—means that people have no chance to save up for a deposit to buy a home, or to sustain a mortgage. I agree with the Conservatives that the SNP is a centralising Government. The purpose of devolution was never to devolve power to a Scottish Parliament only to see it accumulate powers from the local government level upwards. We need only to see the SNP’s plans for our national police force to see how centralising the SNP is, because that could have been an opportunity to increase local accountability. Although the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill contains mechanisms— Paul Wheelhouse (South of Scotland) (SNP) rose— Let me continue, please. You are attacking me before you have heard what I have to say. Although that bill contains mechanisms to involve local political representatives at a local level, those mechanisms do not provide crucial local accountability on policing budgets or on allocation of resources. The SNP’s centralisation of power will mean a police service run by a board appointed by ministers, led by a chief constable approved by ministers, working to a national plan agreed with ministers, with a budget approved by ministers. The division of powers among local government, central government and the police will be lost, and policing that is independent of central government will be put at risk. The SNP’s bill is silent on what will happen if a local council does not agree a local policing plan with the chief constable, because the reality is that the council has no sanctions to strengthen its case. Surely, there is an opportunity to improve policing at a national level, on things such as trafficking and serious crime, which we should all agree on. There is also an issue about financial accountability at a local level—on things such as anti-social behaviour and local policing policy—because there is no clout at a local level built into that bill. That is the reality of centralisation under the SNP. The SNP is good at asserting that it has done things, but we need a reality check. By ensuring ever-tighter central control of the purse strings and reducing support centrally for activities such as school replacement and flood management investment, the SNP has passed the buck to local authorities. It says that it has devolved responsibility to them, but it is not helping them to implement policies in practice.

I will not give way, as I am in my last minute. The desperate efforts to keep secret the reality of the SNP’s plans for local income tax go to the heart of the matter. That is not surprising, because the reality is that the figures that the SNP has quoted are completely fictitious—the tax rate would be double the level that the SNP claims that it would be. It is important to check the detail.

As for a policy of no redundancies for the public sector, 13,000 local authority jobs were lost last year. With the SNP, we need to check the small print. I move amendment S4M-02687.2, to leave out from “with concern” to end and insert: “the severity and speed of the public sector cuts put in place by the UK Government, that the SNP administration allocated as much as 89% of all budget cuts to local government, doubling the level of cuts allocated by the UK Government to Scottish local authorities, that the SNP administration has undermined the capacity of local authorities to protect services to local communities and that local authorities are increasingly reliant on the Scottish Government for funding for local services and believes that strong local councils are a crucial part of democracy in Scotland, enabling local communities to determine priorities for their local areas.”

Will the member clarify the point about local accountability and local financial influence on the operation of the new police force? We are in favour of the elimination of duplication, but we are not in favour of the eradication and removal of local accountability.

Would Mike MacKenzie like to tell us how the cuts to the housing grant have affected housing association construction rates?

It is difficult to sum up the debate. I hope that members will accept my apologies for not commenting on the interesting speeches that some of them made. I shall focus on a few issues. I disagree with the comment of an SNP back bencher that there was no policy in Jackson Carlaw’s opening speech. There was quite an important policy—albeit that it was one with which I fervently disagree. However, I will reflect on it for a minute, because it goes to the heart of some of the challenges that we face. Jackson Carlaw suggested, in relation to planning, that there should be separate codes of conduct for local councillors throughout the country. I argue strongly against that; it is a daft policy. I am absolutely in favour of there being different local planning policies. It is legitimate and appropriate for local councillors to set their own policy agendas, notwithstanding the fact that we also have national policies. However, in relation to the operation of the planning process, we need to learn from the Nolan principles that were implemented throughout the UK to ensure probity in every party, and among those who are not in a party, and to ensure that people in public life do the right thing. I would not deny for a second that planning is complex. It is quasi-judicial, but we should have national standards that every councillor, regardless of who they are, which party—if any—they represent or which part of the country they are from, knows that they need to abide by. If there are difficulties in the operation of the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006, that is a legitimate issue to raise. I would have sympathy if people did not understand how the act works or if new councillors were unsure about the system. If there is a need to refresh the guidance, let us argue for that, but let us not take away the idea of national standards.

With respect, I say that that is slightly different. There has always been a case for members going to a planning committee and banging the drum for the views of their constituents. That is absolutely appropriate. However, we need to ensure that if someone sits on the planning committee, they can demonstrate that they have fully considered the issues in respect of a planning application. Margaret Mitchell may have concerns about the process and the guidance—I think that that is a different issue. However, we need to hang on to the principle of probity and standards in public life. I will look at Paul Wheelhouse slightly differently after this morning’s revelation about his past as a young Conservative. I was astonished at his comment that the changes to the bus service operators grant were a plus point for the SNP because local councils are now standing up for their constituents. It has been a disaster: it has created a crisis and then people’s response to it has been welcomed. That was a daft point to make. In the past couple of weeks I have been out talking to people in East Lothian and Midlothian, and there are members of the public who are genuinely worried about whether they can stay in their employment. There are health service workers, nurses and care support workers, who, if the buses go, as planned, will simply not be able to get to work. Using the local bus is not a choice for them—it is a necessity. That has to be sorted out.

I will not, because I am responding to Paul Wheelhouse’s point. The SNP’s changes to national policy are having an impact on local councils. We all know that fuel costs are rising. That is why it is particularly scandalous that the SNP has undermined and destabilised the system of bus funding in this country.

No, I will not. That has happened on the SNP’s watch. The SNP has destabilised a system and now constituents throughout the country are worrying about whether they will have jobs in June because the bus services are going.

When I hear the SNP talk about scaremongering, it makes me remember the issue of—[Interruption.] With respect, I said that I would—

No. Let me move on. I have only six minutes, so there is not a chance. It is my right not to take an intervention. If members had been in the chamber, they would know that I took several interventions earlier.

I repeat that I took several interventions in my opening speech. I apologise for not being able to take interventions from everyone in my closing speech. That should be respected. We should have some courtesy in the chamber. [Interruption.]

The SNP members do not like it when they are in power and we criticise how they exercise that power to the detriment of our constituents. Richard Simpson made a fantastic speech about what is really happening to kinship carers. That goes to the heart of the issue, because there are national objectives, then there is the reality locally of what happens when funding systems are changed. Several members rightly commented on that in their speeches. It is one thing to have a national priority in a manifesto, but it is another to expect local government to implement it when the Government is not providing the funding to enable it to do that. Whether it is about kinship carers, the number of teachers in schools, the fact that schools cannot be replaced or flood prevention implementation being delayed in my city, the SNP is guilty of having made the wrong decisions. I hope that people will reflect on that next week.

13. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in delivering reductions in class sizes in early years. (S4O-00931)

I thank the minister for her response, but Edinburgh is significantly behind the national average for having P1 to P3 pupils in classes of 18 or fewer. Since 2007, the number of primary teachers in Edinburgh has dropped by almost twice the national average. The Scottish National Party’s 2011 manifesto said that agreement had been reached “with local government to deliver sufficient teaching posts for all” post-probationary teachers “who successfully complete their probation”. Given that the General Teaching Council for Scotland’s initial finding is that 18.8 per cent of last year’s cohort are still not employed and that only one in five is in full-time permanent employment, will the Scottish Government provide adequate resources to allow the City of Edinburgh Council to increase teacher numbers and reduce class sizes and to ensure that teachers who cannot find a job are not lost to the profession?

Has the minister any progress to report on whether he will produce positive guidance for local authorities that are tendering work to ensure that we tackle low pay and deliver a living wage across our local communities?

Will the First Minister confirm the details of the council tax benefit deal? Is it true that local authorities that have disproportionate numbers of people who rely on council tax benefit will have to shoulder the burden of £17 million of cuts in a year in which they have had to shoulder 89 per cent of the Scottish Government’s own budget cuts? Surely that is robbing Peter to pay Paul.

I welcome the fact that the minister will be on the pedal for Scotland event this year as well. I request that he look at the trunk roads budget, because there are massive opportunities in it. It is a huge budget and he could use it to do a lot more to improve long-distance cycle routes and beef up the work that needs to be done by our local authorities. The point that Helen Eadie made about getting from Fife to Edinburgh was absolutely right. Long-distance commuter routes are a nightmare for cyclists.

I very much welcome the debate on local energy companies and hope that it will stimulate action. We will not all agree on everything, but I suspect that there is enough on which we agree for us to be getting on with. The Parliament set an ambitious target for a 42 per cent reduction in CO2 by 2020, and Labour believes that energy efficiency, with local heat and energy in our buildings and in our transport, must be part of the solution. I will not engage in a lengthy debate about the exact nature of the Government’s ambitious targets for renewables. Suffice it to say that we believe strongly in a balanced approach to energy supply that lets Scotland lead the way on renewables while remaining part of a United Kingdom energy market so that we can both export energy that we generate from renewables and use it ourselves. We must be able to export energy to the rest of the UK and import baseload when we need it. The key issue is the need for a decentralised set of heat and power networks across our local communities. Such an approach would be a highly efficient way in which to generate heat and power and could provide much-needed baseload. We believe that it is the missing link in energy and heat supply in Scotland. If we had been elected to government last summer, we would have implemented radical plans for community renewables. We see local authorities as vital partners and key agents in leading the way. The motion talks about the perception of renewables as being all about the benefits to big companies. It is vital that local communities and individual members of society are able to get direct benefits from the renewables revolution. Patrick Harvie mentioned some of the fantastic community projects that now exist throughout Scotland using co-operative, community trust and social enterprise models—whatever is appropriate locally. There is a big gap, however, caused by the fact that local authorities have not played their full part. Council house tenants, housing association tenants and people who are on low incomes will never be able to benefit from technologies such as solar panels, solar water heating and combined heat and power schemes unless they are procured collectively on a mass scale. I have mentioned many times the fantastic work that is being done in Aberdeen. I am glad that it has been namechecked today, but it should not be the scheme that we must always mention—there should be lots of others. That is why we need to put some political energy behind the process today. Last year, our idea was to have a £100 million scheme that was based on the principles that Birmingham City Council adopted. Its model involved setting up a social enterprise company to bulk-buy solar panels for council house tenants. The council also reinvested in energy efficiency and in a new wave of solar panels across the city. It has now been joined by a host of other authorities. In north-east England, five local authorities are working together to do the same procurement work. We would have worked with an initial 10,000 houses, alongside energy-efficiency work. We are not doing enough to address fuel poverty, and such an initiative would have helped to boost work in that area. Patrick Harvie referred to the new revenue that we could invest in such a process. Fergus Ewing is right—it is an incredibly tough time for local authorities, which have had to bear the brunt of 89 per cent of this year’s budget cuts and are shouldering record debt levels. However, local authorities know local housing. We are not using their expertise and knowledge. They have the power to be transformative by establishing decentralised energy and heat networks. They are in charge of the planning framework for buildings and of transport and zero waste planning locally. Local authorities could really make a difference. The levers are potentially at their disposal and they have the powers that they got under the previous Labour Government to buy and sell energy for their residents, but they have competing demands on their time. I say to the minister that the issue is not about him requiring local authorities to do things or ruling out what they can do but about transformational leadership to give them the capacity and the support to take on and lead on the agenda.

No—I have only one minute left. I welcome the minister’s support for our amendment. We believe that it is crucial that the Government comes back to Parliament. The cross-party group on renewable energy and energy efficiency regularly debates the issue, which needs to come back to the chamber and to committees. We need serious political momentum behind the decentralised energy and heat movement. Our local authorities are best placed to lead on that, but they are not doing so. Communities can do such work, but it is not happening on a local government scale. The Scottish Government has a key role in leading on the issue. Patrick Harvie mentioned the local government elections. Glasgow City Council has done work on wind turbine development, which is producing energy and a sustainable income for the warm Glasgow fund. The City of Edinburgh Council wants to develop radical community co-operatives, and Dundee City Council wants to look at buying and selling energy. The agenda is radical. We do not want just one or two local authorities to do such work. All of them need to engage with it, on their own terms. The minister could play a vital role in giving them a lead. I move amendment S4M-02523.2, to insert at end: “, and asks that the Scottish Government reports back to the Parliament on progress.”

This has been an excellent debate. The motion captures the spirit of where a lot of our constituents are at the moment and reflects the change in the world that we live in. Energy supply and energy costs are absolutely fundamental for our communities and our society as we go forward. Where people have a stake in renewables, the attitudes are very positive. Members from across the chamber have talked with pride about communities that they know and understand. Whether in Eigg, Fintry, Gigha or Aberdeen, people understand the power of local energy production and the benefits that can come from it. That understanding transforms attitudes, and we should use that. The problem is that energy costs are huge and are not going to get cheaper. The six big companies hold sway over the costs that we all pay. We can see the appetite for change expressed in the Which? magazine campaign to get a better energy deal for people, with more than 200,000 people signing up to the switch campaign. We can act on the issue too. It would be a great pity if that community element of Patrick Harvie’s motion was rejected, because there is a potential role for local authorities and Dundee Labour is campaigning on that aspect. Taking a decision on the risk involved would be up to local authorities, but it would be good to help them with the process, because fuel poverty scars far too many households in this country. A third of our households live in fuel poverty, and we all know that that is a disgrace. The motion gives us an agenda for tackling that situation—which I believe is a crisis, as does Citizens Advice Scotland. The situation needs political action, because 80 per cent of the houses that will be there in 2050, which is when we need to have met our 80 per cent carbon reduction target, have already been built. The agenda is therefore difficult because it is about not just new houses but existing houses. What the motion proposes is a transformative agenda, but it needs leadership because it is hard to achieve. It is about communities collectivising and pulling people together. I believe that if the Scottish Government put the same effort into promoting community, city-based and town-wide schemes as it puts into the big-scale renewables, it could make a huge difference. Over the past 12 years, successive Governments have put massive energy into community renewables and we can see the fantastic results in our communities in the Highlands and Islands. However, we need to ensure that that happens across the whole country, which is when we will see results. I propose that the minister holds a summit with local authorities to talk about the agenda after the dust has settled following the local council elections. We will have a raft of new councillors and there may be changes in local authority administrations. We should give them a bit of time to settle down, but we should use the time between now and then to do some work so that we kick the process up a gear, to pick up on something that was said in the previous debate today. The Energy Saving Trust has done a huge amount of work, but there is expertise across the UK. Local authorities need to be given support, but I would be the last person to be prescriptive about what they should do. In that regard, I want to pick up on the point that Jamie Hepburn made, because it is not about telling them what to do. The motion in front of us talks about a variety of models. We should let each local authority choose what is right for it but give it the expertise. We have given local authorities legislation on climate change and they are now meant to be working towards targets on carbon reductions. We have given them renewables targets, so we should let them be part of the process and give them assistance. There are great examples of schemes and we need to know what has worked and why. Claudia Beamish has just told me of a scheme in the Borders and there are examples in Aberdeen, Glasgow and in Highlands and Islands communities. There is a lot out there to learn from. The bit that we have not cracked in Scotland is the city-wide level. In that regard, work has been done in Birmingham that we could learn from. So, let us move forward together. This is an agenda where we are missing a trick.

Jobs could be created. Mark Griffin and John Park mentioned that. Let us work with the further education sector and the building sector and look at trades and skills, because there is something for everyone in the agenda.

I hope that the minister will take a lead on the agenda.

Will the minister give way?

I thank Jim Hume for bringing this important debate to the chamber and for lodging a motion that is comprehensive and has a lot of meat in it. I have been a strong supporter of community transport since the Parliament was established. As the first minister with responsibility for transport in the Scottish Parliament, one of the most pleasurable things that I did was go to various parts of rural Scotland, work with the people there and kick off the grant support for community transport. I know the huge change that it has made to ordinary people’s lives. For many people in rural communities, community transport initiatives are a lifeline. For people who are not car owners, who live in an area that has no local bus services or who have some form of disability, there are no alternatives; it is just impossible to get out and about. We need to view community transport as a preventative measure. It enables people to live independently and with dignity in their own homes, sometimes with extra support. It also enables them to access community events and facilities, to go shopping—activities that the rest of us take for granted—and to take part in human interaction, whether that is talking to other people or volunteering. The service is fantastic and important. I, too, was dismayed at the cut in the bus service operators grant. I know that, in my region, that has led to bus fares going up and services being reduced. With regard to my region, I point out that, although community transport is vital for rural communities, it is also important for urban communities. As an urban dweller, I must say that although some parts of the Lothians have good bus services, they are not good enough for people who have physical disabilities, who do not live near a bus stop and who would not get out without community transport. In Lothian, there are several community transport projects, including the Pilton Equalities Project, Dove transport and Lothian Community Transport Services. Those services exist because the traditional bus services do not meet people’s needs. Handicabs in particular does a great job. When I had the chance to invite a local hero to the opening of Parliament following the last elections, I invited Muriel Williams, who is an Edinburgh resident who has spent more than 20 years raising awareness of and supporting community transport initiatives. Community transport is a lifeline in rural communities, but as some of you will have been surprised to hear, it is also important in urban areas. The Pilton Equalities Project runs 90 local projects. Without the community transport that it runs, the people who need that support to visit events that are held by mental health groups, older people’s groups and so on would simply not be able to do so. I very much support the profile that Jim Hume has given this issue by bringing it to the chamber. There is an issue about cost. Local people tell me that they have a taxi card that lets them go on two visits a week. It is not free; they must still make a contribution. Community transport also has to be paid for. However, without it, people would have to choose every week between going to the shops or going to a local project, and I do not think that that is a choice that people should have to make. The benefits to older people who are able to get out of the house, socialise with other people and get advice and support are important, and community transport is vital to ensuring that they can do those things. I hope that the minister, in his response, will talk about support for community transport in terms of the capacity of groups to run those services and to provide the accessible minibuses that are needed, and in terms of concessionary travel. Even when there are buses in their areas, a lot of older people cannot use them and, in communities where there are no buses at all, community transport means that they have a chance to get out and about. I hope that the minister will look at this issue. It is important for rural and urban areas across the country.

Will urban as well as rural authorities be eligible for the Scottish Government’s new money?

I thank the minister for the courtesy of providing an advance copy of his statement today and for the package of documents that accompanied it. I have not managed to read through them all in the past hour, but we should come back to them. The minister referred to the fact that economic circumstances have changed since the 2006 act was passed. I note in passing that he did not refer to the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, which placed pretty substantial policy demands on development planning, the consideration of planning applications and enforcement. Will the minister comment on the centrality of the planning system to the major policy objective of reducing our CO2 emissions by 42 per cent? I welcome the minister’s comments on planning fees, but note that Audit Scotland reported that there had been a reduction in the planning staff employed by local authorities. Although I welcome the continued emphasis on better management of the process, I ask the minister to assure me that Scottish Government agencies that are involved in it will abide by the new deadlines as well. Audit Scotland referred to that point in its report. The decision-making processes are not entirely within the scope of local authorities. With regard to fee levels, is the minister able to put on record the upper limit that he is considering? I note that the maximum fee for applications is around £17,000 in Scotland but £250,000 in England. That is a huge difference and I wonder how fast and how far the minister will want to go with regard to increasing fees. The minister referred to the increasing number of assessments that are being carried out. Which of those assessments does he now consider to be superfluous? The various transport impact assessments, environmental impact assessments, carbon assessments and other assessments that have been judged appropriate over the past few years might have been required not by local authorities themselves but by Scottish Government policy and our expectations of the planning process. Finally, at the end of his speech, the minister made a striking comment about not going “over old arguments again”. I accept that point but, given its quasi-judicial nature and the need to involve local communities, the planning process raises certain challenges and I hope that, in changing how the system works, the minister does not reduce the impact that local communities can have. As local representatives, we all agree that that is fundamental to the quality of the outcome of the whole process.

I thank the minister for his statement, which I and other Labour members very much welcome. Has the minister considered eligibility for local authorities or companies that local authorities set up? He was right to suggest that there is a paradox in that although some of the technology—including renewable heat and solar technology—is established, we have not yet seen its mass application. South of the border, groups of authorities have had success, but cities in Scotland have not yet made progress. Is the minister keen to explore the idea?

Will the minister give way?

I want to ask about the Scottish Government’s support—its strategy to procure goods from supported employment factories. Where that happens consistently—some local authorities are ahead of the game—there is fantastic support, but that is not universal. In Edinburgh, we have lost Blindcraft and we are going to lose Remploy. There is a real issue in the east of Scotland.

I lodged the motion because I wanted to congratulate everyone—in particular, the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce—for doing such a fantastic job of mobilising people to submit a successful bid for the green investment bank. It was in no way a foregone conclusion that Edinburgh’s bid would be successful. If someone had listened to our debates, they would have assumed that it was a certainty, but there were 32 bids from throughout the United Kingdom and, although we are rightly clear about the huge progress and the policy commitments that we have made on renewables, I suspect that we are not quite so aware of what is happening in the rest of the UK. The Humber, the east of England and Cornwall have ambitions not only to emulate us but to overtake us, so there was no room for complacency. That is the context for the announcement that Edinburgh has been successful in securing the green investment bank and that is why it is such a major success. The decision is hugely helpful for allowing Scotland’s renewables and low-carbon industries to prosper, because we need stability and the massive investment that come from being part of the wider UK. There would not have been such a huge expansion of renewables without the Scottish Parliament but, paradoxically, we will not fully realise the industry’s massive potential without the subsidies, infrastructure and long-term market that come from being part of the UK. It has been announced that, alongside the Edinburgh headquarters for the bank, the main transaction team will be based in London. According to the Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills, that will allow for the strength of the two capitals to be harnessed. I hope that it will make the bank’s operation more effective, but we need to be vigilant about the possibility of the Edinburgh operation being treated as second fiddle to the main player in London. Edinburgh must be the headquarters of the GIB in substance as well as name. It is not just about a nameplate; it is about the function and operations of the bank in Edinburgh. The big drop in Edinburgh’s international ranking as a place to do business in “The Global Financial Centres Index 11”, which was published this week, highlights the fact that we cannot afford to be complacent. The strengths that we debated only a few weeks ago now need to be brought into play. Our academic networks and our legal and financial expertise in putting together deals for our renewables sector must now play their part in building the momentum that is necessary to deliver the green industrial revolution that we need. Having been the birthplace of the industrial revolution, Scotland now needs to play its part in the economic transformation that we need for the 21st century. Our target to reduce carbon emissions by 42 per cent by 2020 is now only eight years away and we need widespread application of low-carbon technologies in all our economic activities if we are to deliver on that ambition. I will make the case in the debate for a strong green investment bank, which is empowered to take forward its goal of driving investment to address the market failures and risks that are associated with developing green industries, because there are concerns that the bank, as it has been set up, has not been given sufficient financial support to let it get on with that job. Business leaders, economists and campaigners have all focused on the missed opportunity created by delaying the introduction of the bank’s borrowing powers until 2015. Transform UK describe it as akin to waiting for a seriously ill patient to recover before administering life-saving medicine. If the bank does not have borrowing powers from the outset, we risk missing the boat as overseas countries pursue these technologies and reap the rewards. If it had borrowing powers from the start, the UK Government would provide investors with the confidence to put money into the bank and allow it to provide a stimulus to emerging green technologies while creating jobs, promoting growth and cutting emissions. The green investment bank is not meant to be an ordinary bank. It is meant to lead the way with investment in low-carbon technologies and it is meant to act where the traditional banks will not. Some have suggested that the bank will be little more than a pot of money and that, although it will help to fund many admirable projects, it will not provide sufficient reassurance to overcome the barriers faced when seeking finance for green developments from the traditional banks. Part of the rationale behind the bank was to provide an environment that would encourage investors to take a risk on emerging technologies. With the right encouragement and the right investment, the creation of the bank would be an ideal opportunity to put great momentum behind the green revolution and to build strong relationships with industries throughout Scotland and the UK and beyond. Even the Confederation of British Industry is clear that the bank “should have powers to borrow from the outset to give investors confidence.” We need that investment and that investment capacity. I hope that the debate will add weight to the argument to ensure that we get a green investment bank that is capable of delivering on its ambition. At a meeting last month of the cross-party group on renewable energy and energy efficiency, we discussed the superb progress that has been made in the wave and tidal sector, but it is hugely expensive work. It is eye-wateringly expensive to get from the laboratory to getting the kit into the water, but that has to happen because kit has to be tested before it reaches the stage of mass production. Huge progress has been made in the short time that wave and tidal power has been looked at. The Edinburgh-based wave energy company Aquamarine Power has said that companies need the investment now, not in two years’ time. I argue for faster and more meaningful progress. Lord Stern, the climate change economist, has argued that the bank should not operate like other financial institutions. He said that it is not about state subsidy or state aid; this is an institution that is needed because of the market failures in finance, particularly those associated with risk and policy risk. Mark Lazarowicz, one of the key advocates of the green investment bank, argued yesterday that the ability to raise bonds would hugely increase its potential impact. After yesterday’s budget, the need for the bank to be a game changer is even more critical. The green investment bank is important, because it will sit alongside our traditional banks such as the Royal Bank of Scotland, HBOS and Barclays. They need to be persuaded to do more on renewables and low-carbon industries, alongside banks such as Triodos and the Co-operative Bank, which have already started to invest in the sector. We need the bank to make that difference. The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds has argued that from the outset there must be clearly established criteria that the bank will invest only in projects that have environmental sustainability at their core. It is hugely exciting that Edinburgh has been given the chance to be the location for the bank, but we must ensure that it has the political and financial support to live up to its potential. It is about not only our future but the world’s future. It is about the future of low island states and less developed countries, which are already on the front line of climate change. I attended a United Nations conference on climate change in Dhaka last week, at which we received plaudits for our work on carbon emission targets and the legislation that we put through in our Parliament. People welcomed the fact that we have taken the lead in Scotland and the rest of the UK, but we will deserve that praise only when we achieve our targets. The green investment bank is a vital part of that.

The massaging of the waiting time figures and the massive pressure on staff in NHS Lothian have been laid bare today. Given the loss of more than 300 nurses in the past year, the 20 per cent increase in demand for elective surgery, the fact that NHS Lothian is still below parity in NHS Scotland resource allocation committee funding and the inescapable fact that more capacity is needed to treat patients, what will the cabinet secretary do to ensure not only that the process of waiting list places is sorted, but that NHS Lothian patients get the treatments that they need and deserve?

I have lodged the motion because the referendums that have been run in Aberdeen have national implications. The referendums have been on what is, at heart, a local planning issue, but it is appropriate that we debate the wider context. The first important question to debate is about when and how referendums should be used to inform public policy choices. This is the third test of public opinion on the matter in Aberdeen. Some 14,000 people responded to the original consultation in 2010 and their views were ignored. Thousands more expressed a view on the six shortlisted designs only a few months ago, and their views were ignored too. This time, a majority of postal voters were against the scheme, and even after online and telephone votes were included, 48 per cent of people said no to the proposal. The claim that the vote reflects public opinion lacks credibility and discredits the whole referendum process.

Absolutely, because the context is that the people of Scotland are due to cast, sometime soon—date to be decided—their biggest-ever vote, so we need to ensure that the rules on referendums are fair, transparent and consistent. The matter goes to the heart of the Parliament. I find it interesting that the Scottish National Party wants to delete from the motion the phrase “opinion remains divided”, because opinion indeed remains divided.

No, I think that we will just get on, thank you very much. The referendum was held without the agreement of all the parties in the council, and there were no effective controls on spending on the campaign. We have profound concerns about how the proposals were communicated and how the referendum was conducted. The decision on the shape of development in Union Terrace gardens should be taken by those who were elected to run the city—its councillors—with the Scottish Government being involved as appropriate, in accordance with our planning system. I will come back to that point. Whoever leads the city council after the elections in May will have to take responsibility for major decisions, including whether the council should borrow £92 million to take forward the scheme, and they will not be able to hide behind the votes that were cast last week if they get it wrong. Press comments from SNP councillors in Aberdeen suggest that they want to close down the debate. Voters are entitled to know what decisions councillors are likely to make if they are successful in May, whichever party those councillors represent. There is, of course, no statutory framework for local referendums—I suspect that that is one thing on which we in this chamber can all agree. In recent years other referendums have been held, notably by Strathclyde Regional Council and the City of Edinburgh Council. In both cases, a proposition was outlined and a clear system of voting was agreed in advance. I believe that there are sufficient concerns about the robustness of the process conducted in Aberdeen to warrant all parties giving some thought to how agreement can be reached on local referendums and to establish clear principles to be followed in all cases. In making that call, I make it absolutely clear that I do not attach blame to the independent counting officer, who has produced clear and useful recommendations regarding the lessons that need to be learned from the process. He stated: “I had to establish the rules myself”, and he called on the Scottish Government to establish a framework. Let us be clear: he did the best that he could, but there was no framework that he could use. Will the minister now take up that issue, and conduct a review of how referendums should operate? There is a wider issue here, which we should all consider. The counting officer said that he “did not have the legal clout” that he would have had in an election, in particular to ensure that money was spent influencing voters only by those who had registered to be part of the referendum campaign. In addition, insufficient provision was made to regulate the campaigns that were run for and against the proposals, and no effective limit was placed on spending to support either side. What registered campaign groups could spend was limited, but it is clear that money was also spent by non-registered persons, and there was absolutely nothing that the counting officer could do about that. That crucial point is why we have brought the issue to the chamber, and it must be addressed in the interests of fairness and transparency.

Actually, it is in our motion. Our concerns are central to the motion, and we are clear that we want the minister to consider taking the matter forward. The referendum was novel in other ways. Online and telephone voting were permitted, and they produced an outcome that was different from that of the postal ballot. The methods were not secure. Anyone who opened an envelope that contained a voter’s ballot number would obtain the unique identifying number, which was all that was needed to record a vote. In a city with hundreds of tenement blocks and thousands of students in student residences, the potential for electoral fraud was clear. The police were called in to investigate on more than one occasion, although apparently no one has been charged so far. Ballot papers were also sent to everyone on the relevant electoral register, regardless of age, so that most 17-year-olds and some 16-year-olds were offered a vote, but some 17-year-olds and most 16-year-olds were not.

All that I need to report is that complaints have been made. Surely that is enough. That is why we need an investigation. I thought that the member wanted to intervene on the point that I was making about 16 and 17-year-olds and the robustness of that process. It is funny that he did not want to intervene on that, particularly given the Electoral Commission’s comments this morning. It was argued that the scheme would not require the council to spend money on it because of the nature of tax increment financing, but that approach is predicated on using £92 million of the council’s prudential borrowing capacity. It is ironic that the council dropped the original proposals, which were to transform Union Terrace gardens with the building of a contemporary arts centre, because Peacock Visual Arts did not have the whole financial package in place when the alternative scheme came along. The money that was required then was around £4 million, which is a drop in the ocean compared with the cost of the current set of proposals.

I am sure that the member will have time to comment on that later in the debate, but my understanding is that the council did not want to progress that scheme, and that is why it is sitting—[Interruption.] The member will no doubt want to talk to us in great detail about that issue later. There is not only the £92 million; there is also the £20 million assumed funding support for Aberdeen art gallery. Then there are the opportunity costs. As my colleague Sandra Macdonald made clear at the weekend, there are also the costs of managing such a major project, with council staff running the procurement process. Time and resources must be spent on the project rather than on other council priorities, including education. That is even before the unanswered question of how the revenue costs of managing the proposed new facilities at Union Terrace gardens are to be met and by whom is addressed. Our other concern is about the nature of the TIF scheme that is being proposed. We are fully supportive of the principles of TIF where schemes are credible and where they meet the relevant criteria. Will the minister confirm that the Scottish Futures Trust did not recommend that the TIF bid be supported? Will he confirm that it was ministers who wanted the project to be taken forward as part of the TIF programme? That is hardly appropriate, as the Scottish Government is potentially the final arbiter in planning decisions. We simply cannot see how the project stacks up financially. Audit Scotland has also expressed concern about the risk that is attached to the project. It appears that driving the Scottish Government’s decision making in the case has been the idea to approve it regardless. The First Minister has already said this week that the TIF proposal will be looked on favourably. How will the Scottish Government be able to be objective if there is any planning challenge to the project? Given that it is the final arbiter for planning decisions where there is a direct council interest, surely the project will end up on the minister’s desk.

I have 10 minutes. The last time that a project in the north-east was given the same treatment, similar questions were asked. As we all know, that project has now stalled, because Donald Trump thinks that he has a veto over the Scottish Government’s energy proposals. The referendum on the Union Terrace gardens proposal will not be the end of the story.

I hope that members will vote for our motion. I move, That the Parliament notes that a local referendum held by Aberdeen City Council to test public opinion on a proposal for development at Union Terrace Gardens confirmed that opinion remains divided; notes the concerns that have been raised regarding the basis on which this poll was held; considers that decisions on local development proposals are for local elected members and, where appropriate, Scottish ministers to make, in line with the statutory requirements of the land use planning system, and recognises that the decision on whether to proceed with the proposal in question is properly one for the elected members of Aberdeen City Council to make, following the local government elections in May.

Our point is not about the people’s vote but about the voting process itself. The people’s views are entirely up to them; the issue is the system’s robustness. There are no questions about the process in last year’s elections. We regret what happened but it was the people’s choice. We accept that and have moved on.

Have you read the statement that Crawford Langley gave subsequent to the referendum? What are your comments on the concerns that he has raised having gone through the experience? This is not a criticism of Crawford Langley; I was absolutely clear about that in my opening speech. Let us pick up on the lessons learnt that he has laid out for us to consider.

I will pick up on that last point. The Labour Party has not made a commitment either way on planning permission. We are nowhere near the planning stage of the project, but a decision has been taken on the TIF and a proposal was put to people without full knowledge of the planning case. As someone who has been interested in and passionate about planning for decades, I must say that there is a due process to be gone through once we get to deciding on an application and I am concerned that people’s hands have been tied by the process to date. We have seen that happen before and it is of great regret.

No. I took a large number of interventions earlier. I was fairer than I should have been. We make several points in our motion: we note the referendum that was held; we note that opinion remains divided; and we note that there are concerns about the poll. Most of our time this morning has been spent debating those concerns and our request for the minister to examine the poll. I am glad that SNP back benchers and the minister have stated that it would be good if common rules and guidelines could be used for future referenda. That is one of the things that we are absolutely determined must come out of the experience in Aberdeen. There need to be clear rules so that no counting officer is put in the position of having to report a series of major concerns about the process of a referendum after the poll. The counting officer in Aberdeen worked hard and did his best. His integrity is not being criticised, but the process, the lack of clarity and the lack of clear, accepted ground rules are. Those must concern us all. That covers the first two points of our motion and cuts to the heart of the matter. Why can we not talk about the 48 per cent of voters who did not give their consent to the project? I accept the discussion that we have had today. Independent people counted the vote, but that does not mean that we have no concerns about the process, which must be examined. Division remains in the city. If members think that the referendum was controversial, they should wait until we get to the planning process. Members should think of the challenges of putting together such a project. We cannot silence people simply because they have not given their consent. There is a requirement on both sides of the debate to move forward with a proper and honest discussion about what will happen next. I agree that the 48 per cent who did not support the project were not all Labour supporters. We know that. The debate is not simply about us speaking for Labour voters.

No, I will not. We are making legitimate points in our national Parliament about the concerns that remain. There is nothing wrong with doing that and I do not see why we should be gagged and prevented from doing it. We are making the point that there were concerns about the process. Those concerns need to be brought to the chamber so that they can be learned from for the future. When we add together the complexities of the finance that underpins TIF and the future complexities of the planning process, we see that the overall process is intensely complicated. I put it to members that we have seen major complexities in previous planning applications and Government ministers should be careful about what they say. At the end of the day, it is inevitable that an issue that involves a council decision and a council’s financial interest will revert to the Scottish ministers, who will have to take an unbiased decision. However, ministers are pushing the process, through TIF. My colleague Lewis Macdonald has written several letters to Alex Neil and asked several questions in the Parliament, and it is absolutely clear that the Scottish Government has been determined that there should be an Aberdeen TIF project and that it should be the Union Terrace gardens TIF project. That is regrettable. We do not oppose economic development in Aberdeen, although our support for economic development in the past has not been mentioned in the debate—I am not surprised at that, because members of other parties do not want to give the Labour Party a fair hearing on the issue. We have consistently supported economic improvements to Aberdeen city.

I will not, because Kevin Stewart cannot speak for the Labour Party on the matter; he has an opposing interest. We are committed to the future of Aberdeen. That is why the issue is so important and why we are so passionate about it. Huge amounts of money are at stake. Prudential borrowing of £92 million will tie up a huge amount of the council’s money for the next few years, when the council could be spending the money on other things. Jenny Marra made a powerful speech about the need for investment in education in the city.

I absolutely will not. I could not have taken more interventions during my opening speech, when I gave way to the extent that I lost nearly three minutes of speaking time. I want to make comments that I was not able to make then. The motion raises issues to do with the conduct of the ballot and the ground rules for the referendum. Referenda need to be agreed in advance by all parties, so that they can be fair and be seen to be fair, and so that people can agree with the outcome and move on. The motion raises issues to do with the planning process for the project. I agreed with some of what Alison McInnes said in that regard. If, in future, someone says to the people, “You know, we won’t be able to go with the proposals as we put them to you—really sorry about that. There will be financial and planning implications, but we got your say-so, so we are just going to move on,” what will happen? What will happen if there are significant changes to the scheme? What will happen if there are cost overruns? The main railway line is part of the site. I cannot think of a railway project that has gone through without major financial challenges arising in relation to the initial proposals. For examples of that, we need only look down the road to the Waverley station and Haymarket station projects, which are nowhere near the initial expectations. The details of projects matter, and the details of the Union Terrace gardens proposals have not been worked through. How will the Scottish Government make an objective decision? It rightly wants every part of Scotland to be able to benefit from TIF proposals. Why is the Government tying itself to such a complex and controversial major project, when if it sat down with and talked to the other parties it would find that there is a different attitude to some elements of the TIF proposal? There is a real issue to do with objective decision making when the Government is so tied to a particular project, which is regrettable. I will not apologise for Labour standing up to speak for not just our voters in Aberdeen but all voters who had a strong view on the proposal and who remain unhappy and deeply concerned about Aberdeen City Council’s financial future. There is debate about the nature of the referendum in Aberdeen, and there is debate about the forthcoming referendum on the constitution. The recent experience in Aberdeen demonstrates the importance of fairness in all referenda. Surely we can all agree on that. Our motion simply records the concerns about the basis on which the poll was held. Those concerns need to be listened to; they must not be dismissed by the minister. The Union Terrace gardens project will not be any less controversial as a result of last week’s vote. The irony is that all the difficult stuff is still to come; the process will not be straightforward. It is absolutely right that we make that point. It is for local councillors to scrutinise the details on the financial and planning aspects of the proposal—accountability will be vital—and it is for the people in Aberdeen to take the matter forward. It is important that the Scottish Government produces a clear framework to guide local authorities, to ensure fairness in future decisions. When it comes to voting in elections and in the national referendum, we need to ensure that we have all the details and that issues of fairness have been pinned down in advance. Clear lessons must be learned from the Aberdeen experience, because the referendum was not a straightforward process and the project will not be a straightforward process. We reserve our right, at national and at local level, to ask the awkward questions that our voters put us here to ask. That is the job of a responsible Opposition, and we will continue to do that job.

I, too, welcome the debate. I read the committee’s report with interest and would like to congratulate the committee, the clerks and all those who gave evidence to it for ensuring that we have a really good report before us that we can pick up and take forward. These are tough economic times, but that cannot be a justification for people being expected to work for a wage that does not enable them to support their families and has to be subsidised by the state to ensure that their children are not brought up in poverty. How can tough economic times be an excuse for our failure to act? Politics is about priorities and about doing what is right, and surely this is a proposal whose time has come. In our manifesto last year, Scottish Labour supported the adoption of a living wage by public sector employers, and I give credit to our then leader, Iain Gray, for taking a lead on the issue and making it a key plank of our manifesto. I also pay tribute to the campaigning work that has been carried out by my colleague John Park, who has consulted on the introduction of a living wage bill. I also congratulate those councils that have already implemented the living wage and those that have given notice that they intend to do so. I start from the premise that the Scottish Government is crucial in this debate. We believe that the Scottish Government has a crucial role to play in taking the lead, setting an example and making it easy for people to address the issue. In the public sector, there is clearly an appetite and an opportunity for change. A lead from the Scottish Government could make a real difference.

The Labour Government increased the national minimum wage repeatedly to ensure that it kept up. The fact that we are discussing the living wage now is testament to the campaigning that trade unions have done with us to ensure that the matter is firmly on our agenda. We have a chance to act. As others have pointed out, the issue affects not only the staff in the public sector, whether they are employed by central Government or local government, but employees of companies that seek to carry out contracts for the public sector. I listened carefully to the minister’s comments, and I welcome the fact that the Scottish Government is investigating the issue with the European Commission. However, the Scottish Government must take a lead. In evidence to the committee, the Greater London Authority made clear that, in its view, the EU’s procurement legislation was not automatically an obstacle to action. Work must be done across the whole country, and the Scottish Government is best placed to do that. Action on procurement would also address the concern that some have expressed that it should not just be public sector staff who benefit from the living wage. I agree, but I believe that the transformative power of the Scottish Government should be brought to bear in that regard. A living wage unit is important. I welcome the minister’s comments if he is saying that the living wage should be included in the proposed sustainable procurement bill; it would be good to have that confirmed on the record. In that context, it is important that we consider the voluntary sector. There is huge pressure on the viability of many voluntary sector organisations, particularly those that are bidding for contracts for local authority work. However, it would not be right for local authorities to raise their own staff out of poverty pay while expecting those who carry out work for them to pay their staff less than the authorities would pay their own. That is particularly important for young women and children, who are often paid much less than the living wage. The Save the Children briefing highlights the fact that 43 per cent of those earning less than £7 an hour are women in part-time employment, and two thirds of all low-paid workers are women. Where the living wage has been implemented, there has been a huge benefit for women. The Scottish Borders Council is not unusual in that 85 per cent of employees who benefited from the introduction of the living wage were women. One of the most powerful arguments for the living wage is the need to tackle poverty pay and to lift people out of poverty. Given all the comments that have been made so far about the relationship with benefits, it is worth looking at the work by the living wage campaign and the Save the Children campaign, which shows that people with children are still better off and that we should not get sidetracked by the issue of benefits. We need to pursue it, but it should not stop us campaigning for the living wage. The benefits that Joe FitzPatrick mentioned are wider than simply tackling poverty. There are benefits for employers in terms of recruitment, retention, absenteeism and staff morale, all of which were mentioned by the GLA. There is an opportunity for smart employers to negotiate with their staff to bring benefits to both sides. South Lanarkshire Council makes the point that employees who earn at the living wage level spend money locally, which goes back into local businesses. That is surely a win-win situation for everyone. I commend the council not only on addressing the living wage but on boosting the wages of staff on modest salaries of £21,000 by £250. Around 76 per cent of those staff are women, which shows us that there is a real gender issue. It is not only about the public sector; we should also encourage the private sector to introduce a living wage. There are companies that have taken the lead and benefited from the living wage. We need to ensure that we get a positive response from the Scottish Government today. I would like to hear more clarity on the support that the Government will give to implementing the living wage. We need clear leadership, a dedicated living wage unit in the Scottish Government and action on procurement to ensure that the living wage is rolled out across the labour market.

That is why we would support the implementation of the living wage. I hope that the Scottish Government will listen to us today, as we need that political will, a commitment to lead and a commitment to act. I hope that today’s debate will help to secure the determination to ensure that Scottish employees get a living wage.

Surely, one of the lessons from London is that when the living wage is implemented, it begins to influence the labour market and to drive up opportunities for staff in other companies. Private companies must be competitive, so it would have a ripple effect. The key thing is to get the critical mass that we are all campaigning for.

Will the minister clarify whether the companies that work for the Scottish Executive—for example, the cleaning contractors—provide a living wage for their staff?

I very much welcome the debate and hope that it is timely. We are getting close to an announcement on the location of the green investment bank, and I hope the fact that we are able to rehearse for a third time the arguments in favour of the green investment bank coming to Edinburgh is helpful to the wider discussions. I was very enthusiastic when the proposal for the green investment bank was suggested by Alistair Darling in the 2010 budget. It had been discussed for quite a while before that and lots of lobbying had been going on, particularly by the environmental movement, on the need for dedicated green investment in the riskier end of the renewables field. We know that not all that investment will come from traditional banking, so we need something that is prepared to go in there before the market is ready to invest. That is how the green investment bank could be transformative. We should, therefore, lobby not only for its location to be in Edinburgh, but for it to be up and running soon, with the maximum amount of financial resource to enable it to have the maximum impact. That is critical. It is significant that colleagues across the parties are all in agreement. Even on an issue such as this, agreement cannot be taken for granted. Over the past few months, a huge amount of work has gone into putting together a robust and, I hope, persuasive case for the green investment bank to come to Edinburgh. Colleagues have talked about the expertise that we have in Edinburgh, including expertise in fund management and legal experience. A lot of projects have been managed through the Edinburgh area, but this is also about our capacity to expand and our linkages outwith Edinburgh, across the rest of Scotland and the UK. We are well placed in that respect. Gavin Brown made an excellent point about the higher education institutions in and around Edinburgh, but this is not just about them. In Edinburgh, Glasgow, up towards Aberdeen and even as far as Orkney, we have a huge amount of readily accessible academic expertise. The challenge is to turn that academic expertise into business development. We have the ideas and there is connectivity. One thing in particular that we bring to the debate is the integrated approach that we have in Scotland to these topics. Our geography helps. That is part of the reason why we moved faster to establish a new industry in Scotland, but it was also partly political. The first target that we set—that 18 per cent of our electricity should come from renewables by 2010—was ground breaking at the time, and we have moved on hugely over the past 12 years. The challenge, however, is to go a lot further. Colleagues have talked about renewables in other parts of the UK, and there is huge ambition down the north-east coast and in Cornwall to match what we are doing, and to exceed it. Some of the offshore developments in England are beginning to happen very quickly, so we should not be complacent. We know that bringing the green investment bank to Scotland would be a sensible decision, but we must make a hard case for it. For me, this is about getting to the next stage in all these industries. We have made a huge amount of progress over the past decade, but we are getting to the difficult stuff. We need to look at the potential for local combined heat and power schemes and community schemes, which we are terrible at setting up in Britain. There are only one or two examples, of which the one in Aberdeen, where we have a network, is probably the best in Scotland. That required local political buy-in, drive by the council and buy-in from local firms. We do not have that in our other cities in Scotland, although other European countries would take that approach much more as standard. RSPB Scotland has commented that we should argue for a range of investment, and it is critical that we solve the problem of unlocking finance at the community or city scale. That would be something the bank could do. The UK is certainly well behind other parts of the world in that regard. The other big challenge is that investment in new green technologies in Europe is not huge, so having the bank would enable us to get ahead of the game. Again, we should not be complacent. In other parts of the world, including China and Taiwan, there is a lot of green investment, so the bank is critical for the UK. It gives us a one-off opportunity to lift us up from where we are. We have a good track record in Scotland, with lots of linkages that would help the bank to be transformative. A lot of money is involved, and it must be used as well as it possibly can be. We all know that this is a hard time from the point of view of money being spent by the public sector, and that makes the bank all the more important. If I were sitting in the UK Government, I would want the bank not just to have a big impact in the short term, but to lever in a huge amount of private sector capital. That is the opportunity that the bank presents, and I think that Edinburgh, with our links across Scotland and the rest of the UK, is the front-runner. That does not, however, guarantee that we will get the bank, which is why the timing of the debate is useful. We need to rehearse the fact that Tesco Bank, Virgin Money, the Co-operative Bank and Triodos Bank are coming to Edinburgh. Even though there has been massive restructuring in the sector and it has been incredibly difficult for the thousands of people whose jobs have been lost and who have been forced to find different employment, there is still talent, capacity and drive. There is a big opportunity to seize here. We need to argue that in Edinburgh the proximity to our mainstream banking sector would have a transformative impact, because UK banks are based here that still have significant capacity to make decisions, which would have an impact not just at the Edinburgh end of the banks but in London. The banks talk to one another all the time. It is not just about physical location but about connectivity, and people being able to pick up the phone and make the connections that are so important for business. There are opportunities here, and the timing is good for us. The challenge is to ensure that we do the best lobbying that we can. I am not complacent. Rob Gibson’s comments about long-term political stability and renewables are important. There is a case to be made for renewables—the issue cannot be taken for granted. The UK has lots of experience with good ideas, but, for example, the Salter’s duck was never taken forward as the Dutch and the Danes got ahead of us in wind power. Since this Parliament was set up, we have been determined not to let that happen again. The challenge is to get into the new forms of not just renewables but other green energy technologies, including battery technology. We have lots of good ideas about a whole host of things on which we are still ahead, but we need the lift-off that will come from the transformative capacity of the green investment bank, and that is why I am glad we are having this debate. This is not just a question of our agreeing with one another. There are bits of political fencing, which it is absolutely right for us to have in the chamber, but I hope that today will help anyone who has any capacity to persuade those who will make the decision that Edinburgh is the right choice.

One issue that we need to concentrate on is the benefit to the whole of the UK of the green investment bank being in Edinburgh and in Scotland. It will provide massive opportunities here, but there is also a case to be made for why it is good for the whole of the rest of the UK that we get the project here. We could make it work for the rest of the UK, and it might be worth making a couple of comments on the record about that, should anyone look at our debate to see what we have said.

This year’s local government budgets are shaping up to be bad news for thousands of families throughout Scotland. In its budget, the SNP has allocated council cuts that are twice the level of the cuts that the Scottish Government has received from the United Kingdom Tory Government. That will mean a squeeze on local services, job losses and increased charges for services, which will impact particularly hard on people on low or modest incomes. As councils throughout Scotland set their budgets and as local people look at the small print and hold them to account for their priorities, we should let them know that the squeeze on local government services was made in Scotland by the SNP. The SNP Government took a cut from the UK Tory Government, doubled it and then passed it on to councils.

No, thank you. Let me get started. That is on top of last year’s difficult settlement for councils, to which the cabinet secretary has referred. Last year, 13,500 jobs were lost from local government, and Unison tells me that another 13,500 will be lost this year. This is not just a technical debate, although I thank the staff of the Scottish Parliament information centre for their assistance in processing the raft of statistics that we have received from the cabinet secretary, particularly as they have been unveiled over the past few days. This year’s SNP budget will affect councils’ capacity to use the spending power of local government to create local jobs and training opportunities—something else to which the cabinet secretary has referred. The additional money that was announced yesterday is obviously welcome, but when one looks at the detail, one sees that it is much more a triumph of expectation management than a boost to local services. The SNP makes great play of its council tax freeze, but there is a con at the heart of that approach because the council tax freeze is not being fully funded by the Scottish Government and it will add massive pressures on top of last year’s cuts by the SNP. Our view is that the budget settlement is a bad deal. The SNP promised to protect people from Tory cuts.

We are discussing the order, and I am afraid that we can only discuss what is on the table. We are criticising the settlement, because that is the issue that we are debating. Ken Macintosh addressed the member’s point in the debate yesterday. The deal is a bad one for local government and local communities—there is no getting away from that. We are now three months away from the local government elections, during which people will be able to raise the issues in detail.

I would be delighted to take an intervention.

To give just one example, the SNP and Labour groups on the council in my area have asked for flexibility and the opportunity to consider a bed tax to take the pressure off. I understand that the council will have a current debt of more than £1.5 billion, even with the additional money as a result of the 85 per cent floor. There are ideas in local communities, and the cabinet secretary would do well to listen to them. Pleas are being made locally, but they are not being listened to. The approach is one of expectation management: make massive cuts, see which are the most popular and then put a little back into the pot. However, the local government settlement is bad news for people, whether they are the parents of children who are unhappy with class sizes and the loss of 3,000 teachers under the SNP’s watch; carers who are seeing the quality of their services undermined daily or rationed; or people who desperately want a decent home and who have been let down by the SNP’s failure to live up to its election promise on social rented housing. The cuts to the bus service operators grant will also hit local communities. Local councils are struggling to decide whether to lose local bus services or to use some of their hard-pressed budgets to fill the gaps, as the City of Edinburgh Council is considering doing. People in every part of Scotland will be let down by the settlement. The provision of services locally, collectively provided, is why we have local government. The capacity to improve communities and make them good places to live is what drives people to stand for election as councillors. In the four years of the previous SNP Government and in the six months or so of the majority SNP Government, the capacity of local councils to set their priorities has been diminished. There is no way to get away from that. Local councils are tied into a financial straitjacket, with all the blame being passed down to them for every local cut that they make. Labour councillors across the country, whether they are in power or in opposition, have argued for protecting vital local services on which people depend and using the power of local government to help to bring the country out of recession through the power of local spending to help economic development. The debate is needed as a reality check—it is our chance to hold the SNP Government to account for its approach to local government and for letting down people throughout Scotland by doubling the cut from the Tory Government. There is a human cost to this year’s local government financial settlement. Backroom civilian police staff will be sacked to meet the SNP’s promise on front-line police numbers. That will result in front-line police being dragged back to the bureaucratic details that the backroom staff were there to let them away from. On education, class sizes are nowhere near the 18 that the SNP offered in 2007 and they are still not at the 25 that the SNP promised. Supply teachers are being put off because of cuts to their terms and conditions and new teachers are still finding it hard to get their first job. The school building programme, even with the changes that were announced yesterday, is being slowed and delayed across Scotland. For parents, childcare is becoming increasingly expensive, and working parents are under particular pressure because of the lack of affordable nursery provision. Our priorities must be to support people through the recession, to make the best use of local services and procurement and to stimulate local economic development. That is why, in Falkirk, Glasgow and now North Lanarkshire, the focus is on training. Furthermore, we have to give a chance to people who are furthest from the labour market, which is why we argue for the use of article 19 of the European Union public procurement directive to let local government help factories that offer supported employment. That would give people a chance to find work. Last year, the SNP-Lib Dem council in Edinburgh allowed Blindcraft to go to the wall. That should be contrasted with the fantastic work done by Glasgow City Council to support disabled people. The cabinet secretary’s speech referred briefly to preventative spending. However, pernicious cuts in social care are taking place at local level across Scotland. Following today’s finance order, and following the budget settlement that the SNP has chosen to offer local authorities, the cuts will be all the more challenging. A key way in which local government can help is by taking the pressure off carers and by ensuring that social care is available. However, across councils, social care is being rationed. There is also a huge squeeze on the voluntary sector. The voluntary sector brings experience to the table—experience of people who are discriminated against and are vulnerable. It also brings volunteering hours that local government gets for free through trading arrangements. The budget settlement will make it infinitely harder for local government to work with the voluntary sector. It is a bad deal. The cabinet secretary mentioned social rented housing, money for which is incredibly cost effective, not just in helping to tackle our housing shortage but in kick-starting the construction industry. The SNP Government promised 6,000 new affordable rented homes a year, but, after yesterday’s budget, there was a 30 per cent cut in affordable housing. That is not helping communities such as those in Midlothian with a focus on new council house building. We deeply regret the SNP Government’s choice to pass on twice the level of cuts, in real terms, that it received from the Tory Government. I hope that the rest of the chamber will agree with us that today’s local government finance order could have been better and should have been better. It will hold back local investment; it will limit the capacity of local government to do everything it can to help people and businesses to come out of recession; and it will result in cuts at local level, with the underfunded council tax freeze adding to the pressures on services. The order will affect local government’s capacity to address what motivates people to stand as councillors in the first place. I encourage colleagues to support the amendment in my name. I move amendment S4M-01979.1, to insert at end: “but, in so doing, regrets that the Scottish Government’s real-terms budget cut to local authorities is more than twice the cut to the overall Scottish budget.”

Will the member give way?

Apart from the fact that that is a complete misrepresentation, does the member agree with the SNP applying 89 per cent of the cuts to local government?

It has been an interesting debate. Across the chamber, we all agree that it is crucial that we use the power of local government spending to help local communities and businesses to weather the storm. However, one of the key ways in which we could do that would be to get a better settlement for local government. The order that we are debating does not do a good job. Even with yesterday’s last-minute changes to the budget, which the cabinet secretary has mentioned—

Come on—let me get started. I am not even 30 seconds into my speech.

No, I will not. I took a number of interventions in my opening speech. Let me respond to the debate, thank you. Even with yesterday’s last-minute changes to the budget, the SNP Government is making huge cuts to housing, our colleges and the services that people rely on locally. The new money for local government is putting back some of the money that was previously cut, returning some of the capital spend money that had been delayed and reinstating some of the housing money that had been cut, but it is still nowhere near enough to deliver the 6,000 social rented houses that the SNP promised last year. I would be interested to hear from the Minister for Local Government and Planning, in his winding up speech, whether the SNP Government still stands by the promise of 6,000 social rented houses that it made in its election manifesto just a year ago, given its 30 per cent cut in the housing budget. Also, adding in money for broadband on the local government line does not save services that have already been cut in order to enable the cabinet secretary to spend the money elsewhere. The Minister for Local Government and Planning will have to put on a brave face in handling the budget, his first order and the prelude to his own local government election campaign. He has been dealt a bad hand by John Swinney and the problem is that this is not a game of cards; it is a real debate about the future of our communities and their ability to provide local services—the whole reason for having local government. John Mason talked about crumbling schools in Glasgow, which shows that there is a problem with capital spending. I could show John Mason a school only five minutes away from the Parliament that is equally crumbling and that has a leaky roof—that is a problem across Scotland. When local communities ask why they are losing services, we will point to the priorities that the SNP Government has adopted. In last year’s election, the SNP promised to protect people from the excesses of the Tory Government, but today the SNP is passing on cuts to local authorities that are twice the level that it received in real terms. We know that the way in which councils spend their money can make a huge difference to the local economy. In Edinburgh, we campaigned against the wholesale privatisation in our local council that the SNP-Liberal Democrat administration proposed to save money. That process cost £4 million before it was scrapped. As I said in response to an intervention from the cabinet secretary, even with the application of the 85 per cent floor, the City of Edinburgh Council has a current debt level of more than £1.5 billion. Councils across the country, regardless of whether they are Labour controlled, SNP controlled or run by a coalition, will be taking tough decisions because of the local government finance order that will be passed today. It piles on severe pressure.

It is simply not possible for us to delve into the SNP budget on the basis of our finance spokesperson having had a half-hour meeting with John Swinney. We are not in control of the budget—the SNP has majority control of the Parliament, so it is the SNP’s budget. We cannot even propose amendments to it. John Swinney knows the answer to his question as well as I do.

No, not again. The SNP is in control of the budget—it is the SNP’s budget. We have heard that 89 per cent of the cuts in the budget are to local government. We talk about preventative spend, but the health service’s money will be used to shore up gaps in local government spending on some of the most vital social care services, which I mentioned in my opening remarks.

It is not scaremongering. In Edinburgh, we had to force our local council to remove proposed cuts in its budget that would have affected the most vulnerable people in our community. Those are the people who deserve and need local government services. If those services are cut, the issues will have to be picked up through spending on the health budget line, which will make preventative spending all the tougher. Last week, the Local Government and Regeneration Committee produced a report on the living wage, which is another interesting challenge for local government. John Mason said that we have to wait for independence before we can really discuss that, but that committee report is on the table now. Will consideration be given to enabling local authorities to make progress on the living wage for their staff and through procurement processes, or will authorities be left to find the cash without Scottish Government support, as has happened on so many issues? One of our jobs as MSPs is to ensure that we get fair deals for our constituents, and not just for those who are well organised or vocal, but for those whose daily lives are a struggle and who depend on local services to support their relatives, such as adults with learning disabilities, children with special needs or older members of the family. The test of the local government finance order will be its impact on budget settlements across the country. We regret the fact that, far from protecting the most vulnerable people in our communities, the Government’s budget settlement will make their life harder and will result in tougher choices for every local council. Our amendment merely draws attention to the fact that the SNP Government has more than doubled the budget cut from the Tory Con-Dem Government. It will be up to SNP candidates across the country to explain that to hard-pressed constituents. We lodged our amendment so that, although the order will be passed, that point can at least be made clear to people. The most vulnerable people in our communities will not look at the finance secretary’s detailed calculations. In Fife, they will look at the 6.6 per cent rise in council tenants’ rent this year. Preventative spending will be harder because of the budget. I hope that colleagues from all parties will support the amendment in my name. In the budget that the minister proposed yesterday, 89 per cent of the cuts were passed on to local government. How is that fair?

I did not say that.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will meet the 2011 interim environmental performance targets set out in its environmental policy. (S4O-00681)

I welcome the progress that has been made, but I ask the minister specifically about energy consumption. The most recent environmental performance report published by the Government, in November last year, said that the Scottish Government is less than a third of the way to its 12.6 per cent target for March 2012, even taking into account the fact that some buildings were empty for part of the period. What is the minister doing to ensure that the Scottish Government catches up and meets its target by next month?

I, too, congratulate Helen Eadie on securing the debate and on the excellent start that she gave to our discussions. Like her, I declare an interest as a member of the Co-operative Party. I put on record the fantastic work that co-ops do in Scotland and throughout the United Kingdom. In an economic recession, co-operative businesses are a particularly important way in which to secure local economic development and to secure profits for people to share out locally, whether that is in the local community or among the workers who run the company. They share the wealth that is created and sustain wealth locally. Helen Eadie was right to point out that co-operatives perform well and are a positive way in which to retain investment. Maureen Watt was right to point to the work of the Co-operative Bank in promoting ethical banking, supporting local co-operatives and supporting renewables throughout the UK. That is worth celebrating. Sarah Deas of Co-operative Development Scotland has rightly said that “Co-operative business models used to be considered niche” but they are “now entering the mainstream and being taken seriously at a national level.” As Helen Eadie pointed out, that also applies at the international level, which is fantastic. In Lothian, Scotmid has been trading for many years. It has done fantastic work in supporting Fairtrade in Scotland, and was one of the first key retailers to take Fairtrade from its niche and put it into the main stream. Like other colleagues in the chamber, I have visited a sugar co-op in Malawi. The benefits of that co-operative were being spread into some of the most disadvantaged communities. It was especially important for women workers and their children; they got real benefits from profits that could be reinvested both in the business and in the local community. Closer to home is the Edinburgh Bicycle Cooperative, which has been fantastic. It has made cycling in Edinburgh trendy. It provides fantastic bikes at a decent price, and it provides fantastic clothing. As a result, other bike companies have set up across the city. A new market has been created. The work of members of co-operatives can lead to expansion. Edinburgh Community Food also has an ethical flavour. It aims to tackle inequalities in low-income communities by supplying food co-ops across the city. It aims to relieve poverty and to promote health equality by providing affordable healthy food to communities that could not otherwise afford it. It does a fantastic job. Two other types of co-operatives are established locally. One is the Edinburgh Community Energy Co-operative. It was set up at the end of 2007, and it has taken a long time to arrive at something tangible. The co-operative has done a lot of work in studying opportunities in Edinburgh for co-operative renewables, and a project is now up and running in Leith thanks to the climate challenge fund. Progress is being made. The co-operative has been instrumental in drawing individuals and communities together across Edinburgh, allowing us to focus on what practical measures we can take to tackle climate change in a way that creates green jobs. Colleagues in the City of Edinburgh Council are proposing that we take the idea and run with it. If the co-operative model is a success, thousands of people will benefit. Another real contribution has been made by housing co-operatives. West Granton Housing Co-operative and Lister Housing Co-operative have provided a fantastic model of decent housing. I had always assumed that the co-operatives were quite old, but when I looked them up in preparation for today’s debate, I found that Lister Housing Co-operative was set up in 1976, and West Granton Housing Co-operative in 1990. However, they have both enabled tenants to play a full part in the management of their properties. They have made an important contribution towards the sustainable management of housing in Scotland. It is an example that I would like to see a lot more of.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive, in light of the disparity in rates of employment for disabled and non-disabled workers, what action it is taking in support of supported employment. (S4O-00640)

Fewer than half of disabled people gain employment compared with 80 per cent of able-bodied workers. Given that supported factories have demonstrated that they can deliver value for money, and in the light of the closure of Blindcraft and the threat hanging over Remploy workplaces, will the cabinet secretary detail the progress that is being made on the objective set out in “The Scottish Sustainable Procurement Action Plan” that every public body should have at least one contract using article 19 provisions in public procurement? How many staff are employed by such contracts?

I, too, congratulate Colin Keir on securing the debate. On the welcome that we should give the facility, there can be no better explanation of its importance than his comment that 1,000 people were there when it opened. People in the local community have wanted the facility for a long time so I, too, congratulate that community on running such a long and successful campaign. In the end, we have a fantastic set of facilities in the same building, which is definitely to be welcomed. I know that the community campaigned for many years and that it had concerns about some of the details. It is important that it was involved in the design of the facility so that it meets people’s needs. That is an important principle in local planning. The west of the city has grown substantially over the past 20 to 40 years. I was brought up in the west of the city, but went away for a few years. When I came back, a large chunk of city had appeared in my absence and the whole area needed new facilities. The library facilities and the sports facilities that have been provided recently in particular were needed in an area in which there was huge development through the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. I very much welcome the project—particularly for the range of facilities that are being provided together. I echo David McLetchie’s comments; we should welcome the joined-up nature of the project. We want that in other parts of the country. It is very much worth celebrating. The inclusion of adult learning, community information, access projects, the health information point and the day-care centre is significant in terms of providing joined-up facilities for the local community. The day-care centre is particularly important, given the changing demographics—which would probably come up in a debate about health—and the growing number of people who are living well into their 70s, 80s and 90s. I welcome the opportunity of a day-care centre that can be shaped locally and which can meet people’s social needs by giving them a chance to get together and socialise at a time of life when many will be living on their own, living much longer than would have been the case in the past, and not living near their families. The location of the day-care facility beside the library is great, because people who go to the day-care facility as local residents or as people who are brought by their families will also want to use the library on the same trip. The fact that there is a cafe in the library is particularly good. In some ways, it is surprising that we do not have cafes in libraries, but I suppose that it goes back to the whole ethos at the time when they were set up and were intended for books, for studying and for thinking. The ability to socialise once one has visited the library, but not necessarily in among the books, is an interesting development that is worth supporting. In a time of recession, libraries come into their own. The ability to read and learn for free is something hugely important that we should fight for. The range of 23,000 new books is fantastic, but that local stock is not all that will be accessible to people in Drumbrae library, because they will be able to call up books from within the whole Edinburgh library network. They will also be able to access expensive books about art, science and technology that cost £40, £50 or £60. On multimedia, David McLetchie hinted at DVDs, CDs and the capacity to use the internet. The ability to use all those things for free is important at a time when people do not have a lot of money. Also, I do not underestimate the importance of free access to newspapers and magazines. I can see that the magazines and newspapers are also used in my local library in Stockbridge. With magazines costing £4 or £5, it all adds up to a lot of money for people on restricted incomes. Access to IT facilities enables people to use the internet to draft a curriculum vitae and to see what jobs are available. If people can go online, they can easily access websites such as Goodmoves, which is opening up a world of opportunities to the people who live in Drumbrae. The fact that the library is on bus routes is vital. Anyone who knows Drumbrae will know that a bus service is absolutely fundamental for someone who wants to get there and is not particularly mobile or lives slightly further away. I praise the wisdom of finding a site that is on a decent bus route. I am glad that local kids were consulted. Getting kids into libraries is absolutely crucial in getting them to enjoy books and to see libraries as places they can go for information, for pleasure, or for doing school projects. For me, as for Colin Keir some time ago, access to a library—in my case, in Blackhall—was hugely important. I loved being able to go every week, when there was always a new set of books that I could borrow. Kids love the fact that the choice is unlimited because there are more books than they can ever read and they get to pick which ones they want. Libraries are hugely important for children in getting them into the culture of thinking, reading books and—now—using the internet. This is a great project that is integrated with local services such as housing and environmental services and the police. A good, strong local community needs strong local services, and the fact that they are accessible to people is something to be celebrated.

I have prepared to speak for eight minutes, but my speech will take 10 minutes easily. I thank the minister for his warm welcome. I was absolutely delighted when I first saw the debate’s title, because I thought that it would be a great chance to highlight the importance of local government elections and encourage people to vote in them. I also thought that it would be a great opportunity to highlight the fact that the Scottish National Party has taken a 2.9 per cent cut in its budget from the United Kingdom Government, but has passed on a 6.1 per cent cut to local government. However, when I read the motion, I realised that we would be not just debating local government, but taking part in the endless conversation that is the SNP’s mission for independence. The local government elections will be held in their own right. It is a long time since local government elections were held separately. Turnout for local elections is always lower, and recent election turnouts have been incredibly low. Therefore, I very much welcome the minister’s comments on promoting more engagement and involvement. I will return to that issue. Our amendment focuses on participation and voter registration in the local government elections. We wanted to put those issues explicitly on the agenda, as we think that they are crucial issues that we should note. Nothing like the full number of people who are eligible to vote do so in any elections, and I think that we all know that, having decoupled the elections for good reason, as the minister outlined, ensuring that people turn out on the day and that the elections are supported by local people are serious issues. We supported the implementation of the Gould report’s recommendations when it was published after the 2007 elections. Like the minister, I think that what Gould said about how the voter was treated was striking. He said: “the voter was treated as an afterthought by virtually all the other stakeholders.” That is a damning comment. In all our discussions about the elections, we must put the electorate first. Gould argued that parties should be involved in discussions about elections, but that we should not own the process or put party advantage above the interests of fair elections. Those are good principles that should apply to whatever election or referendum is being discussed. That is why we argued in the chamber last week for there to be discussions on the referendum not just between the First Minister and the Prime Minister; the wider civic movement in Scotland and the parties that are represented in the Parliament should also be represented and consulted. Therefore, I very much welcome the minister’s comments. He has listened to the comments from a range of parties on the amount of money that parties are allowed to spend on the election. The only thing that concerned me about the timing of the count was that the consultation on that took place over the Christmas holidays, which will not have maximised people’s contributions to the discussion. I know that that is a technical issue, but in the spirit of Gould we should have proper and wide-ranging discussions and consultations. I agree with the minister that the Gould report was good; it contained clear analysis and sensible recommendations for the conduct of the elections. Reading it four years on, I find it an excellent reminder of what we need to focus on in the run-up to the elections in May. When the report was published, we argued that, as politicians, we should not pick and choose which recommendations suited us or just sign up to the ones that favoured our party and leave the others on the sidelines. One of the key recommendations was that all the arrangements should be in place in good time—ideally six months—before the elections. As we are now less than four months away from the local government elections, the minister’s report today on what the Scottish Government has done to ensure that those elections are fair and transparent and that they are run properly is welcome. Has the minister conducted his own review of that process to satisfy himself that everything that needs to be done has been done before the elections take place? I will focus on postal voting, which the minister did not mention. The Gould report dealt with access to postal vote registration, the opportunity to cast a postal vote and even the way in which we fold our postal votes so that the electronic counting machines can deal with them. Those might seem small issues, but as we are encouraging people to vote by post, they must be taken on board. Perhaps the minister can comment on that in his closing remarks. Our amendment deletes the last section of the motion—or suggests that we delete it; given our numbers in the chamber, we cannot guarantee to delete anything. We do not dispute the need for consistency and a more coherent approach, and we are signed up to the Gould recommendations. However, the Scotland Bill Committee did not consider the evidence in relation to local government, yet it still made recommendations on that in its final report. It is too late to make major changes for this year’s elections; that should have been discussed before the minister’s predecessor laid the order before the Parliament in October last year. Across the country, parties are selecting or have already selected their candidates for May’s elections, and we should focus on what happens in less than four months’ time. The turnouts for recent by-elections have been incredibly small, and this election will be the first stand-alone local government election for decades. No one group or organisation is responsible for promoting participation—the minister is right to say that we all have responsibility for that. However, I would be interested to hear how much will be invested in the discussions on promoting voter participation, particularly with regard to the key issue of voter registration. In the run-up to the 2007 elections, there was publicity from the Electoral Commission on how the STV system worked. What similar publicity will we have this time? There is a new generation of voters who were not around to benefit from that publicity last time. In 2007, the Electoral Commission published its report on other aspects of the election, and I will focus on the issue of electoral registration. It is now possible to register to vote much closer to polling time, but research for the Electoral Commission has shown that the percentage of people missing from the registers has grown since the last time that matter was examined more than 10 years ago. The research suggests that around 13 to 15 per cent of eligible people in Great Britain were not registered following the annual household canvass activity in autumn 2010, in comparison with 8 to 9 per cent after the 2000 canvass. Do we have the comparable figures for Scotland? I am interested in the issue of participation, because a social justice factor is involved. In my region, the areas with higher levels of deprivation—

Yes—part of the issue is that we must go round and talk to people rather than just waiting until the elections. The way that it is done at present is that a letter pops into people’s houses. The statistics show that the areas with higher levels of deprivation or transient populations have much lower registration levels than more affluent, stable communities. There is an issue around targeting communities in which there is low turnout and low registration. There is a real democratic deficit in that regard, and we must all consider it. There is good practice in some local authorities, but that must be applied across the country. We have all been in the polling station when somebody has turned up who cannot vote because they are not on the most recent register. I am keen to hear what the minister will do to encourage registration. In our debate last week, we talked about lowering the voting age. However, we know that the turnout for elections among younger people is lower than the turnout among people in older age groups. I therefore ask the minister what in particular will be done to focus on younger people and to make local government elections relevant to them. Access to affordable housing, jobs and training, and local sports facilities are all issues that are dealt with by local government, and there is a huge opportunity to engage young people. There is a great line in the film about Aung San Suu Kyi that has just come out, called “The Lady”: “You may not be interested in politics, but politics is interested in you.” We must get that message across to young people. Many people are also concerned about the move to individual registration. There could be a duty to promote registration, so that all local authorities would see that as a key issue. As has been said, everything needs to be in place six months before the elections. A key issue for all elections or referenda is that we need to know the rules in advance. In his speech to Parliament in October 2007, the First Minister stated that the Scottish Government accepted all the Gould recommendations, one of which was about what parties call themselves and the issue of sloganising. In his summing-up speech, will Derek Mackay, who is the SNP’s campaign manager, be able to tell us what name the SNP will be flying its flag under this time? The spirit of that recommendation was not applied in the Scottish Parliament elections last year. What will be the outcome of today’s debate? The elections are vital and there is real irony in the fact that the party that is demanding more powers for the Scottish Parliament is sooking up powers from local government to here, whether through the new Forth Estuary Transport Authority board, the new education quango or whatever. Local authorities are worried that their financial straitjacket means that they will be responsible for delivering on the ground what the SNP decides here. That is an issue that we need to debate. Local government should remain local; it should be accountable for local service provision. Local councils exist solely to provide local services to meet local needs and suit local circumstances, accepting the fact that collective provision will always be more effective than individuals trying to look after themselves, particularly in a recession. Those of us who are party animals take knowing how to vote for granted, but we must ensure that there are proper systems in place to encourage ordinary voters. I am keen to hear more from the minister about the resources that are being allocated to ensuring that that happens. We also take for granted the conduct of the elections. I welcome the fact that we have been able to focus on that today. It is highly appropriate that we acknowledge the work of the thousands of staff throughout the country who do the hard work on the day of the elections and, afterwards, during the count to ensure that our democracy is a real democracy. I ask the minister to give us a bit more detail about awareness raising and the distribution of promotional literature to ensure that the voters—the people who really matter—know when the elections will take place; how to register; how to vote in a polling station; how to get to the polling station if they have a physical disability; and how the postal vote system works. As the minister said, we must ensure that the elections are democratic and that as many people as possible who are registered and eligible to vote actually turn out and vote. I move amendment S4M-01741.2, to leave out from “and participation” to end and insert: “, registration and participation, and notes the valuable role of the Electoral Commission in helping to ensure fair, open and transparent elections and good practice in this regard.”

I welcome Mr Stewart’s comments. It is helpful to have a cross-party discussion on the issue, given the range of political control across local government. Might one way to help be for us to put a statutory duty on returning officers to ensure that they take electoral registration seriously and are proactive about it?

I have tried to be absolutely clear in saying that with less than four months to go, we must focus on what will happen at these elections. We are more than happy to debate with ministers on the future shape of local government that they are after, but we must now be getting young people out to vote at these elections.

I thank the minister for his response that there will be a publication next week. In the light of the discussion that we have just had on the Gould report and on having everything settled six months before we have elections or referendums, will the date of the proposed referendum be published next week so that we can all have a proper plan?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

We moved swiftly to set up the Scottish Parliament. We were able to do that because we had a political mandate. Poll after poll had demanded devolution, and we had done our homework with the cross-party consensus through the Constitutional Convention. That is why we say today that we now need to move to a cross-party discussion. This cannot be resolved by megaphone diplomacy between the First Minister and the Prime Minister. Political parties and civic Scotland need to be involved in the process. Given that we have a Government whose single mission is independence, it is astonishing that we still do not have a date for the referendum bill, we are still not clear what the question will be, we still do not know what the rules will be, and we still do not know the answers to the vital questions on independence. I say to the First Minister that it is precisely because of the experience of the 1970s that we need to be cross-party on this. The referendum cannot be owned by any one party—that is absolutely clear. There is not an expressed will for independence—poll after poll makes that clear—there is still not a worked-out plan and fundamental questions remain. What about our currency? Would the SNP join the euro? How would our banks be regulated? Would we still have Trident? None of those questions has yet been answered by the SNP. That is not accidental; it is through choice. It is a political strategy designed to win support for independence by avoiding saying what independence would actually mean for the people of Scotland. That is not good enough. What is the justification—

No, I will not. I tried to intervene repeatedly earlier and my time has already been cut. What is the justification for the SNP waiting seven years after coming to power before deigning to hold the referendum? We all know the answer. We know that in 2014 we will have the 700th anniversary of Bannockburn, the second homecoming, the Ryder cup and the Commonwealth games. We know the dates of those events, but we do not have the date for the Scottish Parliament referendum. Constitutional change is not a small thing, it is fundamental; and we, as the people of Scotland, have a right to know what the SNP’s proposals are. Will it, for example, change a future tax regime? Will the hated local income tax be back on its agenda? The people of Scotland need to be treated like grown-ups. The SNP needs to lay out its plans properly, and we can do without the FM describing Scotland as a “surly” country. Let us move on from that kind of stupid insult; let us move on to a proper, mature debate. The view of Labour members is that devolution gives us the best of both worlds—strong powers, law-making powers and government that is closer to home and accountable. Independence means separating from the rest of the UK and would give us no influence over our nearest neighbour. Devolution has worked well for the people of Scotland and has changed in the past 12 years, with stronger powers on railways and marine issues, which were negotiated in partnership. The purpose of today’s debate is to flush out that choice. It is not acceptable for the SNP and its civil service to draw up their plans in secret—in their private space, as we are told. The SNP should be open and transparent. The aim of our demand for cross-party talks now is to ensure that the debate is not conducted simply between David Cameron and Alex Salmond. Everybody must be at the table, because at issue is the future of our country. The past decade has proven that we can move forward and strengthen devolution when there is cross-party consensus, when robust debate has taken place with civic Scotland and when we agree that we want to move forward. That goes to the heart of the choice that we face, which is strong devolution versus independence. It sounds as though there is agreement throughout the chamber for a straightforward question, so why cannot we have it? Even the SNP wants a straightforward question, so why cannot we just get on with it? Malcolm Chisholm was absolutely right to say that we do not need a question on stronger powers for the Scottish Parliament versus independence, because that is what the choice will be. It will be yes or no to strong devolution or to independence. That will be the question. It is up to the SNP to give us a referendum that the people of Scotland want. The SNP has had five years since it came to power to plan for a referendum that is the whole purpose of the SNP’s existence. Our motion gives the SNP a way in which to move forward with the people of Scotland and with civic Scotland on a cross-party basis. The SNP amendment shows that it is interested in furthering the interests of its party, not of the people of Scotland. It is not acceptable to refuse to have cross-party talks or to bring in civic Scotland. The SNP Government’s approach is all about making everybody wait until it deigns to tell us what it wants. That is not good enough and the people of Scotland deserve better.

13. To ask the Scottish Executive when it will publish its response to the investigation by NHS Lothian of so-called hidden waiting lists. (S4O-00561)

I thank the minister for the copy of the report and the letter, and for her response to Dr Richard Simpson earlier today. I welcome the minister’s specific commitment earlier this year to review the guidance to provide clarity on the implementation of the guidelines, which will be helpful. I draw her attention to the report’s finding that elective surgery in Lothian has risen by 20 per cent since 2008, and to its statement that “The inescapable fact is that more elective capacity must be found locally”. Is the minister being kept up to speed by NHS Lothian on its plans to deliver new beds, theatres and staff? Is she satisfied with the level of provision that it has identified is now required?

The cabinet secretary just mentioned leadership. What about funding, which is one of the issues that were raised in the recent Audit Scotland analysis of local government performance on waste management and recycling?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive when it will publish its response to the investigation by NHS Lothian of so-called hidden waiting lists. (S4O-00484)

Following the acceptance that patients had been offered unreasonable appointments, I welcomed the First Minister’s assurance that the patients concerned were now receiving treatment locally. However, subsequent reports have suggested that some of those patients could be among the 700 in NHS Lothian’s area who are to be treated by private providers at public expense. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the use of private providers by the national health service should be a last resort, not the default position? Is the sustained use of private providers by NHS Lothian an inevitable consequence of Scottish Government cuts, now that 270 nursing and midwifery posts have been lost in the past year and 300 more are projected to be lost in the months ahead?

Given the huge potential that Scotland has for green energy, particularly in marine energy, surely we need to do everything we can to retain the United Kingdom electricity market and the massive cross-subsidy that Scotland gets for our renewables and our grid upgrades.

The cabinet secretary recently created a £15 million fund for college mergers. Have rural mergers been factored into that sum? How will that money be distributed?

The cabinet secretary said that he will take steps to ensure that our fleets have the time to catch their available quotas. What alternative proposals will he submit, alongside colleagues, and what will be the outcome of the discussions next week? How optimistic is he of getting the right result?

We, too, had great hopes for the Copenhagen summit. Although some progress was made, it illustrated the challenge of achieving climate justice around the globe. Last month, I was privileged to visit Bangladesh with Voluntary Service Overseas, having been tasked to produce a report on the impact of climate change on water and sanitation. The villagers I met already see seasonal changes with wetter, more unpredictable monsoons and hotter, drier weather. Because so much of Bangladesh is already below sea level, people find talk of even a tiny rise in sea levels deeply alarming. What is agreed in Durban is no academic exercise. For millions of the world’s poorest people, it will mean the difference between being a farmer and being a homeless climate refugee. We need agreement to ensure that countries take responsibility for their emissions and are transparent in recording their progress. Furthermore, any agreement must mean money for climate adaptation to ensure that countries that are economically disadvantaged and vulnerable to climate change are helped to survive the coming decades. Their development must be low carbon and their natural assets, which act as carbon sinks, must be properly valued and protected. Like the minister, I am proud of our strong climate change legislation. Labour played a constructive role in that by improving the Scottish National Party’s original proposals and reflecting the aspirations of the Stop Climate Chaos Coalition to set a strong framework for action for business, national and local government, local communities and, indeed, all of us as citizens. Although we will be constructive again today in this debate, we are concerned that the motion sets out only half the picture. For a start, it is too self-congratulatory. There is much to be proud of but we should not pretend that it is enough; indeed, the Scottish Government’s own figures for the past two years show as much. Even with the recession and tiny targets of 0.5 per cent this year and 0.3 per cent next year, the Government will struggle. It is all a far cry from the 3 per cent annual targets that people were promised. Our disappointment stems from the fact that, although the policy levers exist to grow a low-carbon economy and cut emissions, they are not being used to the full and there are serious concerns that even the limited and vague measures in the report on proposals and policies, detailing how the Government intends to meet the targets, have not been allocated adequate funding in the budget settlement.

Yes, but the key point is that it is the role of the Scottish Government to lead and to demonstrate that it will do what it expects others to do. Cutting the active and sustainable travel budget by 45 per cent over the next three years sends the wrong message and stands in total contrast to the SNP’s election pledge. When we signed up collectively to ambitious targets in the previous session, we did so in the knowledge that they would be challenging but doable. We argued that early action was vital to create new jobs and industries and to help people to survive the recession. Although renewables are vital, the Government must give a much higher priority to energy efficiency. Not enough is being done to make the big lifestyle and economic changes that are needed. For example, electric vehicles could be transformative, would enable green manufacturing and would be effective not only in our towns but in rural areas that have ready access to renewable electricity, such as the northern isles and the Western Isles. Moreover, if electric vehicles were linked with the car club movement, people on lower incomes could access them, too. It is therefore just plain daft that the money that has been allocated to kick-start the electric car transformation has been taken from the sustainable travel budget, which has been cut. That simply does not make sense. What is plan B if a deal is not struck in Durban? The minister warned about that in his opening speech. Delay now means storing up tougher and more expensive decisions for the future and years of unnecessary carbon emissions building up in our environment. Our amendment is a reality check. It is intended to be constructive. We have to be realistic about the future. It is clear that we need sustained action over time and across Government elections. Crucially, we need the report on proposals and policies not just to be a stronger mechanism but to have funding for its implementation.

No, I will not, as I took a long intervention earlier. We have resisted the temptation to provide a list of potential budget changes because it is not just about this budget; it is about subsequent budgets, too, and all of us signing up. If we were in power, there would be much more on energy efficiency in homes and buildings, low-carbon vehicles and sustainable transport. We have welcomed the progress on the fossil fuel levy, but how will that money be used? What about investment in our low-carbon environment? We have immense peatlands in Scotland. They are our rainforests and our natural carbon sink, but they are not being looked after. The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds argues that, around the world, the large-scale degradation of peatlands is resulting in serious environmental impacts. The UK is in the top 20 for carbon emissions from damaged peatlands, and Scotland has 80 per cent of the UK’s deepest blanket bog peatlands. Therefore, we need action now. If our peatlands are left to dry out, the environmental damage will be immense, and the carbon emission reductions that we will need to make elsewhere in the economy will be hugely increased. We cannot just do the stuff that it is good to talk about; we must do the hard stuff as well. There is no room for complacency. Through freedom of information work that we have done, we have uncovered that the claims that the Scottish Government has made about the climate challenge fund have been overstated and not effectively monitored. I suspect that we could debate that matter for an hour. It is not enough to make claims about what will happen; we need to ensure that things have happened and that we learn lessons. Claims have been made about climate change emission reductions that will be delivered, but we know that they will not happen in every case. If there is a project to make a village hall energy efficient, for example, a carbon emissions reduction will be predicted, but if the hall is used much more than it was before, its carbon emissions will increase. That is not a bad thing, but the predicted emission cannot be bagged; the emissions as they happen must be looked at. There must be credibility. It is not enough to make predictions; the outcomes of projects must be considered. We need better monitoring in every aspect, not only of one fund. We want to highlight the increasing challenge. Approval for a new power station at Hunterston, for example, would be massively damaging for Scotland’s carbon reductions. It is disappointing that we do not have carbon capture and storage for Longannet, and today’s European Environment Agency report adds yet more weight for action to reduce CO2 emissions and protect our environment. Today, Jewel and Esk College is announcing plans to go solar, but the UK Government is cutting back on crucial investment to enable people to install solar panels, which would save money and emissions and, crucially, create jobs. There can be no room for complacency. We need action at every level of government—whether at the UK, Scottish or local level—and action in the business community. We need to ensure that, when actions are being predicted and benefits are being stated, they are real. That is vital so that, when the minister is abroad talking up what we are doing in Scotland, there is a reality check and a sense of humility. We know that the emissions reductions that we must make will be challenging. If cuts are being made in the sustainable travel budget while we spend lots of money on major road building, the impact on how we will reduce our carbon emissions must be thought through. We do not believe that enough is being done in that respect. It is not enough simply to make good claims about energy efficiency investment in our houses and buildings; we must ensure that there is real investment. It is not good enough for the Government to claim that it is increasing the budget because it previously reduced it. That is not a real gain. We need decisive action. I agree with the minister that progress in the Durban talks is vital, but it is not enough just to talk about the good things that we are doing on low-carbon investment. We must be honest with the rest of the world about the areas in which we will find it hard to reduce our carbon emissions as well, and we know that our increasing use of energy is massively challenging. We need only look at the footprint from our use of cars and other vehicles and at the emissions that they create. The process will not be simple and we delude ourselves and other people if we pretend that it will be. The agenda must have buy-in from not just the SNP Government but future Governments and businesses and local authorities throughout Scotland. The consequences of inaction would be devastating and future generations would not thank us. The amendment in my name is not a delete-all amendment but a constructive amendment, which shows that we are all behind the minister in meeting the challenge. I move amendment S4M-01406.3, to insert at end: “but realises that meeting the targets set in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 will be increasingly challenging, will require the statutory Report on Policies and Proposals to be fully funded to meet the 2022 emissions targets and that therefore there is no room for complacency.”

Will the member take an intervention?

I apologise that I will have to leave for a brief period for a prior commitment with a constituent, although I will be back for the closing speeches. I join colleagues in arguing that our oil and gas resources are precious to us. The Scottish Government’s motion records the huge investment in oil and gas, and the massive resources that come from the industry, which generate revenue for public services throughout the UK. It is important that we extract oil and gas in an environmentally responsible manner and with regard to human safety. I shall comment on both of those issues. It is also important that we use our oil and gas resources wisely and as efficiently as possible, but I suspect that that is a debate for another day, possibly next week when we debate climate change. The oil and gas industry is hugely carbon intensive, in both the extraction and the use of gas and oil. However, there is a great deal of expertise in the industry, which is now considering how we can turn a high-carbon industry into a lower-carbon industry. As Lewis Macdonald highlighted, we need to ensure that there is sufficient training to enable the next generation to enter the industry. We must also make links with universities, so that the industry gets the best quality of research. The minister highlighted the new opportunities for development, which are significant. However, new development is ever-more challenging, not just geographically but because of the climate in which companies will operate over the next few years. As the industry moves to deeper and deeper fields, the operating challenges are tougher and the stakes are even higher. Last year, a report from the UK Parliament’s Energy and Climate Change Committee highlighted the impact that a major oil spillage in the UK could have on taxpayers. That should concern us not just in relation to developments off our own shores—I think that British-based companies need to act to British standards wherever they operate in the world. That is important not only for fair competition in the oil and gas industry here and for workers who go from Scotland with multinational companies to use their skills across the globe, but for environmental standards. We know that the cost of mistakes and accidents can be huge. As Lewis Macdonald so eloquently commented, Piper Alpha reminds us of the huge human cost of error. More recently, the environmental cost of the Deepwater Horizon leakage in the Gulf of Mexico was enormous. That was a huge wake-up call to the industry throughout the world. The fact that the Gannet Alpha incident in August this year was our most serious oil spillage for 10 years reflects well on our industry, but it is also a reminder that we need to ensure that health and safety and environmental standards remain central. I was keen to hear what lessons Scottish ministers had learned from the Deepwater Horizon disaster. I was particularly keen to hear about contingency measures. Will the minister talk about those in his concluding remarks? In particular, I am thinking about information that is given by oil companies and responses that can be made by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Marine Scotland once they have the information. For most people, the environment is out of sight and out of mind, particularly if it is the marine environment and especially if it is hundreds of miles off our shores. However, now that our new marine acts have bedded in across the UK, I am interested to hear from the minister how the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 has delivered us a framework for a more sustainable marine environment. That is a huge opportunity and I hope that the Scottish Government is taking it forward. For me, the underlying principle must be the precautionary principle, which means that our approach to the marine environment must be underpinned by robust science and information. That situation must be challenging for companies at the levels at which they now operate, and it is challenging in terms of transparency for both regulators and Government. The oil and gas industry is not just about a sustainable marine environment. New technologies such as fracking, particularly in the shale industry, are now being promoted. I am keen to hear from the minister in his closing remarks what work is being done to evaluate the risks to our environment from fracking; in particular, I am keen to hear what risk assessment has been done on groundwater and water resources and whether SEPA has been tasked to examine how local carbon impacts could be assessed and the issue of hydraulic fracturing. Fracking was mentioned briefly during themed questions on rural affairs and the environment, but the issue deserves some attention in a wider debate on oil and gas, because we need information on it urgently. Planning officers who have not been trained on the fracking issue or have not dealt with it will have to deal with it in a professional, efficient manner. There is a role for the Scottish Government in ensuring that planning authorities are up to speed on the issue. Experience in the US has demonstrated that irresponsible use of fracking technology leads to huge environmental costs. In some areas, the water has become so contaminated that people can set it alight as it comes out of domestic taps. We do not want to see that in Scotland. In that regard, there is a major role for a regulator such as SEPA or our local planning authorities, which must ensure that they are up to speed on the issue. The Scottish Government needs to give leadership on that. I am keen to hear what discussions the Scottish Government has had with planning authorities to ensure that they can exercise their duties properly. I want to comment briefly on health and safety in the oil and gas industry. There are major challenges in that regard at deeper depths. The comments on health and safety in Lewis Macdonald’s amendment are important and need to be part of our discussion. We need to state clearly that we support the highest priority being given in our marine environment not only to environmental standards, but to health and safety. The role of trade unions and their members is important in that regard, alongside that of employers, regulators and the Government. We need to ensure that, even with our very good track record in the oil industry in Scotland, we have a safety culture that is deeply embedded in every aspect of oil and gas production. That is crucial, because it can take only a minor mistake somewhere for tragedy to ensue. Lewis Macdonald’s comments about Piper Alpha are utterly relevant for the industry now. It is important that the trade union movement plays a vital and positive part in the industry. I hope that the Labour amendment will be supported and that the environmental aspects of oil and gas are logged. On the carbon capture and storage proposals for Peterhead, we need to take a wider approach to oil and gas, so that proposed development would be crucial in giving us the experience in Scotland of carbon capture and storage, which we could export. It is important to ensure that our carbon-intensive industry can still proceed but that it does so with a smaller carbon footprint. That technology is hugely important, not only for us in Scotland; I hope that we can export it to the rest of the world. Retrofitting existing plants is the way forward. I hope that the minister will pick up on some of my questions in his closing speech.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive what proportion of the 20,000 social rented homes that were announced by the Minister for Housing and Transport on 6 October 2011 will be built in Edinburgh. (S4O-00292)

Almost 26,000 people are on the Edinburgh housing register and the City of Edinburgh Council estimates that it needs 1,600 new affordable houses every year over the next decade. Registered social landlords have indicated that they can deliver only 3,000 new houses over the next five years, which is 600 homes a year. In an earlier response, Alex Neil indicated that there would be funding for housing for local authorities. Will the minister clarify how much resource will be available? Will he assure me that the shortfall of around 1,000 social houses a year will be expected to come from new council housing stock?

9. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of Stevenson College and Jewel & Esk College. (S4O-00246)

Last week, the minister cited the terrific benefits that could come from college mergers. Is he aware of the survey of members of staff, at Stevenson College in particular, that highlighted their fear of job losses and their concern about the complete lack of detail in the proposals? Is he aware of the concerns of students who would face potentially significantly increased journey times and a lack of flexibility, and who are worried about the impact on drop-out rates and transport problems that could lead to childcare problems for many students who value their local colleges?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met NHS Lothian to discuss the new Royal hospital for sick children incorporating the department for clinical neurosciences in Edinburgh. (S4O-00204)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her response and for the other responses that she has made to parliamentary questions on the matter. Concerns have been raised with me, through the press and directly, about the potential for a talent drain from Edinburgh to Glasgow as a result of the new Glasgow children’s hospital, which will open in 2015, before the Edinburgh sick kids hospital opens. Can the cabinet secretary provide assurances that earlier completion of the new hospital in Glasgow will not affect specialist skills and children’s services in Edinburgh and that Edinburgh’s sick kids hospital will be a world-class facility in its own right, rather than a satellite service for Glasgow? What will the cabinet secretary do to ensure that there is no talent drain from Edinburgh’s sick kids hospital?

How is the Government using the procurement process to deliver the Scottish Government’s 42 per cent carbon reduction target? Is it monitoring the reduction of carbon emissions through the use of public procurement contracts? Finally, will it be able to report back to Parliament on its year-on-year targets?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Will the member give way?

I welcome this timely debate. There are huge pressures on our fishing stocks. The EU Commissioner for the Environment recently produced a paper describing that pressure, with the world’s population quadrupling during the past century, output growing by 40 times and fish catches increasing by more than 35 times. There is massive pressure on our stocks and huge competition, so we need fair management. Everyone agrees that the common fisheries policy is not fit for purpose, but what will replace it? As Elaine Murray pointed out, it is difficult to disagree with the principles that Commissioner Damanaki set out in July; the questions will all be about the design of the new system. The consensus in Scotland—which has been reflected in today’s debate—is that fishing interests, environment NGOs and fishing communities all want to see the detail. From the Scottish perspective, everyone has stressed the importance of our fishing industry to our national economy and to the communities that are dependent on fishing, whether they be coastal communities that land fish or those that contain the companies that process our seafood and turn it into high-quality products. That is why we think that our fishing communities need to be at the heart of the debate, and that we must develop sustainable fishing industries for the future. We therefore support the move to regional fisheries management to support those communities and to ensure the long-term ecological viability of our fish stocks. Accountability and transparency are critical for the management of the stocks, and the CFP simply does not have those. I was interested in members saying that they are nervous about aquaculture being part of the process. It is interesting to contrast those comments with the SSPO’s comment that it welcomes aquaculture being given a more prominent role in CFP reforms. It might be that it welcomes the importance of aquaculture being recognised rather than the detail, but that perhaps needs to be teased out. The SSPO’s view is that if global aquaculture production had not increased strongly since the early 1990s, there would be massive fish shortages across the world. Aquaculture is important both for Scotland and for the world’s need for fish. Members across the chamber have acknowledged the major efforts that our fishing communities are making to ensure the sustainability of our fishing stocks and banning of wasteful discards. Again, everybody has stressed that the detail is crucial, particularly in a mixed fishery. That is why research on discards and the CCTV pilots are vital in providing evidence for making suggestions to the EU about what the framework might be. Jenny Marra was right to stress the importance of the science, which must be credible and correctly interpreted so that it stands up to scrutiny when it is presented to the EU. We have condemned the practice of discarding for several years now, and there is massive public opposition to it. As the cabinet secretary said, the question is how we catch less but land more. He was, in that regard, right to look to the conservation measures that our fishing industry has implemented and to the dialogue between our environment NGOs and our fishing industry. However, what happens next is the key issue. As we know, Commissioner Damanaki has flagged up that she wants to get rid of discarding. Claudia Beamish was right to speak up for consumers in that regard, who are demanding better information. However, we must work out the detail. Our fishing fleets have been working on increasing conservation management, but what happens next? Rob Gibson was right to say that we need to find common cause with others on the issue rather than just discuss it here. I hope that the cabinet secretary will talk in his closing remarks about what is being done at European level to build support for getting the right policy on discards. There is an issue about persuading the EU. If we can mobilise huge numbers of consumers in the UK on the issue, cannot that be done in other European countries? There must be a way to ensure that the political pressure on us is translated into political action when the EU produces the new proposals. What is key is mobilisation of people’s concerns so that we get the right decisions. The challenge for the Scottish Government is to work with the UK Government in order to ensure that we influence the development of the new fisheries management rules. Our amendment is not just about stating the facts but about building support across the chamber so that we influence the UK minister. The Labour Party is the Opposition not only here but at UK level. When I look across the chamber, I see not just the Scottish National Party Government but the coalition parties of the UK Government. Whether or not we like each other politically, we have a responsibility to lobby together for the best interests of Scotland, which involves everyone in the chamber using whatever political influence they have, whether that is us talking to our MEPs who are supportive, or other parties in the chamber talking to their UK ministers, and the cabinet secretary ensuring that he translates that support into action down south. It is not just about the UK Government—important as it is, as a key block of the EU—but about what the other European states think. I have represented the UK in EU discussions, so I know that it is possible for us to have something deleted or vetoed if the EU feels that that will keep us quiet and let it concentrate on the big picture. However, the challenge is not just to veto a small point here or there but to influence the whole architecture of the next CFP. That must be our ambition. It is not about just deleting a line in the policy; it is about ensuring that the whole policy is infinitely better than what people must live with at the moment. That political challenge faces everyone and the burden rests particularly on the cabinet secretary’s shoulders as the person who is involved in the process. Given that, I would be grateful if he could tell us a bit more about his strategy for delivering on our collective ambitions. Elaine Murray and Graeme Dey were right to highlight the Commission’s legal advice and to question whether we will get any meaningful devolution at all or whether the prize of regional fisheries management will be taken from us at the last moment, as the CFP is reformed. Surely that would go against the principles that we have all been arguing for, so I hope that the cabinet secretary will be able to clarify the processes and timescale with regard to that position. We need to think about how, collectively, we can put pressure on the EU. As for trading quotas, which have been raised by members across the chamber, I must say that getting Alex Johnstone to sign up to something that the rest of us agree on is a major achievement. I do not want to stray any further into the Tory party’s discussions about where it wants to position itself, but if we can achieve that kind of political consensus on the view that the quotas will be a nightmare for our fishing communities, we need to use it properly. Such a move will lead to our companies being bought up and quotas being traded away. It will mean that the fish that are currently landed in Scotland will be landed somewhere else and it might result in the disappearance of our fish processing industry. The stakes are very high and we do not have much time before the rules come into force. As a result, we need the best possible representation. Indeed, our amendment is about ensuring that we all work together. Of course, the challenge does not face the UK alone. I would be interested to hear about the cabinet secretary’s discussions with other European interests because it is crucial that we build common cause not just within the UK but across the EU. Different countries have different interests. If we can get the fishing communities in Cornwall and, indeed, in the rest of England on our side, I am sure that we can do the same thing in the rest of Europe. The challenge, though, is massive. In his opening remarks, the cabinet secretary correctly analysed the CFP’s failings; however, the question is what the new CFP is going to look like, so I would like him, in his closing speech, to tell us more about what he is doing—and intends to do—to deliver on the proposals that we think are important. I suggest, for example, that he invite the European commissioner and the UK fisheries minister to come up and talk to us, the industry and the NGOs. Such an approach has been hugely influential with previous fishing ministers. When Jonathan Shaw and Huw Irranca-Davies came up, they totally understood the challenge that was facing them and the importance of the negotiations in which they were involved. We need to do the same again and get ministers up here to talk to us and the cabinet secretary in order to demonstrate that this is not a minority interest but something that interests the whole Scottish Parliament. Furthermore, the cabinet secretary should consider how we can maximise influence and support, because this is all about translating our aspirations into the CFP’s new principles. In the past, the cabinet secretary has been quite coy about his strategy, but I do not think that such an approach is appropriate now. We have to go out and build support for certain principles. After all, we do not want to tweak one or two bits of the system; instead, our challenge—and our aspiration—must be to influence the whole policy. We want devolution of decision making, an end to tradeable quotas and a solution to discards that we can all live with. Graeme Dey was right about the reduction in the Scottish fleet. We had decommissioning in the early years of this Parliament; our fishing communities have already made those sacrifices. What will be our bargaining chip when the next round of CFP is being developed? We only have 18 months and there will be no independence referendum in that time. We all have to work together in our country’s interest and I hope that members will support our amendment, which is a collective call for common purpose not just within Scotland or the UK but across Europe.

Will the member take an intervention? Did he vote for the 2006 act?

Labour wanted the Parliament to have this debate because we think that the current situation is totally unsatisfactory and that the Scottish Government’s position on waste management facilities lacks clarity. Across the country, people are up in arms at the plethora of large-scale incinerators. At the very least, they expect that the planning system will allow their concerns about health and transport impacts to be heard. However, there is a strong feeling that the Scottish Government is not listening. That frustration is reinforced by the fact that SNP candidates across the country campaigned against waste incinerator proposals at the election but have been silent on the issue since then.

No, thank you. I am not even into my first minute. The truth is that the SNP put in place a system of decision making that is less transparent and tilts the balance of power towards the centre, which means that local authorities, developers and local communities do not have certainty. That is totally unacceptable. Even more disappointing, we have been here before. In 2007, Scottish National Party candidates who are now ministers campaigned against the Beauly to Denny line, but when they were elected to Government, that Government green-lighted the project. This is not about members’ right to disagree with the Government; it is about consistency. On waste management, the SNP Government has presided over the changes that have led us to the unsatisfactory situation in which communities and businesses across the country now find themselves. I welcome the chamber’s total support for the Government’s ambitions for a zero waste Scotland—the cabinet secretary should take heart from that. We also support the principles that underpin those ambitions in the waste hierarchy of reduce, reuse, recycle and recover. However, members of every party have expressed concern that the strategy is not yet being implemented. The SNP put in place ambitious targets for delivering on its strategy and, again, there was support across the chamber for that move. However, what the Audit Scotland report made clear was not that every single local authority was not going to meet its targets but that, collectively, council plans were not in place. That is the problem. Why are those plans not in place? In the Lothians, there was joint planning between the authorities but one of the first acts of the minister in the previous parliamentary session was to dismantle the regional strategy that would have enabled them to put facilities in place. The regional strategy was simply dumped. At the time, we warned of the consequences. When that co-ordinated approach was taken away, the Government left the private sector to fill the vacuum, and that has led to the problems that we face today. When, in the previous session, the proximity principle was introduced in new guidelines that the cabinet secretary issued, we thought that the idea of local facilities that were planned locally sounded good but questioned how it would work in practice. In fact, it did not give clarity to local authorities, which have to set out the development plans that provide certainty for infrastructure investment. That is what the planning system is about. It is also, crucially, about democratic accountability. Local people must be able to see the plans for their area.

I would love to.

As Elaine Smith pointed out, the problem is that the Government is changing the rules in the middle of decisions that are being taken now. Moreover, she made clear that the proximity principle was unceremoniously dumped earlier this year in the middle of a public inquiry. That cannot be right. Not only that, but the Scottish Government has also quietly removed crucial planning rights and planning requirements on local authorities with regard to notification. SNP members supported the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006 but, quietly, the Scottish Government has removed the requirement for local authorities to report to the Scottish Government when they breach their local plans. The only categories left that require notification are developments in which the local planning authorities themselves have an interest; objections by Government agencies; and opencast coal and related minerals applications. The fact that there is now no trigger notification with regard to neighbouring local authorities or development plan breaches is part of the problem in waste management. This is a centralising Government. Having dumped the regional planning framework for waste management and the proximity principle, the Scottish Government has removed the capacity for local authorities to make decisions on waste management proposals. Nobody wins. Local authorities know that the planning applications they refuse can be approved by Scottish ministers; indeed, that is what has happened with two major waste management schemes. Community campaigners know that, in the end, these decisions are made by Scottish ministers and there are no upfront safeguards, because this Government has been undermining them. I say to Mark McDonald, who I thought made an excellent speech, that local authorities’ decisions about cumulative impact have not been taken on board. Indeed, a number of SNP back benchers highlighted points about cumulative impact and the impact on recycling programmes. It is clear that large-scale incinerators provide no incentive to drive up recycling rates; after all, in the long term, it is cheaper to burn rubbish instead of separating it out and finding markets in which the materials can be reused or recycled. The cabinet secretary acknowledged that very point in his opening speech. However, planning decisions are not being based on those needs and are not taking cumulative impact into account. The environmental costs need to be factored in. Large-scale projects mean large numbers of lorries travelling long distances, and environmental justice has to be part of the picture. I was really disappointed that the cabinet secretary did not address our points about wood, biomass and waste-to-energy projects. Projects are not sustainable if wood is not available and has to be imported. The Confederation of Forest Industries and RSPB Scotland have flagged up their concerns about the major expansion of large-scale biomass-to-energy projects. They highlight the fact that we already have a limited supply of wood and that the problem with projects of major and significant size is that they will damage United Kingdom jobs and have a counterproductive impact on our carbon emissions. That needs to be factored in. I was disappointed that the cabinet secretary did not specifically address that point and wants to take it out of our motion completely. RSPB Scotland has also raised concerns about the impact on forests, not just in relation to how we use our wood in this country but in relation to habitats in exporting countries and rainforests. There is a wider responsibility here that is not being addressed, and I was disappointed that those issues did not even get a name check in the cabinet secretary’s speech. At the local level, local authorities are left without clear guidance. Developers are not being given clarity, either. They spend thousands of pounds on planning inquiries and on making proposals. It is not in anyone’s interests not to take up the issue of need, not to address the issue of cumulative impact and not to give clear guidelines. Throughout the country there are debates. I need only mention Lanarkshire, Renfrewshire and the Lothians. We know that in all those places, SNP candidates were clear about their views before the election—

I am not attacking the SNP. Their own Government has removed the guidance that would help these decisions to be made properly. People can see through that.

No. I am in my last 30 seconds. The cabinet secretary had two speeches and did not even have the courtesy to address the issues in our motion. He has merely gone for a delete-all-and-insert amendment. That is not good enough. He should stand up for his principles and debate the issues in the motion, but he has ignored them. I am disappointed that he has gutted the motion. No one disputes the need for a zero waste strategy in Scotland. The problem is that he is not delivering that. This is happening on his watch—it is his strategy and he has played around with the rules. That is why his strategy will not succeed.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to ensure the financial viability of the Edinburgh international film festival. (S4O-00138)

Is the cabinet secretary not worried by the loss of sponsorship from Standard Life and, most recently, the British Film Institute? She accepts the importance of the film festival, but does she acknowledge the concerns about its long-term viability and stature? Will she step in and act to ensure that we have a viable film festival in Edinburgh and that it retains its premier status?

The minister’s targets are set out in the route map. Does he accept that fuel poverty now affects 40 per cent of Scottish households? Will he use his leadership to ensure that households benefit from affordable local and community renewables? Will he commit to considering the Birmingham City Council model, which is delivering energy bill reduction, a massive increase in local renewables and energy efficiency all at the same time? There will be a big payback for that council over the next 25 years using the feed-in tariff. In our manifesto, we committed ourselves to supplying 10,000 houses with renewable energy over the next four years. Will the minister commit to match that or go further than us? I know that the Government has a target to meet by Christmas. The Birmingham model already exists and works, so we are keen to accelerate that target.

I think that there is some agreement that the motion does not go far enough, although, as ministers will have picked up, there is no hostility to the proposals on the table; the concern is more about seeing them implemented. The Government’s strategy is important, but so are the funding, action and partnership working to deliver it. As many members have said, the public investment is crucial. There is in fact complete unanimity in the chamber about that, which is pretty rare. I heard the Conservatives argue for public sector investment because the private sector cannot deliver on its own. Let us capture that moment, celebrate it and turn it to our advantage. We need sufficient investment and Government action to make it happen. The RSE report was absolutely clear about that. It said that it will cost proportionately more to connect rural Scotland than to connect the rest of the UK. That is why we need our fair share. If we are part of the UK, one of the benefits has to be that we get our fair share. That needs collaborative work. It is not just about collaboration between Governments—for which reason we will support the Conservative amendment—but about private and public expertise working together to get the best value for everybody. The cabinet secretary made a very powerful case for rural businesses to be able to sell their products and services, but an interesting comment was made about how things have changed. Before I was elected to the Parliament I used to teach town planners. At that time, this whole issue was not even our agenda, in the same way that renewables were not on our agenda. Many of our leaders in the public sector were not trained to deal with such issues—they are totally new. That means that a level of expertise, continual learning and investment in skills are needed not just to build things but to negotiate deals. People’s capacity to negotiate good deals is fundamental. If we are relying on the private sector to help us deliver, we need to ensure that the public sector capacity is there to make things happen. Sometimes, the public sector is too cautious. Some of our procurement processes are so lengthy that they militate against our getting a good deal. There is a real challenge there. Elaine Murray quite rightly mentioned the need to act and said that the RSE’s report stated that work was doable by 2015. So, why is the target for 2020? This is something that matters to us now. There are so many Government policies that connectivity would help us deliver, which makes the case for faster action. Alex Johnstone made that point well. Fiona McLeod’s speech about the impact on health services and the potential in relation to health services was very good. The example that she gave of one of her constituents was striking. Rhoda Grant continued on the same theme and added the education sector element. I am thinking about the models to which we aspire. There are countries across Europe and across the world that are making this happen. What distinguishes them is not the powers that they have but how they use them and how they work together. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s analysis of which nations are doing well and which are doing less well shows that it is not about size—that is one of the striking things—but about the work that is done within nation states and regions. It is all about setting the right political priority. It has to be a question of focus. In our manifesto, we suggested that we should have a digital champion—that we should task someone with the job of making it happen and give them the resources to do so. Will ministers do that? This is the second or third time that we have debated the issue with ministers, and they have a lot on their plate. It is crucial that we find a way to make connectivity a priority alongside renegotiating reform of the common agricultural policy and the common fisheries policy and delivering on our climate change targets. On that basis, I am delighted that we are debating the issue on the last day of term. I hope that that will give a bit of a push to ministers and their support system to make it happen. One of the most telling statistics that we heard today came from Jim Hume, who said that one in 10 businesses in rural communities does not use the internet at all. That is a stark statistic and we should reflect on it. Those businesses cannot be successful without the internet and without decent connectivity to the internet. Rob Gibson’s speech was bang on in focusing on how, what and with whom we deliver, and it had a sense of urgency. He talked about thinking about what we can do to deliver to communities from the top down, and to empower them to deliver what is needed faster themselves. That is about partnership, focus and priorities, and there are real challenges there. Jenny Marra mentioned the Cornwall connection: even without an organisation like the Scottish Parliament to lobby and argue, and to organise and deliver funds, Cornwall has managed to winkle money out of the European Union and get support from the UK Government. That has to be an achievement, given the number of people who live in Cornwall and the area’s rurality. We need to look at other models and at how others overcome obstacles, because they can be overcome if there is a will. Adam Ingram’s points about a pan-Scotland approach were very persuasive. We need to come up with an approach that is about more than just saying, “If only we could do this.” We need to decide that we need it to happen, say who we need to work with, decide on whom to task with the job, and use our collective energy and political interest to make it happen. It is partly a question of leadership from the Scottish Government pulling people together to get action taken. We need some fresh thinking. Our contribution to the mix is whether we should have a digital champion. Fresh thinking is also needed on the relationship between the private and public sectors, and on cutting through some of the difficult procurement issues that are meant to be fair and to deliver access for everyone but which sometimes involve slower processes and deliver a poorer outcome—while the private sector, which needs such projects, does not get its share from the public sector. We need to get our fair share of the cake, which means ministers banging the drum. You have been given the opportunity today to bang the drum constructively. The Parliament is clearly minded to be consensual today, from the SNP back benchers through to the Conservative and Labour members, and I hope that, in the spirit of the debate, you might be tempted to support our amendments. There is no requirement on you to do that, but they are constructive amendments—they are not all about deleting and inserting. From the tone of the speeches that I have heard today, there is a desire to work constructively with the Government. We should think about who lives in our rural communities and social exclusion, not just between urban and rural communities but within rural communities. Some people cannot afford a computer, never mind a broadband system, whether decent or poor. As the Royal Society of Edinburgh report indicates, some older people, some people on lower incomes, and some people with disabilities are not even at the starting point of getting access to any form of IT or digital connection. Projects across the country that work with such groups are partly about social justice and partly about the public sector wanting to include such people. For many people, libraries are the bedrock of access to the internet. Financial changes are being made—I refer to the Christie commission report. When such changes are being made to public sector service delivery, we should not forget those who are less well-off. In education and health, digital connection presents an opportunity, but we need to have it on the agenda. The issue is not just about the kit, although that is vital and it is right that the debate has focused on it; the issue is also about the people who access that kit and their ability to do so. The Government can take a lead on that and help to deliver, not just at the national level, but by working with local authorities and the voluntary or third sector. There are big opportunities. The ministers are being offered consensus, which I suspect will not last for the entire parliamentary session. Let us use the consensus to drive a sense of urgency and priority and ensure that we deliver together.

Where does the minister think we will get to by 2015?

Does the cabinet secretary think that there is a particular opportunity in relation to milk and milk producers? During the previous session of the Parliament, we had a milk summit. There is great concern about the long-term economic sustainability of the industry and about whether we will continue to have fresh milk supplies in Scotland. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the establishment of the supermarkets ombudsman must be an opportunity to ensure that milk supplies and fair prices for consumers and farmers are firmly on the agenda?

First, I welcome Stewart Stevenson to his new role and back to the Government front bench. I look forward to working with him. I also welcome Alex Fergusson to the rural, environment and climate change brief. How the next five years pan out will be all about how the Scottish Government uses its leadership. For the last couple of weeks, the message from Scottish National Party ministers has been that ministerial doors are open to us to present our ideas for the Government to act on. I very much welcome that offer. The Labour manifesto for the election was full of practical ideas and we will pursue those ideas through the Parliament’s committees and in our debates. On all the big issues—our climate; how we deal with waste; how we address sustainable flood management; how we protect our natural environment and at the same time make the most of our environmental capital; and how we protect our rural communities from the impact of SNP and Tory budget cuts—Labour will be arguing for fairness and environmental justice. In the previous session, we were critical of the SNP’s financial changes to the funding regime for flood investment, and only last week the Scottish Environment Protection Agency’s flood map showed that thousands of houses and businesses in my region are still at risk of being flooded—in the Lothians alone, more than 13,000 homes and almost 1,300 business are still at risk, with potential damage estimated at £115 million. We have also supported the SNP’s zero-waste ambitions, but we remain critical of the lack of financial support to bring those ambitions about. Across Scotland, people are deeply concerned about proposals for incinerators, but the SNP Government does not have a coherent policy framework that will enable it to make the right decisions. There are challenges there. In the previous session, we stopped SNP ministers from privatising our forests—[Laughter.] With respect, the minister’s colleague, Roseanna Cunningham, withdrew that proposal. At the time, we congratulated her on that.

I am afraid that it is a matter of record. The SNP Government wanted to privatise more than 25 per cent of the Scottish Forestry Commission’s estate. The minister should look at the proposals from the previous session.

It is a matter of public record. We will scrutinise—

On that specific point, I would be delighted.

The Government’s proposal, as outlined by Michael Russell, the then Minister for Environment, was to lease out to the private sector, for more than 75 years, at least 25 per cent of the Scottish Forestry Commission estate. We all remember the debate at the time.

It did not, because we stopped it. Let us just move on from that pain. We will also scrutinise the implementation of the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 and the network of marine protected areas. We need a proper scientific basis for protecting our marine environment. We need a regional approach that is sensitive to fisheries stocks and to local fishing interests and jobs. We look forward to engaging in the reform of the common fisheries policy. In the previous session, we persuaded the SNP Government to retain the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board, which is important to incomes for rural families. We also argued for more transparency about how the rural development programme is implemented, and for animal welfare and biodiversity concerns to be at the heart of land management policies. In this session, we want there to be more practical support for crofting and community ownership. As the minister has suggested, the reform of the CAP and the rural development programme will require effective leadership, because difficult decisions will have to be taken and we all need to be involved in those conversations. The Labour Party will continue to support initiatives to promote Scottish food and drink, and I welcome today’s announcement. However, the Scottish Government must do much more to support local food procurement. We believe that targets to develop more local supply chains are needed if we are to secure local supply to our schools, hospitals and local services. As food prices rocket, many are struggling to make ends meet. That is why we need more community gardens and allotments to meet public demand. I would like to know what priority the Scottish Government attaches to its election commitment to enable public sector organisations to provide access to land and support for the development of new opportunities for people to grow their own produce locally. Will legislation be required? As the Scottish Government faces the next five years, it needs to be radical. We suggested the establishment of a commission on rural Scotland to take evidence from communities across Scotland on action that the Scottish Government needs to take to improve people’s lives. We need investment in rural services and jobs to ensure that rural communities do not lose out disproportionately from cuts, whether those cuts come from an SNP or a Tory Government. Rural development has to be about more than agriculture and forestry, although both those industries are crucial to rural communities; it must also be about economic development, tourism and private and social house building. We also need progress on superfast broadband. Will the Scottish Government today set a timescale for the roll-out of superfast broadband, which is essential to the success of rural businesses? In the previous session, ministers asserted that the Scottish Government’s climate change targets would blaze a trail for the rest of the country. Can we have a report today on the progress that is being made on meeting those targets? I would like to give the minister the opportunity to reaffirm the Scottish Government’s commitments to meeting the 42 per cent target, because very little progress was made in the whole of the previous session. We have a golden opportunity collectively—across the Parliament—to use the next five years to put in place the necessary radical policies. As we celebrate the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 two years on, we need to celebrate achievement, and we need to get going now. It is the Scottish Government’s responsibility to set the right policy framework. The Labour Party has engaged constructively in the debates and made many suggestions on targets, the land use strategy and the need to address energy conservation as well as energy and heat generation. We backed a strong public duty backed by green procurement to enable the public sector to take a lead and make the ambitions that were set out in the 2009 act a reality. In our manifesto, we made a suggestion about infrastructure for electric vehicles, starting in our cities. Will the cabinet secretary lead by example and commit to converting the Scottish Government’s fleet to electric and low-carbon vehicles? We also want to see more action on the energy efficiency programme, which—again—will need leadership. Will the Scottish Government match or even go further than our ambition of having 10,000 public and social sector houses receiving benefits from the feed-in-tariff and the renewable heat incentive by 2015? The other area in which the Scottish Government could go further is in carbon-efficient use of land. That is why we argued for the introduction of a land use strategy. Will the minister tell us when the action plan for implementing the strategy will be published? If we are to see the achievement of the Scottish Government’s target of planting 100 million trees within the next four years and peatlands restoration, there will need to be a co-ordinated approach. We must seize opportunities for strategic green infrastructure. As the Scottish Wildlife Trust has commented, more needs to be done if we are to achieve habitat restoration and the creation of a national ecological network with a more proactive approach to biodiversity. We need radical politics and action. For example, the central Scotland green network and the John Muir way have the potential to improve people’s quality of life and create new jobs and tourism opportunities. If it is to be successful, work needs to be done through partnership between the Scottish Government and local authorities. Studies have shown that thousands of jobs could be created as we move to a low-carbon economy, but those jobs must be spread throughout our urban and rural communities, and for that we need the right planning framework, a commitment to green procurement and investment in sustainable infrastructure. I say to the cabinet secretary that we agree that the next five years represent a fantastic opportunity, but they do so only if the practical policies are in place to deliver on the ambitions. Our radical climate change targets can be met in Scotland only if we make the transition to a green economy and if we use all the powers that the Scottish Parliament has now to put those ambitions in place. Labour will argue that fairness and environmental justice are the right principles to underpin those ambitions. I give the cabinet secretary our commitment that we will be constructive, add our policies to the agenda and scrutinise the work of the Government during the next five years. The ambitions are right, but they will be achieved only if we work together and get the practical policies in place.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I congratulate Marco Biagi on securing his first members’ business debate and on choosing such an excellent topic. It is highly appropriate that we debate the issue as one of our first members’ business debates in this Parliament. In the previous Parliament, there was strong support for the green investment bank across all the parties, which I hope we will see again tonight—in fact, I am sure that we will. I agree with Marco Biagi’s comments about the excellent work that has been done by Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce. It is not enough to assert that Edinburgh would be an excellent place to locate a green investment bank; the real detailed work and the business case have been absolutely crucial. The fact that there is a serious competition between Edinburgh and London is the result of that excellent work by the chamber of commerce, which has lobbied mercilessly and effectively over the past few months. It is important that we all agree on the issue in this early debate. In the previous Parliament, a Labour amendment attracted cross-party support, and there is strong support both here and at Westminster for locating the green investment bank in Edinburgh. As a Lothians MSP, I support the case for locating the green investment bank in Edinburgh not just for the jobs that it would create, much as I would welcome those, but for the significance of having it here. It is not a question of its being good for Edinburgh; Edinburgh is simply the best location for it in the UK considering the huge investment that we have already made in the renewables industry and the fact that we already have the legal and financial expertise in Edinburgh from companies doing deals at the moment for the massively ambitious raft of renewables projects in Scotland, particularly in offshore renewables. Much of that work is being undertaken in Edinburgh, as can be seen from the fact that renewables companies are choosing to base themselves in Edinburgh. Given the future expansion in low-carbon industries across Scotland, it makes sense for the green investment bank to be located in Edinburgh, and one has only to look at Edinburgh’s higher education and research capacity to see the expertise that is on tap. There is also access to key sectors in Scotland through the links to Glasgow and Aberdeen, which are only an hour or two hours’ drive or train journey from Edinburgh. Up the east coast, there are renewables developments in Fife, Dundee and Aberdeen. Whether in renewables or low-carbon technologies, there are already industries working in those areas and we would see further opportunities if the green investment bank were located here. There is also the proximity of the Orkney test centre to be considered. All of those are real projects and developments in Scotland that are leading the way. As well as the links within Scotland between Glasgow and Edinburgh and between Aberdeen and Edinburgh, which would enable that work to take place, there are important links between Edinburgh and the rest of the UK and excellent links between Edinburgh and other parts of the world. So, there would be a value to the UK Government in locating the green investment bank in Edinburgh. Also, the cost of locating it in Edinburgh would be a lot less than the cost of locating it in London, which must be good in terms of value for money. I really hope that the UK Government makes the right decision on the issue. As Scottish and Southern Energy comments, establishing the green investment bank in Edinburgh would give a level of scrutiny and visibility to the green investment bank that would help it to become the high-performing, delivery-focused institution that it has to be if it is to be successful. If the £3 billion of investment is to be spent wisely, the green investment bank must be able to tap into existing research and development and existing projects. We have the expertise in Edinburgh and across Scotland to make that successful. If the UK is to come out of the recession successfully, the green investment bank will be absolutely critical in building the capacity of our existing industries. That is why Edinburgh is the natural location for it, as Friends of the Earth suggests. I hope that the UK Government will see the massive benefits of that. As Ron Hewitt has put it succinctly, the value for money, the expertise and the greater opportunities for clean energy and the low-carbon sector all make the case for Edinburgh. We have an excellent business case in front of us. One of the benefits of our being part of the UK is the fact that we can seriously bid for the green investment bank to be in Scotland and potentially be successful. It would be part of a wider global UK economic push for renewables. Let us look for the £3 billion investment to maximise the current private investment in Scotland and make the most of the Scottish Government’s investment in ports and infrastructure. We need this bank in Edinburgh not just for Edinburgh’s sake, but for the sake of the wider Scottish and UK economies.

We in the Labour Party agree that renewable energy is vital to the future of Scotland, the UK and Europe. We are proud of the lead that we took on renewables developments in Scotland when the Parliament was established in 1999. The first target that I set then was seen as highly ambitious and very bold, but it was based on the use of existing technologies and followed the lead taken in other countries. It was one of the landmark changes that we delivered in the early years of our new Parliament. It laid the framework for early action and much of the development that Fergus Ewing talked about in his opening remarks. There are huge opportunities for Scotland in the development of renewables, but saying that we support renewables is not the same as providing the infrastructure and policy support for renewables, particularly given that the technology is still being invented and tested. Our marine renewables industry in particular is coming up with exciting developments, but it needs the right support and it needs time. I very much welcome the minister’s announcement that a route map is to be produced. I hope that he will bring it to the Parliament, so that we can interrogate it and add our own ideas. I take him at his word, given that in yesterday’s debate he gave Opposition parties the opportunity to come forward with proposals, which he might take on board. I will certainly outline one or two proposals in my speech. One of the things that I ask the minister to consider as he draws up the renewables plan is whether now is the right time to say what proportion of contributions we expect to see from different types of renewables. It is interesting that in his speech the minister concentrated on large-scale renewables. There is a real danger that we will underplay the contribution of small-scale renewables at household level. The work done by the Department of Trade and Industry shows that there could be a massive contribution from that area, and we would do well not to ignore it. Over the years the work that Labour has done in this Parliament, such as setting planning guidelines to support the principles of renewables development and our amendment to the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 on community-scale and household-scale renewables, shows that we have been committed to renewables for the past 12 years. We believe that more must be done to secure the maximum direct benefits to communities from renewables developments, whether such developments are run by communities or whether communities get a fair share from the big renewables opportunities that are brought by private developers. We support a variety of ownership and management tools, including co-operative actions, which we think will help communities buy into and have a stake in renewables developments, rather than seeing such developments as being done to their communities. That is why the planning process is crucial. All that will not happen by assertion, however. The one thing that I say to the minister as he takes on his new, exciting portfolio is that the recent tender for the Forestry Commission Scotland contracts was potentially a missed opportunity for community renewables. When he comes to look at designing contracts and the tender process for Scottish Water and other Scottish Government land, I hope that he will bear that experience in mind. If Labour had been elected, or had been in the position to exercise control over the Government, we would have wanted to promote renewables to deliver new jobs and, crucially, to deliver cheaper energy for consumers and communities, with a particular focus on people on low incomes, who are suffering under the current raft of gas and electricity price rises. There has to be a win, win, win for Scotland. We have to ensure that it is about not just expanding the industry but looking at the benefit that is secured, and not just by communities but by householders. There is a potential bonanza throughout Scotland. We very much agree with the minister on that issue. There are a raft of potential careers in the renewables industry, in building new grid infrastructure; in designing the new smart grid that needs to be developed in Scotland; in manufacturing and building the new kit, whether it is going to be onshore or offshore; in installing household and community-scale renewables; and in designing better and newer types of renewables, particularly in our marine environment. Last week’s warning by the International Energy Agency about the continuing growth of CO2 emissions means that we absolutely must step up the link between our renewables and our energy-efficiency targets. We need to ensure that we step up the level of investment in green, low-carbon and zero-carbon industries across the board. That is why our amendment suggests a range of actions that the Government needs to take on board, particularly to decarbonise our housing and transport sectors, which is vital. We need to link the opportunities for renewables, energy efficiency, zero carbon and jobs. That is key if we are to come out of the recession creating new jobs. The policy mechanisms need to be in place. We welcome the new route map that the minister mentioned, which is vital to making the Government’s ambitious targets at all achievable. Those targets rest on the development of new industries and new technologies. We need to look for the early actions that will deliver the jobs bonanza. Where will the regional training centres that the Scottish National Party manifesto mentioned be established and how soon will that happen? What will the Scottish Government do to speed up the granting of planning consents? Will the minister act on the renewables industry’s concern that the marine licensing system and the onshore planning system do not have enough resources to deliver fast enough the action that we need? That is coming through loud and clear from the industry. What is happening to ensure that the contribution of the skills in the offshore oil and gas industry continues and to plug those skills into the new offshore renewables world? I will describe another area in which we need to take ambitious action. The Government’s action will be tested by what it delivers. In comparison with the ambition on renewables, there is nowhere near enough ambition on energy efficiency. The Government must take that on board. An energy efficiency action plan was produced in the previous parliamentary session, but the Association for the Conservation of Energy points out that the budget for domestic action was slashed by 30 per cent. A link exists between energy efficiency and domestic price rises. That is why we want more practical action to be taken early in the Government’s term. We want more use of council tax and business rate incentives for people to install energy efficiency measures. The new report “The Power of Scotland Secured” by GL Garrad Hassan highlights the important role of energy efficiency. Reducing electricity demand—particularly peak demand—is by far the cheapest way to contribute to the security of supply and to emissions reductions. We need an energy and renewables strategy that links completely into energy efficiency. That is why we would like much faster action on community-scale and householder developments. In the green new deal in our manifesto, we proposed early action at local and community levels. Until we have a mass market in Scotland, we will not have the reduced costs that result from greater competition. We will not have investment from companies in something that is not seen as a Government priority. A huge opportunity has been missed to deliver jobs and tackle fuel poverty. The new feed-in tariff and the renewable heat incentive that the minister mentioned transform the economics for local and householder renewables, but we must seize the day. When I announced that we would deliver 10,000 local developments for housing—whether in council housing or the housing association sector—Alex Neil dismissed me in the Parliament as delivering a tiddlywinks policy. However, the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism has not set out the Scottish Government’s policy. What I have described is the big policy suggestion that I put on the table today. Will the minister consider that suggestion? The policy is happening in Birmingham city now and there is no reason why we cannot adopt it in Scotland. If the Scottish Government worked with local authorities and housing associations, that would produce a local jobs bonanza and benefits, particularly for people who live on low incomes and who suffer from fuel poverty. Such a policy would make a dramatic difference to people. It would also deliver new manufacturing and installation jobs. We estimated that 10,000 developments in the initial years would deliver 10,000 training places. It would be a practical contribution to renewables that focused on energy efficiency and delivered local jobs, and, crucially, it would deliver in the early years. All the ambition on renewables and climate change looks to 2020, but we must look to the next four to five years. We cannot afford to miss the opportunity, but we must also drive down our emissions now. The SNP did not do enough on other matters in its past four years in government. Opportunities were missed in public procurement, which I hope will be covered by the Government’s new route map for renewables. I am interested in hearing from the cabinet secretary whether the Government still has a policy of having renewables in every school. We lobbied the Government hard on that in the previous session, but little progress was made. Where is that policy? Has it been sidelined or is it still active? In Edinburgh, the reality has been deeply disappointing. Renewables were removed from the previous schools programme and I heard this month that school students who had won a prize for new renewables were not allowed to get those renewables in their schools. I hope that the SNP Government acts on such barriers to progress. The Government needs to put its money where its mouth is and ensure that renewables and energy efficiency are built into procurement and school design from the start. There are other areas in which we need rapid progress. What is happening with the development of the Beauly to Denny grid? The SNP has swanned through two elections promising all things to all people. Local people need to know what is happening. We will support the Government when it negotiates and works constructively with the UK Government on the fossil fuel levy, the green investment bank and the Crown Estate. The results of the consultation on the Crown Estate urgently need to be brought to Parliament. Parliament needs to be brought on board and it needs to see what the options are. We need to see action throughout the country so that we get the renewables bonanza that the minister talked about in his opening remarks. Less time should be spent on new powers, and more time should be spent on using the powers that we have now. I move amendment S4M-00169.1 to leave out from first “supports” to end and insert: “believes that Scotland’s renewable energy resources present an important opportunity to develop a sustainable, low-carbon economy and considers that the social and community opportunities in terms of ownership and investment need to be maximised and calls on the Scottish Government to now deliver its renewable targets by setting out a plan that includes supporting policies and finance, planning issues, procurement, training, grid development and management, and measures to deliver community and cooperative ownership and management opportunities; believes that the promotion of green energy should go hand in hand with ambitious energy efficiency targets and calls on the Scottish Government to work with local authorities, social housing providers and Scottish companies to deliver a sustained programme of home energy efficiency and community and householder renewables installations, to work to deliver the best deal for Scottish consumers, communities and businesses, to set out its ambitions for delivering on housing efficiency in order to maximise the use of householder and community renewable heat and power schemes and to prepare a transition plan for transport to drive forward the infrastructure to enable the expansion of low-carbon and electric vehicles in use and calls on the Scottish Government to work with the UK Government to support the establishment of the Green Investment Bank in Edinburgh, to get the best deal for Scotland in relation to the release of Fuel Fossil Levy monies and the development of the UK energy market so that it meets Scotland’s needs in terms of both exports and imports, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward as a matter of urgency the results of its consultation on the Crown Estates Commission so that they may be considered by the Parliament.”

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that he is interested in talking to us about the principles of building in householder renewables alongside the energy efficiency programme and about our suggestion that we should be much more ambitious, particularly with council and housing association properties where people are in very difficult financial circumstances? Will he work with us on bringing forward more radical proposals?

Last Wednesday, Alex Neil MSP made a one-off payment of £700,000 to the City of Edinburgh Council to plug the gap in the city’s employability services. At the Blindcraft demonstration on Thursday, the same minister pledged to do all that he could to save Blindcraft and suggested that the money could be used for Blindcraft workers. This week, Blindcraft staff were told that the factory will be closed at the end of the month. Will the First Minister step in at the 11th hour and save Blindcraft as he saved Glencraft in Aberdeen?

I ask the question again: what tangible benefit is being brought to the project by the Scottish Futures Trust? My colleague George Foulkes made a freedom of information inquiry to find out what advice was being given to NHS Lothian and the entire answer was redacted—not one piece of information was given out. None of us can find out what is happening with the project. Will the minister give us a guarantee that she will be able to sign off the project before the end of this parliamentary session? Everyone across the Lothians is worried about the impact of the delays to the project. We are told that the combination of the sick kids and the neuroscience unit has delayed the project and that the Scottish Futures Trust has sent the project into a labyrinthine process.

In our first debate on climate change in this session, John Swinney said that the Scottish Government would not wait until a Scottish climate change act had been passed before beginning to act on reducing carbon emissions, but the first thing that the Scottish National Party Government did was to dump its promise to set a statutory annual target of 3 per cent year-on-year reductions in CO2 emissions. We are still waiting for the final land use strategy, the national strategy on electric vehicles has been delayed until after the election and there has been a cut in the energy efficiency programme. Little has been added since the consultation and it is not fair to blame the committee for not meeting the challenge. What is missing, in particular, is a sense of urgency and clear priorities, especially on transport. As there is little prospect of the EU signing up to the 30 per cent reduction target to which the minister referred—it has now published a 25 per cent target—what does the minister intend to do? Does she accept that we should now produce policies to reduce that gap and allow us to plan for the future to ensure that we fill the gap between the initial 34 per cent target and the 42 per cent target that the Parliament voted for? Or is it a question of the SNP watering down that commitment through a we-will-if-you-will approach? All the detail is being left to the next Government. What does the minister now say to the Stop Climate Chaos Scotland campaigners who thought that they were getting real action on climate change in the current Parliament?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with Historic Scotland regarding the former Odeon cinema on Clerk Street, Edinburgh. (S3O-13216)

I thank the minister for her answer. She may be aware that the owners have resubmitted their controversial plans for the Odeon to the council after failing to find a buyer, but there are real concerns among the community, potential buyers and arts groups that the guide sale price of £2.93 million did not reflect the deterioration and dilapidated state of the Odeon. In the minister’s last letter to me in November she advised that “Historic Scotland has indicated that due to the volatility of the market and the lack of recent sales and comparables, a set price may be inappropriate”. In the light of those comments and the community council petition to save the Odeon, which has collected more than 4,000 signatures, will the Scottish Government now intervene to save this important building?

I thank colleagues for supporting my motion and for ensuring that the issue is raised properly in Parliament. We are in the middle of a recession, and the situation for people who are looking for work in Edinburgh is extremely challenging. Fallout from the banking sector continues, which is bad news not just for banking staff but for people across the city. The pipeline for construction projects has seized up, as have opportunities for young people to find work. The voluntary sector is under massive pressure, and P45s are being issued as projects lose their grants. People across the city are taking redundancy, while other people are still looking for work because they cannot retire. The labour market is tough. More people are competing for fewer jobs. To crown it all, Edinburgh has the highest proportion of young people who go straight on to the dole after leaving school. We must not return to Thatcher’s 1980s, when a generation of young people lost hope and opportunities. That is the backdrop to the cut in employability services and why my motion calls on the Scottish Government to rethink ending its funding of £2.238 million to employability projects through the Capital City Partnership. The issue is political, but it is not just Opposition politicians who have asked the Scottish Government to rethink its position. I was first alerted to the problem in a briefing from Councillor Tom Buchanan, who is the Scottish National Party convener of the City of Edinburgh Council’s economic development committee. When we first raised the question in Parliament in a budget debate, John Swinney, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, acknowledged in response to a point from Margaret Smith that he had received representations from Councillor Tom Buchanan and from Kenny MacAskill. The issue cuts across the parties in Edinburgh. The amount of money is small, but its loss could do immense harm to our young people and to our unemployed people’s opportunities. We have not yet had a positive announcement. When I raised the issue with Angela Constance, after John Swinney’s comment that the Government was looking for a solution had raised my hopes, her reply was disappointing—people in the sector were greatly disappointed when they heard her remarks. I hope that the Scottish Government, in the guise of Alex Neil, will give us a more positive response today. Training for young people who most urgently need support should be the last service to be cut at the current point in the economic cycle. What hope do people have if they have a learning disability, are recovering from a mental illness or from substance or alcohol misuse, have left a care home or are just unlucky enough to live in one of the bits of the city where many people are unemployed and where their parents have been unemployed? The tragedy is that we know that the training projects that are under threat have done a fantastic job for young people—they have given young people a proper chance, let them rebuild their lives and given them the opportunity to succeed in life. Surely we can all support that. Key agencies have come together to support those young people with a co-ordinated approach, joining up the private sector and working with the different parts of the public sector, whether the health service or the council. There has even been a placement in the Parliament for one of the young people involved in the joined up for jobs strategy. The approach is giving young people the skills and confidence to challenge social barriers, to find success and work, and to make their way into further education and training. It has been praised by various sectors in Scotland, but it is threatened by the decision to remove funding. There is a real concern that places will be lost. Only last week, I attended the Access to Industry passport and transition awards. I called them the Edinburgh Oscars, but in truth they are more useful than the Oscars, because the young people whom we celebrated on Friday had succeeded against the odds. They had held down placements in companies and hotels, worked hard, committed themselves to moving forward, learned the skills to get into college and university, and prepared themselves for the job interview that could give them a passport to the future. Over the years, I have met young people whose lives have been transformed by local training providers. Women Onto Work’s programmes have given women the confidence to train and to get the child care to help them to move on. The fairer Scotland fund gave people the chance to improve their employability and was aimed at early intervention and health inequality reduction. It delivered through the community planning partnerships, the fairer jobs fund and the Capital City Partnership. The loss of the funding stream will unpick those successes and the support that has been in place. In this financial year, it amounts to nearly 43 per cent of the city’s fairer Scotland fund allocation for improving employability and getting people into work. People in Edinburgh’s training organisations cannot understand the minister’s decision to end the funding stream. Without those projects, young people will not get the chance to get work or go to college. Training partners in Edinburgh were stunned and surprised when the cut was announced on 23 December. Since then, everyone has worked together. Along with colleagues, I have had the privilege today to hear directly from young people about what the training opportunities have meant to them and what a fantastic difference those opportunities have made to their lives. They have got a petition together—they are working hard. The projects under threat include youthbuild in Craigmillar, Barnado’s NETworks, Fairbridge, Four Square, Impact Arts and real jobs. The comments from young people get to the heart of it: “Save the jobs that save the jobs!” and “Be fair to people ... give people a chance and a foot up to success. Funding here prevents rehabilitation later. Be nice”. Young people, in their own words and actions, want to ensure that we support the next generation of young people. The employment situation in Edinburgh has worsened dramatically. The proportion of young people in work is now lower than the Scottish average, having been higher before the recession. This recession is therefore doubly hard for us in Edinburgh. The employment rate for the city is lower than the rate in the country as a whole, and the number of people in Edinburgh claiming jobseekers allowance is about 10,000, or 3 per cent of the workforce. Now is not the time to make this cut. The labour force survey shows that economic inactivity is going up, so this is the wrong way to go. I return to the point that I made earlier. I was first alerted to the funding problem by the city council. No one I have spoken to can explain how what is happening now is justifiable or sustainable. The real problem is not just the cuts this year. The 43 per cent cut will lead to cuts in European funding and in match funding from other agencies. I hope that the minister can bring us good news today on an issue that unites the parties in Edinburgh. It also unites communities, from the most disadvantaged to those that have done well in the past. Training providers and private companies are keen to help young people to get the support that they need. These training services are vital. I hope that the minister will do the right thing and restore the funding. If he were to do that, he would have immense support and respect throughout the city. This issue affects people in their day-to-day lives. We cannot let people slip through the net, become homeless, and lose opportunities and hope for the future. Today is important. I know that people will not stop the campaign, but I hope that the minister will be able to give us a good response that will let everyone move forward.

For a second, I thought that an extra Government speech had appeared in the debate. Labour is very happy to support the bill, but we believe that it could have been better. The bill tidied up rather than took the chance to start with principles and look at what was needed to put them in place. We tried to work constructively with colleagues. Although we have not always agreed with each other, particularly on some of our amendments today, my colleagues on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee worked hard with colleagues across the chamber to strengthen the original bill. As Roseanna Cunningham said, the Parliament worked with communities, businesses, estates and environmental and animal welfare organisations to try to do what was possible to strengthen the bill. A lot of welcome changes have been made. I am disappointed that Labour did not get the agreement of other parties across the chamber on the principle of banning snaring. The issue is controversial, but on this side of the chamber, snaring remains a cruel practice, even with the improvements that we have negotiated and legislated on over the previous two sessions of the Parliament. There are still too many instances where even those provisions are ignored. Irene Oldfather and Elaine Murray referred to the evidence. Animals suffer; we know that from the science and research. Snares are indiscriminate; pets still get caught in them.

They pressed consistently for restrictions on snaring. You see that in the evidence. We were always of the view that it would be very difficult to get a majority on a full ban on snaring. The work that Elaine Murray, Peter Peacock and Karen Gillon did was to try to push the agenda on as far as we could. We were keen to support proposals that other colleagues put at committee and in the chamber today, but we remain convinced that snaring—as currently practised in this country—is not required. We need only look at other countries where snaring does not take place routinely. There are alternatives not only abroad, but in Scotland. We worked very constructively. The great irony is that a petition to ban snaring that is live in the Parliament was not made a formal part of the process. I say to Mr McArthur that, given the live nature of the petition, our expectation was that it would be discussed in the context of the bill—that was the natural place in which to discuss it—and we remain disappointed that that did not happen. We are particularly disappointed that we could not go further than the minister’s initial offer on the review period, which is the parliamentary equivalent of kicking the issue into touch—into never-never land. Progressive Parliaments have changed legislation; they have changed the ground rules on snaring. I give a commitment today: Labour considers a ban on snaring as unfinished business. We will return to the issue in the next parliamentary session. We are disappointed that other amendments were not agreed to today. I refer in particular to amendments that Peter Peacock lodged in relation to action on the persecution of wild birds, particularly raptors. We know that those birds are under pressure from illegal killing. Just this morning, a drop in the number of hen harriers was mentioned. There remain concerns about the potentially weakened protection for species such as pine martens and red squirrels. Those concerns should not be ignored. I am keen to ask the minister to set out in her closing speech the further steps that she will take on promoting action on wildlife crime. We welcome the general provisions on vicarious liability and we are glad that they have remained in the bill. Again, we know that this is a complex issue. It is important to ensure that estate owners take responsibility for what happens on their estates. This area is a classic case of the actions of a few impacting on everyone else. I put on record the welcome hard work that estates in many parts of Scotland have carried out. There remains a problem in certain areas. We should send out the key message: accountability needs to be strengthened. We welcome today’s discussion; in particular I focus on the amendments on species licensing, deer and biodiversity. Again, the issues are controversial. A clear lead from the Parliament on its priorities is important. I mention in particular the need for a stronger commitment on sustainable deer management. It would have been good to have had that in the bill. I will finish on the subject of biodiversity. We know that we have not met our targets for 2010, and the amendments proposed by Peter Peacock and Robin Harper both aimed to strengthen our chances of protecting our rich biodiversity. It will not survive without our help. We impact on biodiversity in the legislation that we pass, the Scottish Government’s moves to give a lead and local government’s day-to-day planning decisions. As we pass the bill, we will work strongly and constructively to ensure that its good provisions are implemented, but I wish that we had gone further, particularly on animal welfare and support for the protection of biodiversity. Biodiversity is the basis of our economy, tourism and quality of life, and it would have been good to see more done today. Notwithstanding those comments, I think that there are strong and constructive elements in the bill. For that reason, we will support it at stage 3.

We very much share the desire to have a supermarket ombudsman, precisely because of the issue of transparency in contracts. Nevertheless, we have knocked the issue around Parliament for quite a few years. In practical terms, what can we do together to say to the industry that it is unacceptable that milk is cheaper than water? It makes no sense. We all know the cost in the milk supply chain. It is not about raising prices for consumers but about getting a fair price for farmers. What more can we do together, across the parties, not just in legislative terms but in terms of exerting political pressure to bring about change?

I have read the Official Reports of the evidence sessions and the submissions that were made to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, and I agree completely with the concerns that Lewis Macdonald raised. If we are to tackle fuel poverty, concerted action needs to be taken at every level of government. The Energy Bill is important because it will set the UK framework. I say up front that there is much in the bill that Labour can support, but we are not uncritical. We support the concept of the green deal, but we think that commentators have raised legitimate issues that need to be addressed. I make the point to Liam McArthur that it is legitimate to make constructive criticism. There are some aspects of the bill’s proposals that we believe would be a step backwards. In particular, we agree with Friends of the Earth and WWF that the repeal of HECA must not happen without a new duty being put in place. If HECA is to go, we need to know what will replace it. It is not good enough to say that something will happen. It is possible to design something that would still be a duty, but that is not on the table; I am surprised that Alex Neil did not even mention that. It is not about local authorities having to do all the work themselves; it is about them being able to set the priorities. They have the local knowledge and the housing stock, so they are best placed to act, but they need to be able to set the priorities. The climate change legislation targets will not be met just as a result of central Government demanding that they are met. Local authorities are crucial.

I am afraid not, because we are all running out of time. I want the minister to give us an assurance that he understands the points that have been made. HECA may not be perfect, but it is better to have the present duty than to have nothing. We have not been promised anything, which is why we are putting pressure on the minister and the Government. I want an assurance that the provisions in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 on our private rented sector will be respected and will not be watered down by the Energy Bill. It is difficult for all of us to get into issues that are quite substantive in three or four minutes. That is why we are exerting pressure. If we do not do so today, there will be silence on those issues. It is not our job to allow difficult issues that people have raised not to be mentioned in this Parliament. We need to step up a gear on the energy efficiency regimes that we have in Scotland, and we must ensure that nothing in the Energy Bill inadvertently undermines that work. We must step up that work. We know that we must do more, which is why we need robust action by the Scottish National Party Government. The minister does not have until the end of March to tell us what he intends to do on section 64 of the 2009 act; he has less than 20 parliamentary days to come up with a statement. It is imperative that we create opportunities for energy efficiency and renewables so that people can insulate their homes and bring down their energy bills. That is why the detail of the golden rule is crucial. We need to know what is in the deal and what is not. People who make the kit are already asking us whether windows are in it. It is important that such details are raised. We support the idea of the green deal, but we need the detail to be right, which is why we are asking questions today.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what support it is providing to help young unemployed people in Edinburgh back into work. (S3O-12957)

I am sure that the minister shares my concern about the 17.2 per cent of young people in Edinburgh who leave school and go straight on to the dole. The City of Edinburgh Council has alerted us to the fact that, because of an anomaly, £2.2 million has been removed from employability training in Edinburgh. We are disappointed that, to date, the Scottish Government has not accepted that there is an issue. Will the minister consider the potential job losses that would affect 3,500 vulnerable young people in Edinburgh, as vital services from a variety of providers would be removed? Will the minister step in, consider the issue and resolve to act?

Like other colleagues, I thank the committee’s witnesses and clerks, as well as the committee members, for their work on the bill. We also had some useful briefings from the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and Scottish and Southern Energy. Although, as everyone has said, the bill is technical, that does not mean that it is not important, and there is a job to be done over the coming weeks to ensure that the issues that colleagues and witnesses have raised are dealt with. Elaine Murray acknowledged the importance of climate change, noting that we will have stormier and more unpredictable weather. We therefore need to examine structures that people might not have thought about for decades and ensure that risks are properly assessed. The background to and purpose of the bill are straightforward. What emerges from the committee’s report is the range of details that need to be pinned down at stage 2. That will be a difficult job because of the short time available. The committee makes the striking point that it was a challenge to scrutinise every aspect of the bill in the limited time that was available to it. The fact that the bill is not seen as being exciting does not mean that that scrutiny does not need to take place, so I hope that that will happen. I ask the cabinet secretary to make clear before stage 2 what he believes will need to be changed at stage 2. Ministers have not had much time to consider that since the report was published last week. We all took notes during the cabinet secretary’s opening speech, but a written comment would be helpful. I will focus on the questions that are not answered in the committee’s report. It would not be surprising if those who own or manage reservoirs were nervous about the implications of the report, some of which are fundamental to their work, such as knowing whether a reservoir is or is not within the threshold. Having a threshold seems eminently sensible, but it will be challenging for people to find out whether they have crossed it. Other important issues include timescales and the cost of studies. There will be costs to people who manage reservoirs, and we could do with more clarity from ministers about that. There are particular issues about responsibility. Responsible owners will manage their reservoirs well and ensure that they are kept to a high standard. However, we should understand people being nervous about the process. Like Elaine Murray, I agree that giving SEPA responsibility for managing the process makes a huge amount of sense, because of its existing flooding expertise, the fact that flood maps are already being drawn up for river basins and the fact that flood catchment areas are being extended. However, as Elaine Murray pointed out, SEPA is undergoing cuts, and even though, in the big scheme of things, it does not seem that the work that the bill will give to SEPA will involve a lot of money, it will either push other priorities aside or it will require changes to be made. We would like ministers to confirm that they do not think that the new responsibilities will be a problem for SEPA or that they will dislodge other important work. There are concerns about the cost of the legislation. We need to make clear exactly what financial support the Government is prepared to offer. The cabinet secretary mentioned that in his opening remarks, and I would welcome more detail. For example, there is a need to pin down exactly what the cost implications would be for community groups in situations in which Scottish Water offered a community a reservoir that it no longer needed but which the community wanted in order to take advantage of the recreational opportunities that it provided. In that situation, would there be a dowry from Scottish Water? Who would be responsible for registration and for any works that happened after the reservoir was transferred? Such communities would need to be aware of the financial implications. There is also a question about smaller businesses that exist on a shoestring and do not make a lot of profit. John Scott and Peter Peacock spoke effectively about that. This is a technical bill. I remember sitting through the debates on the Water Environment (Controlled Activities) (Scotland) Regulations 2005, which involved discussions of the cost of implementing the regulations. Such matters might not look huge in the big scheme of things, but the related issues of costs and timescales can be important to those who are affected by them. We need clarity about such matters before stage 2. I want to end on planning issues. If developments are built downstream, there is a question about costs and who takes on the bigger risk. That is fundamental. The committee is clear that the developer should be responsible and that there should be clear planning guidance. We all know that planning guidance cannot be wished out of a hat instantly. Dealing with such issues takes time. In implementing the bill, consideration must be give to responsibilities. From the minister’s evidence to the committee, it seems that the Scottish Government’s view is that, once the regime is in place and reservoirs that are over the 10,000m3 threshold are covered, it will be up to those who build below a reservoir to take on the risk. I take Bill Wilson’s point about the word “risk” flagging up concerns, but I think that developers will have to factor that into new developments. People must consider the issues carefully. I am concerned that, because the bill has been labelled as technical, everyone thinks that it can be rushed through Parliament. The fact that we were all delighted to hear that another debate was being scheduled for this morning exposes that view. However, stage 2 of the bill will be important in teasing out the issues that I have mentioned, which are important to those who will be affected. The committee has recorded that it felt rushed at stage 1. I hope that we can make stage 2 a meaningful stage in the progress of the bill, so that we can get the detail right. In that regard, it would be helpful if, before then, ministers were up front about the amendments that they intend to make and their views of the committee’s recommendations. Once stage 2 has begun, it is hard for members to plug gaps if the Government does not deal with matters that it has been assumed it will deal with. Anything that the cabinet secretary can do today to allay people’s fears, clarify points of detail and give the committee more certainty before it gets into the nitty-gritty of stage 2 will do the Parliament and the owners and managers of reservoirs a great service.

The other point is that there is an economic argument for regulation. Does the member agree that companies should have the certainty to be able to make investment to achieve better standards that have public support?

The issue of access to capital has also been raised. I have been asked how co-operatives can compete with the big European co-operatives that have much easier access to capital, which has built up over many years. Is the minister prepared to consider the giving out of resources under the Scotland rural development programme? I have been told by the co-operative movement that smaller co-operatives cannot get access to capital, which makes it hard for them to put in bids under the SRDP when they have to put money up front.

First, I thank the committee, the clerks and all those who contributed to the consultation process and the analysis of those comments in preparing the report that we have in front of us for the stage 1 debate. The bill is complex, with controversial elements and detailed proposals, but it is also wide ranging and, potentially, involves a huge number of stakeholders in rural and urban Scotland. One of the key things that comes through from discussions in the Parliament on landscape, farming, crofting, recreation, access, tourism and human activity is the fact that balances must be struck. Decisions on how we use our land have a huge impact on our flora and fauna that pass us by, but which are crucial to maintenance of our biodiversity and the quality and health of our environment for the future. That means protecting  and enhancing our natural environment, and making sure that we have the right frameworks and interventions where that is appropriate. One of the long-term challenges that comes from climate change is the fact that SSSIs may need to be reviewed. The Scottish Wildlife Trust makes powerful arguments about the need to take a wider ecosystems view. That may be beyond the bill, but it will become part of the backdrop of our future land use. Therefore, we very much welcome the provisions on SSSI amendment and restoration powers, which we think will make a positive difference. The provisions on deer management are long awaited. The John Muir Trust is disappointed that the Scottish Government has stepped back from its initial proposals and asks about the extra costs to the public purse if the management action that is required by the code is not undertaken—for example, in relation to woodland planting targets. I wonder whether the minister would like to comment, in her winding-up speech, on those comments from the John Muir Trust. Labour welcomes the proposals for a statutory code of practice for deer management. We also welcome the fact that SNH would have to have regard to that code in exercising its powers to secure sustainable deer management. Like the committee, we seek clarity on how that would work. We think that it is an important issue that needs to be clarified properly. The committee has asked the Scottish Government to clarify whether all landowners will have to abide by the code and what powers SNH will have for intervention if the code is ignored or breached. That is a fundamental point, so it would be helpful to all who are involved in deer management to have that clarified by the minister from the outset. We support the committee's view that everyone needs to be around the table to ensure that the code is right from the start. So, we support the committee's recommendation to the minister that NFU Scotland and at least one environmental organisation be at the table at the start in order that we can make sure that the code has broad support. We also support the committee's suggestion that there be a review of deer management groups. In the light of the new provisions in the bill, that would be a very useful step. There are suggestions in the report for further consideration of definitions. The committee has come up with a sensible recommendation that the Scottish Government use the term "damage" throughout the bill and remove the word "serious". That will be debated in the context of amendments at stage 2.  We also support the measures to improve action on non-native species. As the minister has said, where they are introduced, they can cause huge damage to biodiversity and bring about major costs, as well impacting on other species. For that reason, we strongly welcome the minister's commitments, which we will support at stage 2. Since our Parliament was established, we have made progress on wildlife crime, and this bill provides us with an opportunity to enhance our law and give further clarity on its enforcement. There are still places in Scotland where species are illegally poisoned, but no one is ever prosecuted. Some excellent work is being done by the partnership against wildlife crime, which is pulling together people and agencies to give a sharper focus and greater co-ordination to work on wildlife crime. The committee strongly supported new provisions on vicarious liability, so I welcome the minister's commitment to take that forward and we very much look forward to her official response to the committee's report next week. We think that the proposal will make managers and landowners much more focused on ensuring that there is best practice on their estates, and it will send out the right message. We also support the rationalisation of poaching offences in the bill to support a single poaching offence. The principle of single-witness provisions has worked well with regard to poaching, and we think that it should be extended to tackling other wildlife crimes, too. We also support the potential use of SSPCA inspectors to help to tackle wildlife crime. As the minister said, the committee has heard divergent evidence on snaring and has attempted to deliver a compromise. Labour still remains unhappy about the current practice of snaring. We accept that there have been improvements through the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004, that technology has changed, that monitoring has been tightened and that more is possible still. However, we remain faced with the fundamental problem that still many animals suffer. Having chaired the last committee that considered snaring, I know that some people will argue that the new provisions will make the bill work. However, we remain to be convinced and we think that, as suggested by the committee, ministers should have the power, through the bill, to enable a ban on snaring. There are still animals suffering that were not intended to be caught by snares. I understand that OneKind has suggested that five years after the introduction of the provisions is too long to wait for a review, and so recommends a shorter timescale of two years. I  hope that the committee can consider that at stage 2. Certainly, a five-year timescale would see the issue kicked further into the long grass—it would not be considered even in the next session of Parliament. We suspect that there is no majority in Parliament for a ban on snaring, but that does not mean that we cannot take more serious action on snaring. There is a need to support the bill tonight, as it contains important new powers. There is an opportunity for delivering clarity at stage 2. If improved, the bill could certainly deliver much-needed support to improve the quality of the environment and ensure its protection. We will try to amend the bill at stage 2, and we will work constructively with colleagues to try to develop majority support on what are extremely contentious issues, as the minister ably outlined earlier. We are happy to support the principles of the bill, so that it can be taken forward to stage 2 for amendment.

I believe that this is not just a repeat of previous debates. Of course we have to have a debate every year in the run-up to the fisheries negotiations, but there have been some changes. Progress has been made in our thinking on how we might deal with discards. More research has been carried out and the pilots that have been conducted over the past few years have helped us to think about how we might shape the future. The speeches of John Scott and Jim Hume demonstrated that they have been expertly briefed by some of their colleagues—I certainly recognised one or two of the lines in John Scott's speech and I definitely got the politics of Jim Hume's speech. This is not the same debate that we have every year, as things are moving on. There is a focus on regional fisheries management, and we need to discuss where we want to push the quota system and what has worked in the pilots. We have talked about discards in the past few years. The work that is being done needs to be looked at properly. The minister set out the challenges, and he was bang on when he talked about the west coast, the stock, the economic impact on communities and the position with mackerel. Peter Peacock said that our fishermen should not have to see Icelandic and Faroese  fishermen taking the benefits of their previous restraint and work. That would be an impossible situation for people in Scotland. Karen Gillon's questions got to the heart of the matter of this year's negotiations on tackling discards. I am keen to hear the minister's solution and how we can push it forward. What lessons does he think we can draw from the pilot work that has been done? We cannot expect the EU to get rid of discards by allowing fishermen to keep what they catch. None of us can see that happening. There must be a place between the pilots and that position. The RSPB is right that there must be a way of catching fewer fish while landing more. The WWF also focused on that point. We have to bore into the reality of what has happened in the pilot. Some of the fishing organisations are less than relaxed about the possibility of what happened in the pilots fossilizing into the new position. We must be careful before we decide to take that way forward. One of the key issues that we need to look at is monitoring compliance with the cod catch quotas. What does the minister think has happened in the experiments that have been carried out? What lessons can be applied? We need to understand the pitfalls and the opportunities. Science must be at the heart of this. The speeches of Dave Thompson and Jamie McGrigor were not very helpful, because they just slated the science. The science must be robust, accurate and transparent. It is not above criticism, but we cannot say that we do not need it.

No, I need to get on. The key thing is to ensure that we get good science. The Scottish Government has a role in ensuring that we get good and transparent science that everyone can see, understand and criticise. Elaine Murray's comments about the need for priorities in science under sustained financial pressure were bang on. We must make sure that money is spent correctly. We need to consider sustainable fishing. The points that were made by Peter Peacock and Robin Harper were absolutely right. Progress has been made during the past 12 years in the debates between the fishing communities and the NGOs that look after the environment. Their positions have come closer over the years. That does not mean that they agree on everything, but there is far greater understanding and more of a willingness to work together than there was 12 years ago. Elaine Murray and Tavish Scott were right to point to progress.  The Labour amendment looks at what is to happen to the fishing communities now. We know that they have been under pressure for the past few years, and they will continue to be under pressure in the future. They need support from the Scottish Government now. Whatever the result of this year's negotiations, those communities will need practical economic support. It is not just those who are conducting the fishing who are impacted on, it is the communities in which they spend money, the supplies industry, the shops that they use, and the schools that their children go to. All the communities in our fishing areas will be under threat and pressure, and the Scottish Government has it within its power to help them out. I hope that colleagues will support our amendment. We need not just to get maximum value from the fish that we land and to sustain stocks and the ecology but to sustain our fishing communities as they find their way through tough times. Economic support from the Scottish Government is needed, and our amendment suggests that that must be at the heart of the Scottish Government's approach.

Will the minister say what initial thoughts he has about what could be done in Scotland using his powers to begin advance preparation and, at least, do some of the thinking about how we might connect Scotland to the rest of the UK, which might cut the length of time that we might have to wait for the high-speed rail line to come to Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to protect communities in Edinburgh from flooding. (S3O-11970)

I welcome the work on early warning that the minister has put in place. My constituents are really worried about the delay to the flood management works in Edinburgh; they worry every time that we have prolonged rain. Will the minister agree to meet me to discuss the funding shortfall in Edinburgh, which the City of Edinburgh Council tells me is the result of changes in Government funding that her predecessor put in place? Will she meet me to see whether there is any prospect of finding a solution to accelerate the speed of the works, which are now spread into three phases? My constituents do not even have the certainty of a start date for the phase 2 elements of the works, never mind the phase 3 part.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government's position is on new, non-replacement, fossil fuel-fired power stations. (S3F-2673)

I thank the First Minister for his answer, although—as ever—he did not answer the question that I asked. I will try again. We all know that new, unabated coal-fired power stations will make it much harder for us to cut our carbon emissions, as we must do if we are to achieve our 42 per cent climate change targets. That is why the Stop Climate Chaos Coalition and even some of the First Minister's own members are unhappy with new, unabated coal. Will he join Scottish Labour in ruling out new, non-replacement, fossil fuel-fired power stations—yes or no?

I add my concerns to those of my colleagues on timescales. Will the minister confirm that he will proceed with the statutory instrument on party flats? In his answer to my parliamentary question yesterday, he said that he still intended to take the matter forward. In the light of the fact that he is dropping the private rented sector elements from this bill, will he assure Parliament that he still intends to proceed with the statutory instrument? When is that likely to be introduced to the Parliament for scrutiny?

Will the minister give way?

I welcome the debate and thank Liam McArthur for using Liberal Democrat time to enable us to highlight the parts of the renewable energy agenda on which there is cross-party agreement. It is important that we continue to push ahead. Liam McArthur was right to highlight the partisanship that has been the hallmark of Alex Salmond's time in office. We need to be able to work together. Independence is a complete  distraction, which diverts us from focusing on how we can push ahead. Not all speakers have agreed with each other, but they have agreed on the need to keep pushing ahead on renewables and that a constructive approach is required. The key issue is how we can use our political weight to ensure that the green investment bank is set up as quickly as possible and that it is based in Edinburgh. If we are to get the maximum benefit from it, those two issues must be pursued. We need clarity, and I hope that the Liberals will support our amendment, the intention of which is to maximise support across the chamber. There is a strong case for the green investment bank to be established as soon as possible and in Edinburgh. As Wendy Alexander said, we need the ports investment now, not in five years' time. We also need the detail. I say to my Conservative and Lib Dem colleagues that we have got as far as we have done on the green investment bank thanks to the years of toiling in the undergrowth of the Treasury by Labour ministers to ensure that the detailed arguments would be put forward effectively. We expect the coalition to continue that work. The Conservatives and the Lib Dems are in the driving seat now, so we look to them to push that case. We will do our job by pushing hard and being constructive in Parliament, but we need clarity. Hard work must continue to be done on the detail, because we cannot afford to have a hiatus in investment in renewables. Last month, Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce hosted a fantastic renewables conference that brought together people across the investment wing and people in the renewables industry to talk about how we can move forward now. We all know that we have fantastic opportunities. We have moved on from having a modest proportion of energy generation from renewables to a position in which more than 30 per cent of it comes from renewables. The big challenge is how we can crack marine renewables over the next decade. That does not mean doing so in a decade's time; it means doing that work now, next year and the year after that. Infrastructure is important. We need the expertise to be used properly. That is why the siting of the green investment bank in Edinburgh represents an opportunity. Leading investors are based in Edinburgh, and Scottish and Southern Energy and Scottish Power operate here. The major fund companies, both in private equity and venture capital, are located in Edinburgh. Collaborative research and funding involving our higher education institutions in Edinburgh and Glasgow is already in place, and our experience of work between the public and private sectors is mature. That is why the green investment bank could work  extremely well in Scotland. It is not a question of bringing hundreds of new investment jobs to Edinburgh; it is about using the jobs that we have and having a key number of well qualified people who are experienced at operating at a high level who can take the process forward. We need to be able to work with investment at UK level, but there is a major opportunity for us in Edinburgh. As Ron Hewitt, the head of Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce said, "we have this huge asset of renewable energy in wind and waves and a lot of very large fund managers who might be interested in supporting these activities." We have an opportunity here that could benefit not only Edinburgh but the Clyde area, Fife ports, Nigg and Argyll. There are infrastructure, manufacturing and offshore investment opportunities throughout Scotland. The Parliament's united commitment must be not to let time slip. Let us all vote for the Labour amendment and add our weight to the cross-party campaign. Mike Crockart, a Lib Dem member of Parliament in Edinburgh, has responded to Mark Lazarowicz MP's initiative to pull us together to discuss the issue. I support Mike Crockart's early day motion at Westminster. Let us vote for the Labour amendment here. We can disagree on the detail, but the key issue is whether we work together to keep the momentum going. The people who are now in Government down south need to work with us here in Scotland. Let us all pull together and deliver the right message today.

This is the fifth set of targets to be put forward by the Scottish Government. Criticism of the first set led to changes, making the targets for 2011 and 2012 slightly more ambitious than next to nothing, but leaving those for 2013 onwards unchanged. After that was rejected by the Parliament, the working group was set up. I add my thanks to those of the minister to the members of that group. The work that they have done over the summer has been helpful in making the process more transparent in terms of the options that we have for the future. The new set of targets reflect the expectation that targets could be lowered because of the recession. When the Scottish figures were published in September, the targets were lowered further because the starting point was much lower than the Scottish Government had anticipated—so much lower that, if we had gone with the targets initially put to the Scottish Parliament in June, we would already have reached the 2012 target and be well on the way to 2013. Therefore, although the lowering of the targets mostly reflects a lower starting point rather than a significant increase in ambition, it means that we have less distance to travel to the 2020 target of a 42 per cent reduction against 1990 levels. Indeed, we are halfway there because of the recession. That is not a point for celebration, and it leaves for us all a sting in the tail: in future years, as the country comes out of recession and there is economic growth, it must be sustainable and low. That is why the figures are so challenging. We cannot sit back; if anything, we have to work harder in future years. We cannot just restore emissions that have been cut due to recession. What will we do when the economy speeds up? That is the key issue in how the cuts will be implemented. The minister will no doubt bring forward many ideas. Our view is that we have had a waste of three years. As the minister has acknowledged today, we finally have the energy efficiency action plan. The challenge will remain early action, and we believe that tackling fuel poverty along with reducing CO2 emissions must be the way to drive down our emissions in Scotland, so that people on lower incomes do not suffer disproportionately. They need to be protected. We are still waiting for the final sign-off on the public duties guidance. That is all taking far too long and we are worried. We know that the minister is looking to pilot programmes to show us  the way forward, but we are worried that pilots cannot give us certainty because we cannot have definitive figures. We remain particularly concerned that the biggest reduction in the years to come relies on European Union action and the emission trading scheme. There is a lot of hope in the targets; there is less definitive action. That is our key criticism. The recession has given us a breathing space on greenhouse emissions, but we need political will and new policies to deliver on the targets. Setting targets is normally the easy part, but even that has not been straightforward. The Labour Party will abstain today. We will not vote against the targets or attempt to bring them down, because we need targets in place, but by abstaining we register our unhappiness at the lack of concrete proposals to deliver on them.

The member says that the First Minister's intervention was crucial. Can we count on the same support and intervention for Blindcraft in Edinburgh?

I am deeply disappointed that we have had to have this debate today, because in the debate in January members on all sides of the chamber agreed that the Parliament supports workplaces with supported employment. Lewis Macdonald was right to say that supported employment is about giving disabled people the opportunity for dignity and access to employment. It is not good enough to turn up at the 11th hour to alert people—as the minister's notice did earlier this week—to the opportunities that exist for procurement contracts. We all know that: the issue was debated in the chamber in January and ministers made commitments that action would be taken. It is astounding that so little information came forward while members were researching the issue prior to the debate on exactly what contracts have been signed and what has happened in terms of procurement. The SNP has been in government for three years, and procurement is one of its Achilles' heels. There is always a great deal of talk about procurement, but there is not enough action. It is not good enough for the minister to say that he supports projects such as Blindcraft when things are now happening. Mike Pringle is right to remind us, and the council briefing makes clear, that the 30-day period began on 28 September, so there is not much time to resolve the issue. Although the minister has committed to more action on procurement in the short term, that will not automatically help the Blindcraft workers. It is a typical decision by our Lib Dem-SNP council that has been taken without values, without seriously examining the better alternatives and certainly  without considering the impact on people with disabilities. I know that Mike Pringle genuinely wants to save Blindcraft and look after the workers, but it is not good enough for him to say that it costs £30,000 a head for those workers and that the money could be spent on other disabled people in our city. The issue is how we can best support all those people. If the Blindcraft project that is currently trading shuts down, what will happen to the staff? We know that we are in the middle of an economic recession and that people are suffering the Salmond slump, and those workers will not have easy opportunities to get jobs. Members need look only at the briefing from the Leonard Cheshire Foundation, which makes clear that disabled people face discrimination in education and employment: 11 per cent leave school without qualifications and 54 per cent experience discrimination at school, college or university. People already experience problems not just because of their disability but because of how they are treated, and that situation will get worse if Blindcraft closes. Jim Mather mentioned that the world is changing. We know that, and there could not be a worse time for people to be made redundant no matter who they are in the workforce, but if they have a disability it is harder for them. In the previous debate on the subject, I said that Blindcraft was set up in 1763 and that it has survived previous financial recessions, so surely we can protect those jobs. Jim Mather is right to say that he does not want token compliance: I do not think that any of us wants that. We want proper compliance and proper procurement contracts, and we want to have those reported back to us. I was astounded that Johann Lamont's question could not be answered, as the subject of the Southern general hospital contract—and the issue of the Commonwealth games—was raised in the debate in January. What has happened? It should not be impossible for the minister to report back to us. If Jim Mather thinks that there is a problem with the type of products that are produced, he needs to say so, because we need an honest discussion rather than recycling the debate every six months. Does the minister think that Blindcraft is producing the wrong products: yes or no?

I accept that, but the problem is that we had exactly the same debate in January this year. There has been time for the minister to bottom out some of the issues and come back to the chamber, but all that we have had is the new alert to tell people that there are opportunities for procurement. We need to do more. The minister said that we need mutually rewarding relationships. We all want that, and procurement could deliver it. He mentioned the need for strong revenue streams to come through, and that is what we all believe procurement can potentially give. That is why we lodged the Labour motion, and that is what we want to hear from the minister. My colleague George Foulkes asked the minister whether he would meet Blindcraft. I was grateful that the minister said yes, but he needs to get the council round the table. As Mike Pringle said, the council faces a lot of difficult decisions. It has put the matter out to consultation for a period of 30 days, which started on 28 September; that is why the minister is getting passion and demands for action from Labour members. Action is required now: the issue was flagged up in January, but nothing has happened. If nothing happens in the next month, it is clear that those jobs will go. Mike Pringle has made the case for action. We know that difficult decisions need to be made, and that requires banging heads together and sitting people down to seek solutions. Minister, the time to act is now. We cannot hold another debate in six months' time, as Blindcraft will not be here. We plead with the minister to meet the people at Blindcraft and the city council, because something needs to happen now. Decisions need to be made on public procurement. If the minister does not think that Blindcraft is producing the right products at the right prices, he should say so up front and we should seek a solution. If Blindcraft does not exist, there will be no supported employment for those staff in Edinburgh; no one will pick up the threads of that problem. That is why we are getting angry, and why we need the minister's support rather than just warm words and reassurance. We took those in January this year, and now people want to move forward together. Today's debate gives the minister the opportunity to come back and deliver on the commitment that he made in January that he and the Government would help. We need that help to be put into practice now.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Minister for Community Safety has had with the Minister for Housing and Communities regarding the introduction of a statutory instrument to ensure that landlords of short-term lets can be issued with an antisocial behaviour notice. (S3O-11485)

I welcome the minister's answer and his acknowledgement of my interest in the issue, but my constituents still suffer the impact of relentless partying and antisocial behaviour while landlords sleep easy at night and rake in the money. Does the minister agree that, by amending the legislation to target short-term lets, the Parliament will send a clear message to irresponsible landlords that they are not beyond the grasp of the law on antisocial behaviour? Will he reassure us that, in the meantime, he will urge local authorities and agencies to persist in using the tools that are currently available to tackle the problem?

No. Let me get into my speech. I am sure that, across the chamber, we all want to argue for investment to ensure that we have the skills and infrastructure in place to make the most of the fantastic renewables opportunity. The fact that we do not always agree on everything should not cut across that, particularly in the context of next week's Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce conference, which is a fantastic opportunity to attract new investment and to showcase the renewables opportunities in Scotland. We should send a message from the Parliament that we all agree on that point. In advance of that conference, we want to make it absolutely clear that, should there be a Labour-led Scottish Parliament next year, we would be absolutely determined to continue that process and to take it further, particularly in our marine environment. Our banking and finance sector is crucial to the development of a low-carbon economy. The funding cannot come from the public sector alone. It makes sense for banks, particularly those that are based in Scotland but, I hope, also for banks from abroad, to consider the investment opportunities here. We are not short of such opportunities; we are short of the funding now to ensure that all the opportunities are realised. The proposed green investment bank, which I think we all support, would sit very well in Edinburgh. Government needs to set the targets and the standards, but the challenge is to deliver on the practical changes that are required. Yesterday's announcement by Ofgem is very good news. We have long argued that if we are fully to develop our renewables potential, we need to remove financial constraints and provide a level playing field. By necessity, our marine renewables will always be the furthest from market. The challenge is to ensure that, in changing the rules, we do not disadvantage people on low incomes and shift things too far in the opposite direction. A balance will have to be struck. Yesterday's Crown Estate announcement was also extremely welcome. More can be done to get investors involved; the key challenge is to make that happen.  What distinguishes the Labour Party—this is why we must not have a false consensus—is that our priority is to ensure that social justice sits alongside environmental justice, which is hugely relevant in looking at how we can achieve a low-carbon Scotland. We believe that fuel poverty has to be firmly on the agenda. That is why our amendment talks about the importance of housing and buildings generally. We definitely need to move faster in that area. The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 set out new policies for improving our building stock, which is a huge source of our emissions. However, the recession has seen a collapse in the rate of new building—just look at the statistics. The challenge is to ensure that we come out of the Salmond slump building new houses, not just in the public sector, but right across the private sector, too. We do not believe that the Scottish Government is doing enough on new technologies or to ensure that energy efficiency is being driven forward properly. We have debated that before. We do not regard microgeneration and community heat as eco-bling. They are fundamental to a generation of new housing stock and the retrofitting of existing housing stock if we are to have long-term security of supply, houses that are affordable to live in and buildings that are affordable to heat. The construction industry is absolutely clear in its briefing paper for this debate that it wants to see the gap between ambition and reality closed. We believe that there is too much drift from the Scottish Government. It is not enough just to say that we need investment; it must be made. Procurement presents a fantastic opportunity to drive a low-carbon agenda. We do not think that enough is being done at the moment. The Scottish Building Federation highlighted the potential for 20,000 new jobs in the construction industry but asked how the skills gap will be addressed. I hope that in his winding-up speech, the minister will give us examples of modern apprenticeships and new college investment to deliver on that. I am delighted to hear—as, I am sure, is everyone in the chamber—that the energy efficiency strategy will be published this autumn. Let us hope that it will, indeed, be published this autumn, and not next autumn. The fact that it is not out yet is holding back investment and business, because we need a clear message to be sent to every sector of the Scottish economy that energy efficiency is a top priority. Also crucial are the development of energy-efficient heat and the new range of decentralised and localised energy strategies, which must be produced if we are to tackle the issues of wasted energy and affordability.  Much more needs to be done. This week, ministers made an announcement about the duties on public bodies under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. MSPs across the chamber voted for a strong climate change duty, so we are deeply disappointed by what we have ended up being offered. We agree with the Stop Climate Chaos Coalition that this is a big missed opportunity. We think that the SNP Government has watered down the ambition. Why is there no mandatory reporting? There cannot just be warm words; they will not deliver the transition to a low-carbon economy. The public sector is vital to that process, so why is there nothing on the positive role of trade unions, which can play a massive role in the workplace?

No. I need to get on—I think that I have nine minutes. We know that some of the public sector does not have a good reputation or record on procurement, design of services, training and staff travel. That has to be addressed. Since 2007, the SNP has said that it would not wait until the act was in place before we would see action, but that is unfortunately what has happened. Take the example of low-carbon transport: not enough has been done to support walking and cycling infrastructure and buses are still not fit for purpose in huge areas of Scotland.

That explains the problem. Last year is not a good place to start in making comparisons. The minister needs to look at what was done in the first two sessions of this Parliament and to listen to what the cycling lobby is saying, because it is deeply unhappy about the lack of commitment from the SNP Government. We cannot ignore the fact that this Government has run out of steam on climate change. The new carbon reduction targets that it is putting forward fail to meet its party's manifesto commitment. There is a lot of talk about the 2020 target, but the challenge is not 2020 but what happens this year, next year and the year after that. I am very disappointed that, in its amendment, the Scottish Green Party is seeking to delete the strong points that we have put forward in our amendment. So, although I agree with much of the sentiment in its amendment, I am also greatly disappointed by it. We are not prepared to sign up to the Con-Dem proposals on the green deal. I flag up in particular  our concerns on renewable heat, which members across the chamber will share. I hope that the Liberal Democrats are lobbying on that as we speak. I give the Labour Party's total support for the establishment of a green investment bank. We think that Scotland would be a good place to locate it.

No. I will not.

I turn to the Tory amendment. I would be most interested to hear what the Lib Dems and SNP have to say on the issue of nuclear energy—indeed I turned that back on the heckler of a second ago. Labour has always been clear in saying that the SNP is wrong to rule out nuclear as part of the energy mix for the future. We understand that managing waste will always be a key issue, but it is entirely sensible to keep our existing plant open as long as it is safe to do so.

I note Chris Huhne's comment this week on the standoff between nuclear and renewables, in which he said that there should be no subsidy for new nuclear power. Labour's priority is for renewables. That is where we have the best potential for development and where all our political support and funding should be targeted. If we are to have a chance of achieving a low-carbon society, it needs to sit alongside energy efficiency across society and our economy. I move amendment S3M-7047.2, to leave out from first "developing" to end and insert: "; continuing to develop a national consensus and determination to play a full role in developing the technologies, skills and expertise to build a low-carbon economy; welcomes the job opportunities associated with the further development of low-carbon technologies and acknowledges the need for skills development; notes that the net effect of these and other initiatives has been to position Scotland as a preferred international destination for low-carbon investment, and believes that the Scottish Government should use its powers to the full in support of the development of low-carbon technologies in energy, transport and housing and in the promotion of existing technologies, such as combined heat and power and microgeneration, in order to underpin Scotland's recovery from economic recession."   Jackson Carlaw (West of Scotland) (Con):  We live in an age when the fantastical and imaginary worlds of Jules Verne and H G Wells  are becoming not only future possibilities but today's realities. Almost within the lifetime of this Government, we have seen the tentative embrace of renewables technology in pursuit of the low-carbon economy become a realistic policy priority. Let us not be churlish. Despite the fact that the Government has been neither shy nor reticent, it has recognised Scotland's uniquely placed opportunity and has proceeded with vigour and determination. It has had the advantage of being in office as the opportunities arise and it cannot be said that the Government itself discovered the technologies—an impression that we might be invited to gain from some of its more ardent cheerleaders—but so far, so good. Scotland stands ready to be at the centre of this emerging opportunity. I congratulate the minister on the way in which he set out both the huge scale of the opportunity in financial terms and the many ways in which our natural topography, geography and prevailing climate—in all senses—can be harnessed to replicate the economic success that our good fortune with oil delivered previously. Those opportunities and the potential that arises for Scotland are immense. Even so, we must resist the temptation to suspend belief and embrace every new concept whole-heartedly and without intelligent assessment. Politicians must balance opportunity and risk. The world financial crisis evolved in part because the disciplines that could have helped to prevent it were abandoned. So, too, with our strategy for a carbon economy: we must be intelligently selective and seek to avoid tears and regrets later. Have we become too target obsessed? In our rush of enthusiasm, we now have not only targets but legally binding ones, at that. The minister is bursting with pride at the latest of these, as he confirmed in his speech, but do we regard targets as some sort of panacea? Do new targets equal job done? Are they the Scottish environmental equivalent of mission accomplished? It already seems obvious that we have embraced ambitious legally binding targets without either a compelling narrative as to how they will be achieved or an appropriate recognition of the limits of our unilateral ability so to do. Indeed, if we obsess over the targets and expend political capital arguing over them—as I fear we are doing—we will detract from the bigger picture, on which we must surely ask: how do we reduce the pollution that is generated in Scotland, whether carbon or whatever? Having targets, even legally binding ones, may have raised three cheers from all those who lobbied us as the legislation progressed through the Parliament, and it may have earned us plaudits from international experts and bodies, but it does not mean that the targets will be met.  At the moment, reductions in carbon emissions in Scotland are being driven by a recession-depressed economy. As the economy recovers, there will be a carbon impact. I am not sure that any of us would accept risking that recovery because of the need to achieve annual carbon targets—well, perhaps one or two would. It is therefore vital that we match all the opportunities that the Government has identified in its motion, including matching them to its transport strategies, which must amount to more than simply telling people that they have to do without their motor vehicles. It is not enough simply to send round squads of the well-intentioned to advise folk on the location of their local bus stop. We need to make travel more efficient and offer rewards. I refer to schemes to encourage widespread car sharing, whether through car clubs or other means, and ideas that I have advanced previously on allowing multiple occupancy vehicles to use bus and taxi lanes and introducing hard-shoulder running on appropriate motorways. Going forward, our embrace of the new should not be at the expense of practical action. Just last week, we debated Ayrshire Power's proposal to build a wholly new carbon capture and storage coal-powered station at Hunterston—a proposal that lacks public support. Although we appreciate the potential that carbon capture and storage offers and acknowledge the unique topographical and geographical advantage of the North Sea for storage, this is an area in which the rush for the new must be tempered in the face of qualified assertions regarding the practicalities that are involved in making it a success. Such concerns emanate from the industry itself. The motion illustrates the potential advances in technology that have brought this opportunity on us in something of a rush. If all of it works and Scotland can realise the vision that is presented to us, the potential enormousness of which all of us can begin to imagine, that will be terrific. However, the Wood Mackenzie Ltd report for the Scottish Government in 2009 sets out the bald truth that, with the scheduled closure of Hunterston B and Torness, Scotland will lose a significant volume of low-carbon power, to say nothing of energy security. That is where the Government breaks ranks with many people in the industry. The amendment in my name seeks to address the issue. Today our nuclear capability is responsible for up to 30 per cent of our energy. It is safe, reliable and low carbon. In my view, it is regrettable that some have chosen to conflate the issues of nuclear power and nuclear weapons and to inject a false argument of morality into our—

In the previous parliamentary session, we debated crofting legislation but could not achieve consensus on key matters. However, we managed to make progress and legislate on new crofts. Today, three years into this parliamentary session, we are able to address some unfinished crofting business. There has been extensive debate, not only in the committee but throughout the crofting counties. I add my thanks to the organisations that Roseanna Cunningham mentioned. They put in many hours of discussion and debate to help us to come to our conclusions. In particular, I thank those witnesses who came to Edinburgh or made representations to us  directly in their own communities. I offer particular thanks to the crofters who made us feel welcome in their communities for debating with us the principle and detail of the proposals, telling it like it really is on the ground and being prepared to take us round the boundaries that have been the subject of so much debate. The Labour Party welcomes elements of the bill, such as the plans to democratise the commission, new minor powers for the commission and tweaks to planning for inby land. We appreciate that, on some details, the minister has been prepared to accept amendments when we have made a case for change. I thank her for that. We agree that absenteeism and neglect are both major problems. We need to act on absenteeism, but I point out that not all absenteeism is a problem, and we need real sensitivity in relation to how the provisions are implemented. One size does not fit all crofting communities. We need the expertise and judgment of the assessors, who understand the crofting communities and the detail that will be crucial in implementing the bill. We need action from the commission on neglect. Neglect blights land that has the potential to be worked, which is bad news for local crofting economies, landscapes and biodiversity. We are keen to support action on the neglect provisions. However, the bill gets it wrong on some of the fundamentals. Because there are elements that we cannot support, we cannot support the bill as it has ended up before us today, although we will not vote it down. I said that we supported the proposals to democratise the commission, but this morning, Labour members were appalled by the way in which the minister completely ignored the points that Karen Gillon made in speaking out against the unfairness of the representation mechanisms for electing the commission. Shame on the Scottish National Party and the Tories for voting down gender equality. My committee colleagues have worked hard to persuade the minister to accept our views on the register, and we have worked hard to ensure that the crofters' voices were heard loud and clear. The problem is that although crofters have been given an audience, their concerns have not been acted on. We believe that the bill provides for an expensive and cumbersome system of double registration. Crofters understand the double tagging of sheep; now they find that they are to be double registered. The priority should have been to focus on community mapping so that all parties could sit around the table to ensure that common sense and common interest prevail. The process should be a community process that builds on the  strengths of crofting and our crofting communities, rather than one that sends those communities down an even more litigious, expensive and time-consuming route. I have seen the boundaries that will be contested. It is not just about where a line is drawn on a map; it is about how the land is used by crofters, the times of the year that they are allowed to access that land, and being in line with the principle that crofters need to be able to work the land. A key principle of legislation is that it should not make things worse. Unfortunately, the double register will do precisely that. That is why I give a pledge that, if Labour is returned to government next year, we will carefully consider what can be done to sort out the mess that we believe the part of the bill that I am talking about will cause. We are in a recession, and all members know that money will be incredibly tight across the public and private sectors. Let us not waste precious Scottish Government resources and crofter money and resources on a dangerous distraction. I give a pledge that Labour will focus on the fundamentals: the economics of crofting; its viability, which we have consistently campaigned for in opposition; and a more joined-up approach between Government agencies that helps crofters, not one that makes their lives harder. In government, we would have the chance to act to support crofting as a way of life in our most fragile rural communities. That is why we will today let through on to the statute book the very modest improvements in the parts of the bill that we have said that we are happy to support. However, I lay down a marker. We will come back to and reconsider the legislation. We will closely monitor the costly and cumbersome double registration scheme that the minister has put in the bill, and we will do whatever is necessary to stop it damaging crofting.

I thank the colleagues who have signed my motion. As we all know, members do not get this slot without cross-party support, and I am particularly pleased to have the support of colleagues from throughout Scotland. I hope that the fact that we are having the debate will send a message from Parliament and from the communities that we represent that we want better coverage of Scottish rugby on terrestrial television. As Murrayfield is in my constituency, I take an interest in the sport, and I am impressed by the strong support for the game that is evidenced by the players and volunteers in local clubs and schools across the city. From the series of briefings that we have had over the years, it has been apparent that the sport has reorganised its governance structures and put in place plans for growth. Rugby is a much loved sport in Scotland. The massive support for recognition for Bill McLaren certainly did not surprise me, and the way that the campaign grew on Facebook tells us something about the changing age profile of the sport. In each of the past two years, MSPs have been involved in discussions about the development of schools rugby for boys and girls. Plans for growing the game to 38,000 participants this year from a base of 24,000 in 2006-07 were achieved, but without coverage it will be hard to inspire the next generation to get involved. Young people need to see their heroes, and they need to learn the craft of the game and their skills from watching the big matches. I know that the Scottish Youth Parliament is taking an interest in our debate today.  We have heard about plans to build on the sport in communities, and to introduce rugby into the Olympics with the re-entry of rugby sevens in 2012. During the next few years there will be one opportunity after another for international rugby events. We are all signed up to greater participation in the sport, and I particularly welcome the Scottish Sports Association's support for today's debate in recognition of the health benefits that arise from wider sports participation. We have previously rehearsed in the chamber the importance of the sport financially, given that events at Murrayfield are worth nearly £130 million annually to the Scottish economy—£72.9 million to Edinburgh alone. However, despite that positive backdrop, we still do not have consistent coverage on television outside the six nations championship. My motion calls for more investment in the broadcasting of Scottish rugby to ensure coverage of a broader range of rugby matches and tournaments at all levels. This year we were able to watch the Scotland team's fantastic performance in Argentina, but two years ago the same matches were not covered. There seems to be no logic in what is covered and what is not. Scottish Rugby describes the current position as one in which the sport is being deprived of the oxygen of national exposure. We are unique among the home nations in our poor coverage. Wales and Ireland in particular have far superior coverage, especially given the size of their populations. Of course the game is bigger in Wales, but that should not mean that we have such a disproportionately smaller amount of coverage. We have professional rugby clubs in Scotland, such as Glasgow Warriors and Edinburgh. They have been doing well in the Magners league, but historically they have not been getting the coverage. It is not good enough to have only online news and radio coverage. I am told by rugby fans at club level that the coverage that clubs get in England and Wales is having a dramatic and positive effect on grass-roots rugby. TV legitimates sporting events, provides the stimulus for growth and gives support throughout the country. However, in Scotland, Murrayfield Wanderers Football Club reports: "lack of coverage over major national and international matches is making it hard to recruit new supporters and players to the game". It wants to put on record that the matter "is of great concern to supporters and clubs alike and is undermining the game at a community level."  Broadcasting matters for the future development of the sport. We need growth at every level if we are to have the national teams that everyone will want to watch. Scotland is now in its joint highest ever position of seventh in the world rankings following success in Argentina. We need to build on that because, over the next few years, rugby will be on the world stage more and more. We will have the challenges of the rugby world cup in 2011 in New Zealand, the London Olympics in 2012, the Glasgow Commonwealth games in 2014 and the world cup in England in 2015. In 2016, new competitors—Russia, Samoa and Georgia—will join the Olympic rugby competition. More competitors are coming in every year. If we want to give our national team the best possible chance, we need to ensure that it gets the support and coverage it needs. If Scottish Rugby has to pay for TV coverage, that will mean vital resources being diverted from growing the community level of the game. It cannot be right that Scottish Rugby has had to pay for coverage of recent seasons of the International Rugby Board world series sevens to get the tournament broadcast. However, things are moving and it is important that we acknowledge that. The BBC Alba deal that was struck earlier this month is a big step forward. It will mean that, for the next four years, there will be coverage of at least eight Glasgow or Edinburgh home matches per season. We will also see a more joined-up approach with Welsh and Irish public broadcasters. That must be built on because we are a long way from rugby getting the level of coverage that it should be able to expect in Scotland. There is an opportunity to argue for a fairer deal through the BBC trust's strategic review. Scottish Rugby is concerned that rugby in Scotland is being marginalised because of a lack of coverage. We need the kind of support that other sports get, so will the minister tell us what the Scottish Government will do to put its weight behind Scottish Rugby? I hope that our national public broadcaster, the BBC, will sit up and listen to today's debate. It has demonstrated through experience in Wales that there are innovative ways to bring games to the screen, particularly via the red button. We want to hear how that experience can be used to get better coverage in Scotland. I thank colleagues for turning up today and look forward to hearing their comments and their support. I hope that, with support from across the Parliament, we can get better support for Scottish rugby so that our national team, which is doing  really well, gets the support and development that it deserves in the future.

Why was due diligence not carried out on the capacity of The Gathering 2009 Ltd to pay back  the loan that it requested from the Scottish Government at the point at which it asked for that loan? That issue is raised in the Auditor General's report, which makes it clear that a deficit was seen as possible from the outset of the company's operation. On what date did the Scottish Government accept that The Gathering 2009 Ltd was trading insolvently and was unable to pay its creditors? Why does the minister not understand that that issue is crucial to the 103 small businesses that were cruelly let down by the failure of a company that the Scottish Government tried to get other public sector bodies to buy weeks after the event?

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the impact of the council tax freeze on local authority budgets. (S3O-11036)

I alert the cabinet secretary to my concern about my constituents' experiences. The less well-off must bear the brunt of the cuts that stretched councils must make, whereas those who are better off benefit from council tax savings. I am particularly concerned about council house tenants in Edinburgh whose rents have increased by almost 20 per cent since 2007—from £57.98 a week to £69.55 a week. Is it right that council house tenants, many of whom have minimum-wage jobs, are being asked to pay an extra £11.57 a week, while better-off people benefit disproportionately from the council tax freeze?

It is clear from the debate that the Scottish Government needs to do better on tourism. It is not the industry but the Government's strategy that is in crisis. Tourism is hugely important to us, as colleague after colleague has stressed this morning. For us in Edinburgh, tourism is one of our biggest industries. We are one of Europe's most popular destinations, but we cannot afford to rest on our laurels. That is why the lessons of the gathering have to be learnt. I asked the Auditor General for Scotland to intervene and investigate last year because I was deeply disturbed by the lack of transparency in the dealings around the event, the huge cost overruns and the damage done to businesses locally. It required a series of parliamentary questions and freedom of information requests to unearth exactly what happened. As a result of yesterday's report, we now know that the Scottish Government knew that the gathering was in trouble when it approved a secret loan to keep it afloat. That loan became a write-off. It is clear that the Scottish Government tested neither the viability nor the robustness of the business case offered by the gathering organisers. It is now also clear that the First Minister personally engaged in a round of phone calls to try to offload the company, desperately trying to persuade somebody to take the company on and save the Scottish Government's face. The Auditor General's report is damning because it identifies a lack of due process, which is fundamental in a democracy. Moreover, the Scottish Government and the City of Edinburgh Council did not have a full understanding of the position before they released information last year about the future of the company, which is absolutely galling for the 103 local businesses that were misled by those statements. They were left by the Scottish Government to fend for themselves and they found out this week that another company that has the organiser of the gathering, Lord Sempill, at its helm and which was given a loan by the Scottish Government has resurfaced to start trading again. Where is the fair treatment for private businesses? The Auditor General is clear that lessons have to be learnt. Due diligence, clear expectations and performance indicators need to be agreed when large sums of money are being handed out. Our tourism industry deserves better. The Auditor General's report shows us what went wrong with the gathering, a key part of homecoming, but it does not explain why the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Mike Russell, and his boss the First Minister acted in such a  cavalier fashion. That is important, because there are still questions to answer. I was astonished that the minister could not bring himself to apologise for the handling of the debacle. He only got round to mentioning the gathering when Iain Smith challenged him about it in the last 15 seconds of his speech. Things are not getting easier for local businesses, because, as many colleagues have suggested, business rates are up. Hotels in Edinburgh are hit by an average of 20 per cent and cafes and shops, which are vital to our tourism industry, are also hit. When Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce and I met John Swinney, he made sympathetic noises about tax increment finance and the specific need to avoid inconsistent decisions on individual rates bills, but he did not offer any comfort on transitional relief. SNP members, including Rob Gibson in particular, have asked for reality. The point that the minister made ignores the extra cash that the SNP Government has taken in through revaluation this year. He needs to address the point made by the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, which thinks that the figure of £60 million—the sum given in response to parliamentary questions—could be higher. The timing of the revaluation was crucial: it happened when business was good and the values of the properties were significantly higher than they are now. Therefore, businesses face a double whammy: they are hit by rates revaluation at a point when the value of their property has plummeted, and the value of their business is not as good as it was, which means that their rates valuations are inflated. That has pushed up costs for business throughout the city. The Government is not making it easy for companies that are trying to deal with the Salmond slump.

There is a differential impact in Scotland, as the Government's own figures show. Edinburgh is now a global destination, but it has taken years of work to build us up to that. We cannot be complacent, and the last thing that we need is an incompetent approach. We need only consider what is happening locally: we are reaching the anniversary of the beginning of the waste dispute in the city—it is astonishing that it has not been settled a year on. The price is overflowing bins and rubbish in the streets for tourists to see. It is not good enough. We need more competent, engaged leadership, nationally and locally. Edinburgh is one of Europe's most popular destinations but there is a global recession, so everybody has to work  harder. That is why it is even more important that VisitScotland has a clear focus and the Scottish Government takes clear action not only to help generate tourist visits but to help the industry survive really difficult times.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures will be included in its carers strategy to ensure that local authority budget cuts do not impact negatively on carers. (S3O-10948)

I welcome the fact that we will have a carers strategy in the near future. I welcome the carers who are joining us in Parliament today during carers week and pay tribute to the fantastic support that they give to their families. Without them, the financial cost to the public purse would be billions. Given the economic context that the minister talked about, will she remind local authorities of their duty to support carers and consult them fully when cuts are proposed? The concordat is not working for carers, particularly older carers. Will she commit to ensuring that local authorities use equality impact assessments to ensure that carers do not lose out disproportionately in budget decisions? I am sure that I do not need to remind her of the problems that we had in Edinburgh recently with the care tendering process, which thankfully was abandoned.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to help newly qualified teachers into work. (S3O-10835)

I thank the minister for his warm words, but I tell him that the real worries are for this year's probationary teachers, who look at the statistics and know that only 30 per cent of the 2008-09 cohort obtained a permanent contract. That is down from more than 50 per cent a couple of years ago. Of that group, nearly 14 per cent have still not found jobs—double the rate of two years ago. The minister talks about work with local authorities, but given that there were only 20 vacancies in Edinburgh's primary and secondary schools in February, what reassurance can he give new teachers who trained in Scotland that they will get jobs here rather than having to leave the teaching profession or look for jobs further afield?

I congratulate Peter Peacock on securing tonight's  debate. The debate so far shows that hill tracks can be an issue. Peter Peacock and I have taken the opportunity during the summer recess to look at some of the areas where one can see the impact of badly designed hill tracks. I understand absolutely, and take the point from several colleagues, that we need a system that farmers and crofters can live with. They have to be able to manage their land effectively and support the economic activity that they carry out. Christopher Harvie's analysis of the situation was spot on: it is a question of balance. In response to Murdo Fraser's final point about wind farms, I say that the whole point is that hill tracks should be brought under the planning system, which would provide an opportunity for democratic accountability and to say, "No, we don't accept this development," as has happened with many wind farm proposals. Where new tracks are accepted, there will be the potential to mitigate their impact in relation to issues such as peat and access. That is at the heart of the discussion. We need to look at the cumulative impact, which has been raised by several organisations, because there is not sufficient monitoring of the situation. As Alison McInnes pointed out, we are losing the features that make people want to holiday in the Highlands and Islands. There is a lack of enforcement—that point was put very well by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds. This is not a new issue. It has not just popped on to our agenda; it has been out there for several years, which is one of the reasons why it came up in the Heriot-Watt study, and it needs to be addressed. Let us look at the recommendations from Heriot-Watt. There are ways of managing the situation that would not be excessively onerous on land managers. One recommendation is to develop a comprehensive register of hill tracks so that we can monitor and evaluate the impact on the landscape, as well as the ecological condition of hill tracks. That point was well made by Maureen Watt. We should have a system of prior notification—

I ask Jamie McGrigor to let me continue. He did not take any interventions in his speech and I have a pile to get through. Let us look at the recommendations and examine what opportunities could come from them. To deal with the impact of mobile phone masts, we use a system of prior notification, which is a way of bringing a development into the planning system without automatically introducing onerous requirements. That is a balanced approach that should be considered for hill tracks. Another recommendation is to have a voluntary  code of conduct that would reflect the best techniques and practice out there. We would look at what SNH recommends and encourage people to follow that best practice. Therefore, there are ways of looking for best practice. The John Muir Trust has made the point that it is a landowner and it is aware of the opportunities for good land management. There is a lot of best practice that we could consider. Peter Peacock outlined the problems that have been raised with us. I emphasise that issues such as erosion and impacts particularly in the higher altitudes where biodiversity is fragile and takes years to recover are important and need to be considered. Ramblers Scotland has considered fencing and its impact on access. The debate lets us consider really difficult issues. There are balances to be struck, and some of the issues are controversial, but that should not mean that we should not examine them. I hope that the minister will say when he will put in place the review that was suggested three years ago. The issue has been on the go for a long time. We have had a members' business debate on it and there is a live petition on it. That should lead to action. There are no hill tracks in my constituency, but members would be amazed by how many thousands of people go from our cities to our rural communities because they love our rural landscapes. People love our wild land and landscapes that are not quite as wild but are still exciting. Such things are a fantastic release from the city, which is why hundreds of thousands of tourists visit Scotland. If we do not value and monitor our landscapes, we could lose a fantastic part of Scotland's character. We should be concerned about that. It is a pity that Rob Gibson, who spoke about national parks, has left the chamber. The point of the last ministerial commitment to a national parks review was that we could pick up precisely such issues and have a proper look at their impact on the national parks. The issue has been raised and a warning has been sounded. I hope that ministers will listen and act.

Will the minister take an intervention?

That is not true.

The Scottish National Party's manifesto promised annual targets of 3 per cent, but the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill as introduced included only a target of a 34 per cent reduction by 2020. The minister's comparison with the UK is interesting. The UK Government took the UK Committee on Climate Change's advice in setting its target at 34 per cent, but we felt that in Scotland we had more opportunities. Hours after Iain Gray challenged the First Minister to raise his target, the SNP jumped past our suggestion of 40 per cent and went to 42 per cent. To blame scientific advice for the lack of action is unacceptable, because we all knew last year that 42 per cent exceeded the UK Committee on Climate Change's recommendation. That committee's report this year identifies more that the Scottish Government could do. The issue is about political priorities; that committee cannot make such decisions for us. When the SNP Government finishes its fourth year in office, it will have put in place a reduction of only 0.05 per cent for this year, instead of 3 per cent annual targets. We all understand that the numbers will have to represent new effort by not just the Government but by all of us in society. We acknowledge and welcome the fact that the minister has put peat on the agenda. We, too, want to act on peat. As carbon reductions through peat will count from 2012, we need Scottish  Natural Heritage, the Forestry Commission Scotland and Scottish Water to work together. Let us look at the minister's figures. We are not convinced that they add up. What will actually happen? He has changed the reduction only for 2012 and not for subsequent years. Surely the commitment on peat cannot be delivered in one year. It must follow through to 2015, so more figures should have been altered. As we said in Labour's climate change debate in March, the SNP Government can take practical measures now to bring about faster changes—it can do more on low-carbon vehicles, tree planting, Government buildings and schools. We have talked about the boiler scrappage scheme today, which was another missed opportunity to be ambitious. Every time I raise energy efficiency measures with the minister, he talks down what we can do. We all agree that we could do more together. We need practical measures to drive our economy forward. Political support across the chamber is available for the minister to take action, so it would have been better to debate the policies with the targets, even if the final papers are not in front of us. As ever, the SNP has talked a good game, but its manifesto commitments have gone the way of all its other promises—they have been dumped. We want statutory targets to be in place and we want ambitious targets to reduce our carbon emissions, but they must be backed by ambitious plans. We are being asked to put in place the targets without the programmes that we all need to talk about. The SNP has left the step change to following Governments. We need more of a demonstration of serious action. We are not setting out to break a consensus on climate change; the Opposition parties are doing their job and reading the small print in statutory instruments. In 2007, John Swinney said: "A number of issues can be taken forward, and the Government will make early progress on specific action. I emphasise that we are not just putting the issue away for a couple of years until we get the legislation sorted out—there will be early action to tackle it."— [ Official Report , 21 June 2007; c 1047.]  That sums up our problem, which is that the SNP Government talks an excellent game but has failed utterly to deliver on its ambition that was not only in its manifesto but has been in what it has said in the chamber. The detail matters and the order matters. They are not good enough.

Given the massive response from Scottish householders in such a small space of time, surely this is precisely the sort of scheme that the Scottish Government should support. Will the Government now commit to extending the scheme to benefit the thousands of our constituents who could not make the time horizon of 24 hours? The scheme would create jobs and reduce carbon emissions; surely we can all agree on that, and the First Minister can respond.

I want to pick up on that final question with which Stuart McMillan left us. He asked why rail projects have not been promoted, but we need only consider the Scottish Government's cancellation of the Glasgow airport rail link and the central Scotland rail hub that was to have been based around Edinburgh airport—

No, because I am only 20 seconds into my speech and I did not interrupt the member. If he lets me finish the point, he will find that it is that railways are infinitely more complex and expensive than roads. Our engineers know  how to build roads. Railways are much harder to build. To see that, one need only consider the political response to the tram scheme in Edinburgh and the cost overruns. There was nothing like that in Glasgow for the M74 northern extension. That issue is fundamental to politics. Unless we accept it, we will not understand the obstacles to high-speed rail and other types of rail investment. There has been agreement among members on the issue, which is useful. Our job is to ensure that a high-speed rail line is built in the UK and that it comes to Glasgow and Edinburgh. That is the bottom line for every party in the Parliament, so we should ensure that the UK Government hears that loudly and clearly. We must also ensure that the right route is chosen, that it suits us and that we achieve the best possible journey times for Scotland. We need to use the debate to ensure that Scotland is not left behind as the UK network begins to be built. We have to hope that colleagues from all parties in the Parliament and at the UK level will lobby the UK Government. The issue is not only about trying to get Scotland linked in. There is a real danger that the analysis of the previous Labour Government and the research that it commissioned will be thrown out. If it is, at least a year and a half will be added on to the project. I hope that people will ask the new Government to think long and hard before it chucks out all that work. A lot of good, respectable work has been done. Charlie Gordon made an excellent case for that work. Railways cannot just be imagined up. We know that in Scotland. I did not get to open one of the railway projects that I commissioned, because such projects take time. Stewart Stevenson is the lucky person who gets to open them. Political certainty over time is needed. We need the right route and to ensure that it is entirely additional to the east and west coast main lines. Stuart McMillan was absolutely right about the creaking infrastructure on the east and west coast main lines. Even with the important upgrades that we have seen on the west coast main line and those that are planned for the east coast main line, there will simply not be the space to accommodate the train speeds that are needed if we are going to get journey times down below three hours. Physically, we could not do that consistently for every train that goes from Edinburgh or Glasgow to London. No member has mentioned rail freight. With full passenger lines, rail freight will not be able to expand to pick up opportunities. If there are going to be much tighter restrictions on carbon emissions, we must get freight off the roads and on to the rails. That means freeing up capacity on the east and west coast lines, and on regional networks south of Edinburgh. Therefore, we must  have a totally separate line, and that must be put loudly and clearly on the agenda. Last night, we had a reception in the Parliament for the Scottish branch of the Royal Town Planning Institute. Afterwards, I reflected on the time that it takes to get major rail infrastructure in place. We make things particularly difficult for ourselves in the UK. I know that the new planning laws that have been passed at UK level will help the process, but members should not underestimate the power of back benchers or of MPs whose areas the new line will run through. Only last month, the new Secretary of State for Wales said that she would defy the party whip, as her constituency comes first in all instances. She was not happy about the high-speed rail link going through her constituency. I do not want to pick her out; other MPs will have the same view. That partly answers Tom McCabe's point about China. Other countries do not have the same democratic hurdles that we put in the way of our big infrastructure projects. There are good reasons for our democratic accountability processes, but we must ensure that we get agreement. If we can get cross-party agreement in the Scottish Parliament and in the House of Commons, that will help to get a railway put in place. However, members should not underestimate the capacity of our planning system to make the process long. That is why Scotland needs to play its role now. I urge the minister to consider the line in Scotland. If we can cut to the chase and ensure that we get the UK Government to consider Scotland now and not see us at the end of the process—it should ensure that we are part of the process—we can go ahead and start to look at the construction process in Scotland. We need to get things through the planning system in Scotland and ensure that there is certainty. At the very least, we must get the Glasgow to Edinburgh high-speed rail connection in place so that we can link into the wider UK network. There is an opportunity that we must seize. We have an opportunity because Scotland is part of the UK and we are members of the Scottish Parliament. We must ensure that our voice is heard loud and clear. The new Con-Dem coalition colleagues must take the message on board down south and MSPs must use our powers of opposition in Scotland and as part of the UK process. We need to speak with one voice from Scotland and ensure that the rail link happens. If we let the existing process go to seed and have to start from scratch, that will add years to the process and make our discussions academic. For Scotland's environmental—

Does the cabinet secretary not accept the view of many people in the city, particularly in the business community, that major public infrastructure—whether it is roads, trams or trains—needs to be taken on board by whoever is the Government of the day and that it is not good enough for his colleagues on the council to attack the project without being constructive about it? It is a huge project that is critical to our future.

No, it was in 2001.

The committee's report gives an excellent overview of the challenges that face local government. The current regime in the City of Edinburgh Council could be described as an example of how not to run a coalition. There is a lack of clear priorities, there is no strategic vision, the voluntary sector is being poorly treated and there is a failure to deliver good relations with the workforce. Duncan McNeil was right to say that local government must set priorities. We are in an extremely tight financial climate. The problem is that councils have had their hands tied behind their backs by the SNP Government for the past three years. Derek Brownlee was right to point out that the council tax freeze has not been cost free. In Edinburgh, the freeze has been paid for through higher council house rents, higher costs for sports facilities and in-year funding cuts to voluntary organisations. In future it will be paid for through the privatisation of thousands of jobs by the SNP-Lib Dem council. In its first year in office, the SNP-Lib Dem coalition boldly announced a massive schools and community centres closure programme, which was deeply unpopular and for which there was no clear evidence; nor was there any relationship with the SNP's flagship policy on class sizes. The proposals were discredited, unceremoniously dumped and replaced with another programme of school closures, for which different reasons were given. Again, there was a lack of rigour in the proposals. In the Scottish Parliament we debate the huge cost of the Scottish Futures Trust almost every week. However, Edinburgh is doubly hit by a reduction in Government support and an inadequate programme for replacement.  Moreover, the curriculum for excellence is being implemented without the guidance and resources that teachers and parents tell me are desperately needed. We have similar problems with regard to flooding investment, in relation to which the council is being forced down a slower and more expensive procurement route in the absence of the previous Scottish Government's funding deal. The council dropped its proposals on the social care tender, after a massive campaign exposed the reduction in quality of service for vulnerable adults and their families. Lessons must be learned from those decisions. Clear priorities with a sound basis must be established. If there will be losers, we must admit that. We must consider the quality of service, and if the evidence is there for everyone to see we must be honest about that. When difficult decisions have to be made, there needs to be transparency, strong evidence and—this is crucial—consultation with the people who rely on the services. National policies for local government have to be funded effectively. However, the SNP Government has put a financial straitjacket on Edinburgh. The situation is compounded by the council's lack of political judgment and lack of concern about the impact of its decisions on communities and vulnerable people. Our capital must deliver prosperity and economic success, for the future of not just the city but the whole country. What does it say about the competence of our local coalition that 10 months into the waste dispute there is no resolution to the issue? As the months have passed, residents have submitted complaint after complaint about the poor quality of rubbish collection—and, as Mary Mulligan said, the council has still not sorted out equal pay. The city must be in competition for an award for worst ever management of a new tram project. There was bound to be some disruption. We were all braced for that. However, the lack of agreement and political management at the heart of the council has not helped. When the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth signed off £500 million from his budget, the project had a clean bill of health from Audit Scotland. Yesterday, he visited the M74 northern extension project, which is three years late and is coming in at £692 million. I signed off the project at £177 million—

I say to the cabinet secretary that my point is that major investment projects do not always come in on time or on budget—and that is not a plea for costs to rise further. There must be tight financial management, and we need  more rational discussion and involvement on the part of the Scottish Government. We need grown-up engagement. The tram project must be fixed. It is a major problem for Edinburgh's finances. Big projects reach a point at which whoever is in government has a responsibility to work with the project organisers. Our capital city deserves better from the Scottish Government and from its council coalition. Last week I called for a new look at business rates. Edinburgh makes a massive contribution to the Scottish Government's coffers and I am delighted that the Government is considering pilots on tax incremental financing. A fairer deal on business rates and tax incremental financing would not sort out all our problems but would make a difference. I call on the Scottish Government to work constructively with the City of Edinburgh Council. The recommendations in the committee's report that relate directly to what I said about the council need to be considered carefully. We need new solutions for the future. For those reasons, I commend the committee's recommendations.

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it is providing to businesses in Edinburgh to help them cope with increased business rates. (S3O-10452)

I thank the minister for his reply and for his recent letter to me. I have gone back to the Edinburgh business community, which remains adamant that, in the absence of a transitional relief scheme, the massive hikes in their business rates mean that many Edinburgh businesses are losing out severely, particularly in the retail and tourism industries. Is the minister prepared to meet me and the local chamber of commerce to look at the analysis of the work that it has done by talking to local businesses? In my constituency, for example, many businesses have lost out, even though the minister has not intended for that to be the case, and they are now facing a hike of up to 70 per cent in their rateable value and 43 per cent in business rates, to give just one retail example. Given that tourism is a £2 billion industry in Edinburgh, and rateable values have risen more than 40 per cent across the board, local businesses are very worried about the Edinburgh economy and the situation in Scotland as a whole.

Perhaps debates on crofting should be a special sub-category of debate in the Parliament. This has been an interesting debate, and it is clear that there are areas on which we can all agree, across the chamber. Although I welcome some of Roseanna Cunningham's responses to the committee's recommendations, I hope that she will take some time to stand back and reflect on the tone and substance of what some of us have said today. There is an opportunity to do more to improve the bill. The minister has not had a lot of time to respond to the committee's recommendations, and it would be good if she could do so before getting to the real detail that colleagues such as Elaine Murray talked about. If the minister wants to talk further to any of us before stage 2, she will be able to do that. Maureen Watt gave a fascinating account of the committee's travels. Having visited Camuscross and walked through the land there and talked to crofters about the issues that they face, I know that some of the issues are incredibly complex. The fact that this is our second crofting bill in five  years means that the crofting communities are well geared up to lobby us and reflect on what we are debating. We also have an opportunity to reflect on their concerns. I was struck by the extent to which John Scott agreed with us on issues such as the underfunding of the commission and the need to allow the right amount of time if we are to go down the road of community mapping, which he and others across the chamber have supported. We have differing emphases. He is much more enthusiastic about aggressively promoting more owner occupation in crofting, while we think that there is still a role for people to rent their crofts. We think that that is part of the mix. Crofting is different across Scotland—

Let me finish this point, which relates to the point that Liam McArthur made very powerfully. The ambition for crofting is the same across Scotland, but crofting is different in different parts of Scotland, and we must ensure that that variety is reflected. It is a cultural issue in some parts of Scotland, and we must ensure that there is a role for people who are owner-occupiers and for people who rent their crofts. We must also consider the new opportunities that we discussed in relation to the Crofting Reform etc Act 2007, about bigger organisations giving land so that people can rent and, possibly, buy crofts. Liam McArthur focused on that variety of crofting traditions. We need to focus on that. He also made the powerful point that we must not make things worse—a point that was made in debates around the 2007 act, influenced heavily by John Farquhar Munro; that is a powerful principle in developing legislation. Liam McArthur's comments were backed up by several members. Let us not only get the elections to the crofting commission right, but make the commission more proactive. Alasdair Allan made some powerful points about the need to democratise the commission and to use the Government's power to promote the elections. He said that we should do what we can to engage people in the process of tackling neglect, and that anything that can be done to minimise costs would be welcome. A question that has emerged loud and clear during the bill process is whether we need a second register. We are all trying to wrestle with the need for a more community-based approach to crofting and to bring people together to make the most of the expertise that has been built up over the years. I suggested earlier that perhaps there should be a special sub-category of debates in Parliament for crofting. Peter Peacock's comments  took us to the heart of the debate when he said that "absenteeism of itself is not necessarily a problem—it is only a problem when it is a problem." That more or less sums up the debate.

It is not just about our views. If we went out and talked to crofters, we would get the same equivocation. We need to sort something, but at the same time we need to be careful how we sort it or we may make it worse.

I could not disagree more. We introduced some valuable provisions in the previous bill, which the Parliament passed. We removed the bits of the bill on which we could not get the right answer at the time. It would have been wrong to include in legislation provisions that did not have the confidence of the Parliament and, crucially, of the crofting communities. That is why we need to listen carefully to the commonsense comments of the crofting communities. Peter Peacock focused on the need for the crofting commission to have a strategic plan, with the opportunity to bring big benefits. Jamie Stone talked about adding the possibility of tourism benefits. We must consider crofting positively. The bill must be about not just protecting what we have, but seeing how the crofting communities can develop in the future. That is why there is such nervousness about a map-based register. Roseanna Cunningham said that such a register could cost millions, while Peter Peacock said that it could take 40 years to complete. There are some mixed-up views on the map-based register that we must bottom out before we reach the end of stage 2. We cannot support something that we think will be manifestly complex and massively expensive and which will not bring benefits. We are much more in favour of the community mapping approach. There is huge consensus among members that we need to go down that route. John Scott mentioned that the SRPBA would be keen to go down that route. Landowners and crofters want us to take the issue seriously. Let us go back to the evidence that was presented to the committee on the map-based register. On the one hand, the minister told us that it is straightforward to adapt the existing information technology system and that expertise  and design processes are already in place. Contrast that with the evidence from the Registers of Scotland, whose short answer was that an IT system could be built anywhere to create the register. I am extremely concerned about massive expenditure on IT. The legacy of the past 20 years is of Governments having real difficulty designing new IT systems. Why make such a straightforward agenda much more complex? Everyone wants to give the crofting communities the chance to survive and to support individual crofters. Let us not make it worse for them. Let us not create something that will be massively bureaucratic and expensive, without proven benefits. That is the mood among many members. I hope that the minister will reflect that—if not when she sums up, at least before stage 2. As Elaine Murray pointed out, detailed scrutiny of the bill is needed. That has not been done even at stage 1. Our job at stage 2 will be to examine the bill in detail to ensure that we do not make any mistakes. Elaine Murray gave us the same detailed critique of the trigger process that crofters organisations and individual crofters have given, and we need to listen to those comments. For a start, the election system has to be fair. We have a major opportunity that we need to get right; if we do not, we will simply throw away the hours of consultation, the hours of listening to people and the hours of good debate that has been had not only in the committee but out and about in the crofting communities and in the chamber today. Our crofting debates have a particular flavour but, as we learned during the passage of the Crofting Reform etc (Scotland) Act 2007, we should take this opportunity to reflect and to think really hard about things to ensure that we do not put the wrong legislation on the statute book. There are good things in the bill and Roseanna Cunningham, since becoming minister, has already made a number of changes. We need to continue the process and end up with a bill that we can all sign up to, not something that we are divided on.

More on that later. [ Laughter .]

Labour very much welcomes the chance to secure improvements to the lives of crofters and our crofting communities. We believe that crofting remains a significant part of the way of life of the Highlands and Islands and is also economically significant to those communities. We also believe that crofting has a strong part to play in securing the public good, in retaining the population in what might be considered remote areas of Scotland, in maintaining biodiversity, in food production and in landscape and habitat maintenance. We also think that crofting has real potential to contribute to this century's challenge of tackling climate change. However, we know that crofting is not producing high economic returns for its participants and that it needs on-going and improved economic support if we are to retain it as an activity that is largely confined to less-favoured areas, not just in geographic terms but in climate terms. We need to ensure that we get the regulatory framework right, but we must also get the financial support mechanisms in place—the two must go together. I thank members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee for their scrutiny of the Scottish Government's proposals. I also thank all those in the crofting communities and beyond who made so many representations on the bill. However, I am struck by the number of times in  the committee's report where there is clearly no consensus on key bill proposals. I know that horse trading is fundamental to the way in which committees in the Parliament work—with good reason—to get to the end point, but it is striking that running right through the report are so many issues on which there is still such division. On some issues, there is a clear lack of enthusiasm for proposals; on others, there is concern across the whole committee about the detail and effectiveness of the proposed measures. We believe that the bill is of marginal significance to the future of crofting and that major problems remain with some of the proposals that it sets out. Although we can and will support those provisions that we believe will help with aspects of regulation, we believe that, on balance, the bill as drafted will be disadvantageous to crofting. I choose my words carefully, as there are elements of the bill that we think are improvements. However, there are problems: the new financial burdens, through the administrative charges on crofters and the charges on crofters for the new second register; the potential for the new register to be divisive and bureaucratic; and the proposals to extend the rights of landlords to allow them to benefit from croft development. There is also the whole issue of the crofting commission's status as a tribunal. We want to look carefully at the basis of the minister's statement today, as we are still not convinced about that and want to see the detail. We are also worried about the removal of the Crofters Commission's development function. Crucially, we do not think that the crofting commission will have the right resources to undertake its new role. For us, the issue of finance is fundamental to the debate around the bill. As the National Trust for Scotland observes: "Crofting cannot be sustained by legislation alone and increased regulation needs to be matched with a properly targeted crofting support system on the ground. Existing measures to encourage crofters to undertake agricultural work on their crofts are woefully inadequate, especially in the context of existing fuel costs, distance from markets, low productivity in general and the small scale of most crofts. We believe there is currently little in the Scottish Rural Development Programme that is going to appeal to the majority of crofters and this gap must be filled by putting in place financial incentives that are simple, straightforward and properly targeted." We agree completely. The finances that underpin the bill need to be right. Nevertheless, our view of the bill is balanced, and there are provisions that we are happy to support. Those include the proposal to introduce direct elections to the crofting commission, although we want to look further at the detail; the measures to strengthen the commission's hand in relation to the refusal of applications to decroft  even when planning consent has been granted; and the action that it will be possible to take against neglect and absenteeism, where that is appropriate. We are also delighted that the minister will take this historic opportunity to redress the Whitbread judgment, as she suggested a few minutes ago.

No, I need to get on. Many of us have been on the case on crofting for some time, and we know that there is scope to improve matters. There has not been much time to digest the Scottish Government's response to the committee's recommendations, therefore I hope that the minister will reply to my comments in her closing speech. I will not be as tough on her as I would normally be at this point. We received her response yesterday, but I am conscious of the fact that, because the committee's report was published only on 6 May, she has not had much time to reflect on and digest it. We all need to take a little bit of space. The process of debating the right legislation and the regulatory framework has been going on for some time in this session—it went on in the previous session, too. I welcome the work that my colleagues on the committee and my Labour colleagues in the Highlands and Islands have been doing in consulting crofters and considering the evidence that has been presented to Parliament. The improvements that we think can be made are not just about deleting key sections, but about making new provisions. The minister has ruled it out, but we think that the commission needs a direct say in planning decisions that are outwith local plan provisions. I note that the minister is holding out against making the crofting commission a statutory consultee. We support the provisions that will strengthen the powers of the commission to enable it to refuse applications to decroft even when planning consent has been granted, but it is surely better to get the planning decisions right in the first place. There is a real problem in that, if the commission waits until after a decision has been made to say that it is wrong, that will tip the balance against its getting involved. A consensus is emerging that we should support and encourage crofting community development and the voluntary mapping of each community and its assets and potential. We welcome the progress that the minister has made on the issue—she has put on the table an offer to help to fund community mapping. Nonetheless, she needs to accept the fact that there is real unhappiness at the Government's proposal on the register. We believe that she has not gone far  enough on the issue and we are worried about the remaining issues around timescales. The Scottish Crofting Federation has expressed its concerns eloquently: "The proposed Register of Crofts being compiled by RoS using 'trigger points' would be very damaging and must be replaced by legislation directing that the Register of Crofts held by the Crofters Commission Administration be completed", upgraded to include maps "and maintained by them, supported by a community-led model of township development plans". There are issues about the timing, about who actually does the work and about the involvement of communities to make the proposals work. We want changes to the proposed electoral franchise—I was disappointed by the minister's written response on that—and we also want croft land to be protected as far as is practical and reasonable. To sum up, we read the minister's response and we engaged fully in the committee's work, but we are still committed to opposing key aspects of the bill as it is drafted at present. We believe that the policy decision to equalise access to grants for tenants and owner-occupiers will inevitably lead to more owner-occupation and a free market in crofts—something that the bill purports to act against. It is not just about what is in the bill; it is about the Government's intentions. We have lodged a reasoned amendment—something that we do not do lightly—because we do not want to reject out of hand all the ideas in the bill. Instead, we want to flag up to the minister the key issues on which we believe major changes are required. Our amendment reflects not just our concerns but those of many key parties to the consultation. We want to put pressure on the Scottish Government to listen to the representations that we have received, and our judgment is that major changes must be made to the bill before it is acceptable. I share the minister's view that crofting is complex. Many of us, and many people outwith the chamber, have a long history on the issue, and we need to get the legislation right. Our view in the previous and current sessions of Parliament has remained consistent: there is no point in putting legislation on the statute book if we are not confident that there is an appetite for the proposals and that they will benefit the communities that the legislation purports to serve. My colleagues will set out our concerns in more detail. Peter Peacock will address the detailed issues of the proposals on mapping and the register. The last thing that we want to do is to place a burden on crofters in the current tough economic times and to run the risk of opening up  land disputes throughout the crofting counties. Some of the issues have been dormant and we see no purpose in bringing them to the surface if they get in the way of the day-to-day job of crofters or the work that they do to defend their interests. Crofting communities must be at the heart of resolving those issues. As the committee correctly observes, a community-based approach is to be preferred as it is much more likely to avoid overlaps, underlaps and ransom strips. We are also determined to ensure that the power to refuse decrofting remains with the commission, even where planning permission has been granted. Directions from the minister on the exercise of that power will be crucial. My colleague Elaine Murray will talk about the financial issues that we believe must be addressed and the need to sort out the basis on which voting for commissioners takes place. The bottom line is that the system must be fair and must be seen to be fair. A series of changes must be made before the bill is in an acceptable state. Stage 2 will be an opportunity to address those issues. We will not be prepared to support the bill without those changes, so we reserve the right to vote against the bill at stage 3. We will work constructively, engage in the process and continue to talk to crofting communities and our colleagues in the Parliament about how the right balance can be struck. We recognise that stage 2 will be crucial and we will engage in it constructively with our colleagues. Our amendment highlights the need for changes to the register proposal and the placing of costs on crofters, and the need for the Scottish Government to work with the committee on the recommendations. I hope that members throughout the chamber will understand what we are trying to do and support our amendment. I move amendment S3M-6266.1, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, notes the opposition of the Scottish Crofting Federation to the Bill's proposed new crofting register to be kept by the Keeper of Registers; notes that no additional resources are being proposed to the Crofting Commission to administer its new duties; further notes that new charges proposed to be levied on crofters are not supported by crofters, and urges the Scottish Government to consider proposing changes to the Bill and to its policy proposals to address these issues and others raised by the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee."

In advance of next week's debate, does the minister agree that we need a joined-up approach, both between local authority areas so that we manage down the amount of waste that is created in Scotland, and between the domestic and non-domestic sectors so that they work together to reduce the amount of waste arisings in Scotland, rather than treating both waste arisings separately, particularly given the huge amount of non-domestic waste that is produced in Scotland every year?

To ask the Scottish Executive, following the round-table meeting on 29 March 2010, what action it is undertaking in partnership with the City of Edinburgh Council, local agencies and local communities to tackle antisocial behaviour and community safety issues arising from short-term holiday lets. (S3O-10370)

I thank the minister for checking out what happened at that meeting. My constituents feel very let down following the meeting, given the lack of practical action. Although local agencies are willing to be supportive, they cannot do anything other than react. The prevention side is incredibly difficult to put into practice. Will the minister now consider prevention, and focus on the landlords of the holiday lets, rather than reacting afterwards? There was a serious public order and safety incident last month, which led to a huge police action, and there is now real fear and concern in the communities concerned.

I am the representative for Edinburgh city centre and Saughton prison. On preventive measures, we know the high number of people who have become homeless, and that being in the Army, having mental health problems or having been through the criminal justice system are indicators of the likelihood of becoming homeless. Does James Kelly agree that a preventive measure might be that, when people are leaving the Army, their potential housing situation could be considered so that problems are avoided?

Will the member take an intervention?

As I said in my speech, I would take it from the woeful underspend in the energy efficiency programme this year. The money that the Scottish Government put in is the consequentials. The UK Government and the Welsh Assembly Government put in more; that is what the SNP should have done.

The debate is an opportunity for us to discuss how we can help to move Scotland out of recession. The SNP Government must put in place the right support and leadership to make that happen. Talking about what needs to be done is not the same as doing it, and saying that something is being done when it is not is even worse than that. The SNP Government's record is appalling. We are suffering the Salmond slump because the SNP Government is simply not interested in using all  the powers that are available to it. Blaming everyone else for its own inaction is much easier. The SNP has let down every part of the construction industry. I have spoken to a constituent who was angry that his job was to get rid of apprentices—who were doing really well—because there were no public sector jobs in the area in which his big company could bid. His job was to identify young people who had worked hard to get their apprenticeship and sack them. He was angry with the SNP Government because he knew exactly who to blame for the lack of contracts for which the company could bid. In Edinburgh, we are not getting the investment in new schools that we need, and we are falling further and further behind in building the houses that we need to solve our housing crisis. We have seen failure not just with new houses. There is complete agreement across the chamber that we need investment now to refurbish our homes, to insulate people from the massive rises in fuel prices that they have experienced to date and that they will experience in future, and to cut our carbon emissions. That is the obvious place to start. When Obama got into power in America, one of his first acts was to get shovel ready programmes in place. His top priority was energy efficiency programmes, which should have been our priority.

I will make two points. First, fuel prices were well on the way to increasing before the current financial crisis. Secondly, banks in this country have had to be bailed out, and we should be proud of the fact that our Government acted on that. Energy efficiency should have been our priority. I ask the minister whether these words ring a bell: "implement measures to improve Scotland's energy use through the Energy Efficiency Action Plan, which is a key part of the Scottish Government's Climate Change Bill." That is pledge 7 of the Government's 10-point plan, first published in February 2009, to ensure that the energy industry aids the economic recovery. There is a serious gap between promises and the reality. We are still waiting for the energy efficiency action plan to materialise, and half of the amount budgeted to be spent in this year's energy efficiency programme is still to be spent with one month to go. I wonder whether the minister would like to report today on the current rate of progress in that context. Perhaps not.  My proposals for a national council tax discount scheme had the potential to create thousands of new jobs, but the SNP watered them down so that there was a much less ambitious approach that left it up to somebody else—local authorities—merely to have schemes in place. There is no leadership, no national targets, no drive and no ambition on the ground from the SNP Government. In Edinburgh, all the schools that have been opened since the SNP Government came into being were commissioned by the previous Labour-led Scottish Parliament. We are still waiting for the next generation of schools. By the way, there has been absolutely no sign of the SNP's manifesto commitment on a renewable installation in every school. Even the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has not been able to answer the question about that. Given the lofty soundbites, the globetrotting to Copenhagen and the big manifesto commitments on climate change, the SNP Government's abject failure to put in place basic energy efficiency mechanisms that could create thousands of jobs in the construction industry is absolutely breathtaking. We know that our new homes will be built to higher standards, but the SNP Government should be doing more now to give the construction industry new apprenticeships and training schemes to let it meet those radical ambitions. Manufacturers also need to be confident that there is a market for their new renewables goods. The delays in getting going on the renewables revolution in households and communities have been disastrous for companies, which have waited for the SNP Government to act.

No. I will move on, if Patrick Harvie does not mind. The last three years have been a huge missed opportunity. The most recent disappointment has been the Scottish Government's handling of the boiler scrappage scheme. The UK Government announced that it would follow up the massive success of the car scrappage scheme with a boiler scrappage scheme for England and Wales. I ran a petition on the matter that gained thousands of supporters. Colleagues reported that constituents had got in touch because they had seen the television adverts that said that there was to be a boiler scrappage scheme. They could not believe that they were not eligible because they lived in Scotland and an SNP Government was in charge. No one in the plumbing industry understands why Scotland has taken so long and why we have missed out. Plumbing companies have reported that people have been delaying putting in new boilers because they are waiting for the scheme.  They have been told that there will be a scheme, but not when. There is confusion and delay, and there has been damage to the industry. A scheme has been announced this week, but it is three months late and is not as ambitious as it should be. That is a classic case of SNP ministers believing their own hype. Read the small print. Apart from the fact that it has taken three months for the SNP to get a scheme going—Labour down south has announced and delivered a scheme in that time, and people in 125,000 houses there now know that they are getting a boiler—only 5,000 houses will be covered in Scotland. That is not even as ambitious as Wales has been. More money and the same number of boilers are being offered in Wales, which has a population that is 60 per cent of Scotland's population. After all this time, would it not have been better to fund the scheme properly? Would it not have been better to use the money left in this year's energy efficiency scheme? We need more money. Members should support the Labour motion. Let us unite and ensure that the Salmond slump is not allowed to continue.

The minister quite rightly mentioned the bringing of new generation on to the grid from the furthest-away parts of Scotland. What is his take on the amount of microgeneration that we can bring on to the grid? Does the Scottish Government have any predictions on what it is aiming for in that regard?

Will the minister speculate on the rate of growth for household renewables as part of his renewables  action plan? I understand that he thinks that we will get a proportionate share of the United Kingdom's 750,000 home renewables installations. Will he tell us how fast we will get those in Scotland in the next three years?

Has the Scottish Government yet set a target to implement its manifesto commitment that every school would have a renewable device fitted? How many schools have had renewable devices installed since the Scottish National Party came to power?

The minister made the case for targets for non-municipal waste. Does he agree that it would make more sense for councils such as Glasgow City Council to be able to plan intelligently to deal with domestic and non-domestic waste at the same time? Will he set a target for the publication of the national waste plan for zero waste? Does he have a date for that yet?

Will the minister give way on that point?

Will the member take an intervention?

I have great pleasure in speaking to and moving the Labour Party's motion. The Scottish National Party Government has been happy to pay lip service to tackling climate change and to take the credit for the ambitious targets that we all voted through when passing the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, but it has not followed through quickly enough with the decisive action needed to deliver change. Last month the United Kingdom Committee on Climate Change published a report that advised how the Scottish Government's targets can be met. We need more action and less talk and the debate gives us the chance to talk together about how we move forward. It is essential that we tie our action on climate change to tackling the recession. That is why we have focused on action that supports our economy and creates new jobs and training in low-carbon technologies. We need to use the tools that Labour added to the 2009 act—public sector procurement, the public sector duty and the public engagement strategy—to deliver transformational change. I hope that the minister will report today on the progress that he has made on tackling the key issues that we identified when passing the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009—energy efficiency, energy, transport and land use. We all know that the lack of a global deal at Copenhagen was massively disappointing, but as political representatives our job is to get on and deliver the promise that we made to developing countries and those at the sharp end of climate change and show that we meant it when we said that we would act. Last summer, we all said that a  we-will-if-you-will approach was not good enough. Our targets are intended to stimulate action and not just support soundbites. The climate change delivery plan that was published in the spring last year aimed to meet only a 34 per cent reduction target. We need a report from the minister on what he has done to revise his plan upwards to meet the tougher targets to which we all signed up. The UK Committee on Climate Change report is clear that we need new policies to drive the required step change to deliver our targets. That means working with the UK Government and other European Union countries, but it would be totally wrong of the Scottish Government to absolve itself of its responsibility to use its powers to the maximum. The SNP cannot blame others for its lack of delivery on climate change in the past year. It is absolutely clear from the report that the Scottish Government has to deliver more in the non-traded sector. We have no chance of meeting our other targets if we do not get going on transport and buildings, which are core areas in our current emissions. We are disappointed by the slow rate of progress, although we know that work has been happening—for example, we campaigned for the council tax discount policy, which now looks seriously unambitious. The intention was not to catch up with best practice in England; it was to go beyond it. Will the minister say whether he is happy with the deal that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has put in place? How many houses has he been told will be insulated in the first year? Why is there no sign of action to progress cavity wall insulation, which affects 700,000 houses in Scotland? Why is there nothing on incentives for household renewables? Although we are still waiting for the energy efficiency targets, parliamentary question after parliamentary question has revealed that householders are simply not making it through the complex filtering of the energy action programme and housing insulation schemes. Those schemes are promising more than they are delivering. We also have the lowest level of new-build housing for decades, so we are not building the new low-carbon developments that are crucial to delivering economies of scale. I will not dwell on permitted development rights for air source heat pumps or mini wind turbines, except to say that we have lost jobs and the situation has been handled appallingly. Perhaps the minister will talk about the details of the SNP's boiler scrappage scheme. The minister needs to say when it will start, how many houses it will include and whether it will match the £400 discount in England or the £500 discount in Wales. The minister needs to get a move on. Plumbing companies are now worried that they are missing  out because people are delaying ordering their boilers until they see what the Scottish boiler scrappage scheme will consist of. We need a step change in transport policy. Ministerial cars are symbolic—if they are not low carbon or electric, what message does that send? The rest of the public sector needs a clear lead. The rest of the world is looking at our ground-breaking Scottish companies, such as Allied Vehicles and Axeon Technology, but our companies need to start getting serious orders now, not just three or four cars here or there, but fleets. Prices will not come down until we get economies of scale. Today's big announcement by Nissan shows that we in Scotland have to get going urgently. Public sector fleets are crucial—the national health service, local authorities and the whole of the public sector, including Scottish Water and the police, need a co-ordinated approach to kick-start the market and get the value for money that we can deliver. The Liberal Democrat amendment strengthens our motion. We do not need just the cars and the vans; we need the infrastructure to support them. Let us start in the cities that have the critical mass and the distances to make it work. Glasgow has already made a commitment to infrastructure and orders; we need other cities, such as Edinburgh, to follow. It is not just about cars and vans; it is also about high-quality public transport, more walking and cycling options. Will the minister commit to spending a higher proportion of the transport budget on cycling? Colleagues will talk later about the much greater work that needs to be done in support of the bus industry. The UK Committee on Climate Change is clear that, on the current trajectory, the non-traded emissions in Scotland are above the level that we need to reach to meet our 42 per cent target. In all cases there is a gap between projections and targets, so we need new policies and a step change. The UK Government played a leading role in trying to secure a deal at Copenhagen and has not given up. A raft of new policies will come into effect this year that will help the Scottish Government to meet Scotland's targets. Renewables will be crucial in meeting those targets. The feed-in tariff kicks in next month and will be a big help in persuading people to introduce into their houses renewables that produce electricity. We need work on low-carbon cars, the electric cars discount, the low-carbon buses initiative and the commitment to high-speed rail, to which we will return in future. The EU is crucial. In last month's agriculture debate, I raised the subject of supporting our farmers to continue changing their practices to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. We need the EU landfill targets to keep pushing us to do more  on recycling. Every level of Government needs to do its bit, but the Scottish ministers must tell us how they will up their targets in their delivery plan. We need vision, policies and finance to deliver results. We need a step change and we need not only talk about climate change but action. Meeting our aspirations requires a much more collective approach to politics. I hope that the debate will stimulate the Scottish Government to act faster to make the big changes in our economy. We do not want excuses for inaction; we want vision and a timetable for delivery. I move, That the Parliament notes the publication of the UK Climate Change Committee Report, Scotland's path to a low carbon economy ; believes that the Scottish Government needs to review its Climate Change Delivery Plan to take into account the passing of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009; believes that there are economic opportunities to be gained from investment in low-carbon technologies and that the Scottish Government needs to take a lead through public procurement, particularly in the fields of transport and construction, and specifically calls on the Scottish Government to put in place a programme to replace its own fleet with low-carbon or electric vehicles and to enable the public and businesses to make the practical changes required to meet the targets set out in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009.

In her opening speech, the minister highlighted the local and global significance of aquaculture. Aquaculture is hugely important to Scotland in the context of the jobs and income that it brings to our rural communities. It is also part of the global food production agenda. It was important that we did not talk only about aquaculture. Some of Jamie McGrigor's suggestions about mussels, oysters and shellfish in general were important. When we consider the key objectives for growing our aquaculture industry, the need for a fantastic marine environment must be at the heart of the process. That is why the Labour amendment would strengthen the Scottish National Party motion by adding a reference to "healthy, environmentally sustainable, locally-produced food". We also wanted to highlight the need for more notice of documents that the Parliament discusses. As Elaine Murray said, in that regard our amendment is partly a shot across the Government's bows in general; we did not want to highlight Roseanna Cunningham specifically. If we are to have an open and accessible Parliament, not just members but people outwith the Parliament need time to read documents, so that they can get involved and give us their views. There is an issue with the fact that the new legislative framework that we set out in the Marine (Scotland) Bill is not reflected in the documents that are before us. It might have been better to take slightly more time over some of those documents to ensure that not only the ethos of the bill—healthy seas being the starting point—but the suggested joined-up decision-making processes, which are fundamental to aquaculture's success, were brought into the debate more effectively. We would have liked to hear more about the new provisions in the bill and the lessons that need to be learned from the experience in Chile, which almost every speaker mentioned. It was a catastrophic experience for the Chileans but it gives us an economic opportunity. However, unless we properly learn the lessons of that experience, we are not making the most of that opportunity. The minister made a brief reference to  the matter in her opening remarks, but it would be helpful if, in her closing speech, she talked a bit more about the lessons that have been learned. Peter Peacock and Liam McArthur focused on protected geographical status. The minister needs to reflect on the many comments that they and other members made on that. The message from us all is that we are keen that she clarify the Scottish Government's intentions. We are all keen to support the aquaculture industry, which is why we are keen for the issue to be addressed effectively and properly. I think that Peter Peacock suggested that the minister conduct a briefing with members across the parties, which might be a good way to move forward. One issue that has emerged not only in the Liberal Democrat amendment but in speeches from members from all parties is training. We clearly need trained and skilled staff. Aquaculture provides quality jobs in some of our smallest rural communities and, if we are to see anything like the expansion of 400 jobs that the minister talked about in her opening remarks, we need to know who will train those people and ensure that we continue to upskill workers who are already in the industry. Training is linked to local planning, which we regard as crucial. When we look in depth at the framework in "Delivering Planning Reform for Aquaculture", we see the new demands that will be placed on local authorities. That brings us back to the points that Elaine Murray and John Scott made. The Labour Party did not support the centralisation of the decision-making process but felt that, for some local authorities, aquaculture planning is a tall order. I am not suggesting that it would be a tough issue for the Orkney Islands Council, which probably deals with the issue so regularly that it would be one of the authorities to which such responsibility should be handed back. However, there is a problem with expertise across the range of issues that local authorities will have to deal with under the framework. That is an issue for the delivery of an effective development planning framework in which we get the right decisions. Let us examine what the document suggests. Development plans will need to be kept up to date. Anyone who knows anything about development plans knows that that does not happen overnight. It also suggests that aquaculture should be addressed in the local authority main issues reports.

We will probably reheat the debate, but I give way briefly.

It is harder for a council to admit that it is struggling than to volunteer to take on the responsibility in the first place. A lot of time is wasted in that process. Apart from what "Delivering Planning Reform for Aquaculture" says about development plans and main issues reports, it suggests that there should be aquaculture framework plans and multisectoral coastal plans to provide an effective policy basis. That is an awful lot of work for a small number of authorities to tackle when they have a huge number of other challenges on the go at the same time. The document also says that we need those plans in place "where a wide range of competing interests" exists. I cannot think of anywhere in Scotland where there will not be competing interests in aquaculture decisions. Under the document, agencies will provide "map-based advice on potential opportunities for aquaculture development." That will not happen instantly. Scottish Natural Heritage guidance on aquaculture and the landscape is due in spring next year and, once development plans are approved, agencies will support their implementation. I note that SNH will provide no more staff, but COSLA is now required to "work with the Scottish Government to ensure that planning services within local authorities are adequately resourced". Huge pressure will be put on local authorities to deliver that framework in practice. We will find out in future the problem with our new system. Given the new marine legislation that has recently been passed, we need to focus on delivering an effective network of coherent, well-managed marine protected areas that can co-exist with the development of new aquaculture opportunities. With the scale of development that is taking place in the aquaculture industry, the need for a joined-up approach is self-evident. As colleagues have mentioned, such a significant expansion needs to be sustainable. That means that we need support for independent accreditation of performance to ensure that quality is reinforced. We also need further action on escapees—that is not a new problem—on which, given their impact on wild stocks, urgent action is needed. Although I agree with everyone else in the chamber that Robin Harper's amendment is too prescriptive at this time, I concur with the general sense that we need to see improved  practice. I would like to hear the minister reflect on that point in her closing remarks. Other issues that we need to get right for the future include that of PGI status and that of the health of our fish, which was raised by several members. Robin Harper, Maureen Watt, Jamie McGrigor and Richard Simpson all made telling points about the need to ensure that the best research is translated into the best practice as soon as possible. Richard Simpson and Robin Harper in particular made some very interesting points about on-going research, on which I will be interested to hear the minister's comments—especially on Richard Simpson's comments about eggs and smolts. One of the best conclusions to be drawn in today's debate was by Alasdair Allan. I do not often praise him, so he should probably be worried at this point—

When he rises to the occasion, I will do that, cabinet secretary. Alasdair Allan's point that higher environmental standards and efforts to tackle disease need to go hand in hand was very well made and, I think, summed up the feeling of all members in the chamber. The key to future growth in the aquaculture industry is quality. One issue that has not been mentioned today, which I hope the minister will still address, is RSPB Scotland's point about the need for sustainable feed for fish. That issue seems fundamental, although it was not mentioned by colleagues. A quality industry needs well-trained staff and a quality decision-making process that can make decisions swiftly. We need trained staff in our local authorities so that they are confident enough to make swift decisions. When staff are not confident, they do things a lot more slowly, which is not good for the industry. We need effective decisions but also good decisions. We need a quality environment that is capable of sustaining what we all think is an opportunity for rapid growth in the industry, particularly in the salmon sector. At the end of the day, it is all about having a quality product. Everyone has agreed that that is absolutely crucial and we need to market it effectively.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the impact of the local government finance settlement for 2010-11 on the third sector. (S3O-9696)

Is the cabinet secretary aware that, on 11 March, every council department in the Scottish National Party and Liberal Democrat-led City of Edinburgh Council is expected to slash grants and reduce support to countless organisations that provide vital community services? The predicted £1 million of cuts will have a devastating effect on groups, services and third sector organisations that provide essential services to our communities. Will the cabinet secretary, in light of his answer to my first question, assure us that the Scottish Government will intervene where funding arrangements and relationships between local government and the third sector do not reflect the areas of agreement in the joint statement on local government and the third sector, which the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations highlighted in its February 2010 report?

I am glad that the minister is prepared to look at the issue, which I have raised with housing associations. The point that they have made to me is that they are not always aware of tenants' history of antisocial behaviour. If somebody leaves a property before action is taken against them, the behaviour is not recorded anywhere. Will the minister talk to the housing associations about  how often they experience the problem, because it has been identified as a major problem by more than one housing association in Edinburgh?

Will the minister commit to considering that factoring issue and whether there is a way we can deal with it through Patricia Ferguson's bill? Sometimes the issue is how we define what we are trying to do. If one word is used, something cannot be done, but if another  word is used, it can be. Will the minister commit to at least considering that?

I welcome the debate. The common theme in the speeches from throughout the chamber is that we need urgent action, and we all agree that we need to use Patricia Ferguson's member's bill to get effective legislation to identify the solutions to the problems of property management. The issues are complex, and are part of a continuing programme for the Parliament. We have looked at feudal tenure and the law of the tenement; a review of factoring is a crucial part of the process, and we need to turn our attention to it. There are different traditions and practices across the country and in the cities. In Edinburgh tenements, there is not the same tradition of factoring as in Glasgow. People tend to manage properties themselves, spurred on—I must say—by statutory notices from the council. The law of the tenement has been helpful, although it has not resolved all the issues: there is still more to do. Issues such as fair shares, and the effective management and affordability of repairs are relevant to new properties, too. At issue is not just the physical state of the building but the land around the building and the security of the property. Those issues are crucial and, in Edinburgh, they tend to be led by factors. I will focus on rising costs, the lack of transparency, the need for registration proposals and the need for effective dispute resolution. Those things will all be dealt with by Patricia Ferguson's bill, which provides us with the vehicle to set the right framework. Towards the end of my speech, I will also focus on the particular vulnerability of older residents, for whom the lack of dispute resolution is a major social justice problem. Lots of residents have reported to me the rising costs of maintenance, utilities and insurance; the difficulty that they have in challenging estimates from factors; the difficulty in getting to see the bills as they come in; and issues around having proper  transparency. One of my constituents challenged the factor and the utility company when a change from one utility company to another was proposed. The resident pointed out the reason why they used a specific utility company and the need to check that the tariff was right because of the nature of the property's heating system. The factor completely ignored my constituent and changed the utility company. Months later, after a process that was not at all transparent, my constituent was able to get that changed because the factor had chosen the wrong tariff and a company that could not deliver the right tariff given the nature of the heating system in the block. My constituent was not given access to the utility company, which refused to talk to him because he was not the factor. The factor also refused to talk to him. Then, following months of upheaval, after the factor had changed back to the previous utility company, my constituent was sent a series of hostile letters. We need to reassert some balance and get a level playing field. A publicly available and transparent register would help, and the ability to get information from factors is crucial. One of the helpful suggestions in the OFT report was to have a good code of practice. That could come along with a proper regulatory system through the Parliament. People need to know what they should expect from a factor and, to be fair, the factoring companies need to know what they are expected to provide. Everybody must be clear about that. Malcolm Chisholm raised the issue of deeds when somebody buys into a new property. In one case, the developer has avoided dealing with a leak in the roof that has been there since the start of the development. The developer has also been able to avoid the setting up of a residents association by specifying in the deeds that there can be no residents association until every property in the development is sold. The developer has held on to the last flat, deliberately not selling it, so that there cannot be a residents association and, until there is a residents association, the residents cannot debate getting rid of the factoring company. Those things are tied together, which is why the situation is complex. However, that is why we need a debate in the Parliament about the legislation. Thousands of our constituents would be glad if we began to deal with the matter. Dispute resolution needs to be part of the process. It is vital in getting proper remedy. Pursuing a legal remedy can be very expensive and time consuming, even through the small claims system, and if someone is not au fait with how the law works it is difficult for them to know where to start. At the moment, it is difficult to switch factors, so I am not surprised that many people do not do so. That cannot be used as evidence that the system works.  I have given the example of people being tied to a factor through their deeds. When they start to receive increasingly threatening letters from their factor and face hiked-up bills, that disempowers them, and it is a social justice issue. A large number of older people in my constituency have deliberately downsized from leaky, inefficient, expensive properties. They have freed up the larger properties, which is good for society, and have bought smaller, newer properties with the expectation that they will be able to manage their financial affairs more easily. However, it has become a financial nightmare for them and a real social justice issue. Those people are vulnerable. They are intelligent and articulate and they are able to write letters to us, but they are not able to deal with lots of threatening letters from factors. They should not have to deal with such letters. We should have a fairer system. David McLetchie asked whether we need a proper system now or whether we should opt for a voluntary system. He accepted the fact that things are not moving fast—a year has passed since the OFT report was published. The minister needs to listen to us all across the chamber. Let us address the fact that a third of factoring companies are seen to be unsatisfactory. If there were a voluntary scheme, two thirds of the companies would sign up but a third would not, and after a couple of years we would be back here having the same debate. Let us cut to the chase and use Patricia Ferguson's bill to have a proper debate, consult everybody, examine the detail and get it right. Let us not wait two or three years for a new Government to start the process all over again. I know that the minister wants to consider the voluntary approach first, but we have had debates in which we have talked about going voluntary but also about using the force of the law if necessary. Let us regulate the sector transparently and properly, with a good debate, and let us get it right. We still have a year and a quarter left of this session. Let us use that time wisely to think about the problems that our constituents face and get the proper remedy. There is enough cross-party support to get it right.

Like colleagues, I congratulate Bill Butler on lodging the motion. It is significant that, even in a recession, fair trade products are still doing incredibly well. Bill Butler's motion highlights the progress that is being made on raising people's awareness of and commitment to the principles that underpin fair trade. That represents a huge amount of work by producers, retailers and campaigners. In tonight's debate, we celebrate the contribution that they have all made. I was delighted and proud that all three winners at Edinburgh's fair trade awards last week, which Robin Harper just mentioned, are in my constituency of Edinburgh Central. The overall winner was Hadeel, as he said. I put on record my thanks to Carol Morton and her husband, Colin, who first made the contact with Palestinian producers 22 years ago. That represents a phenomenal commitment. Hadeel is a trading arm of Palcrafts and is the only Palestinian trading arm in Britain that deals with fair trade goods. Hadeel—the shop—and Palcrafts, which works on a mail-order basis, have done incredibly well. It was fantastic to have in Edinburgh this week Hind El Arabi, who is the United Nations Relief and Works Agency's women's programme officer. She has worked in the west bank and Gaza for more than a decade. She gave us fantastic examples of the impact of fairly traded products such as embroidered goods that are made by women, particularly in Gaza.

I would normally give way, but I am under time constraints. I acknowledge that Hugh O'Donnell has been to Gaza. Given that 80 per cent of Gazans rely on food aid, it is almost impossible to stress enough how important being able to trade economically is for people in Gaza. The moral support that they obtain from knowing that the rest of the world is not ignoring them is hugely important. I am delighted that representatives of Zaytoun, the olive oil producers, are here from Palestine this week. I hope that more such activity will be spread across the country.  As part of Fairtrade fortnight, the National Library of Scotland made its big swap. It has recently refurbished its cafe and has made a fantastic commitment by saying that it just made sense to convert to fair trade. Such decisions are being made throughout the country. I hope that we will become a fair trade nation. It is a long time since I lobbied the then Presiding Officer, David Steel, to have fair trade coffee in the Parliament. As we establish the cross-party group on fair trade tonight, I lobby for fair trade goods in the parliamentary shop. I have lobbied for Palestinian coasters that are embroidered with a Scottish flavour—the manufacturers are happy to produce whatever we want, whether the design is a saltire or any other form. One problem in Palestine is coming up with new ideas; people there must constantly refresh their products. Why do we not sell olive oil, almonds and Palestinian coasters? I understand that the purchasing policy has recently changed, so we could revisit the idea. If we sold fair trade goods in our Parliament, that would be a practical example. I hope that that might be one of the cross-party group's first successes. I am sure that Patricia Ferguson, who has called the group's meeting, has many campaign ideas up her sleeve, but that is the idea that I put on the agenda for tonight. The fact that we debate fair trade almost every year, that we come up with new products each year and that new commitments are made in our communities each year shows that Scotland is moving towards gaining fair trade nation status. The debate provides one way to contribute to pushing for that status. We acknowledge the work of community groups and businesses and the campaign work that has been done to take us to that fantastic goal.

Has the cabinet secretary had exploratory discussions with the UK Government about ensuring that the Scottish issues that we want to see in the agenda for support will be taken on board?

We believe that it is a good time to debate the Pack report. With major changes to agriculture and rural support due to happen in 2013, we need to have the widest possible debate to enable all the key stakeholders to consider carefully and collectively what we need and how we should deliver it. The report contains a good analysis of the challenges  that we face. Its analyses of food security, water supply, energy supply, biodiversity loss and climate change are spot on and provide a good overall framework. It is right to conclude that it is not just our country but the rest of the world that needs to address those issues. To put the matter in context, there will be two billion to three billion more of us in the world to feed and the countries on which we currently rely for many of our agriculture products, often at the expense of their ability to supply local people, will struggle because of climate change. Water shortages and increased temperatures will make agriculture in some regions on which we currently rely much less viable, or even unviable. Food security is an issue. In the past, EU subsidies made it impossible for farmers in developing countries to compete on fair terms. As we are in the middle of Fairtrade fortnight, we need to join up the debates and think through the linkages. Fair trade has been a lifeline in enabling farmers to profit and to channel their profits into increased productivity, better local water and drainage infrastructure, better salaries and better local services. The fact that a third of the EU's greenhouse gas emissions come from food production and consumption raises another key issue. When we discuss the kind of agricultural and environmental support that we should have in Scotland, we should also ensure that other European countries are doing the right thing. Yesterday's United Kingdom Committee on Climate Change report highlights the need for us and, in particular, the Scottish Government to provide more leadership in making these kinds of connections and helping our farmers to make the necessary changes to address the challenge of climate change. Although farmers are already making agricultural production more efficient as far as emissions are concerned, we really need to be leading from the front. As a result, this debate must be about how we feed ourselves, not only affordably, but in a way that provides long-term environmental stewardship and maximum benefit to the communities on whom we rely for our primary produce. All those objectives must be tied in together; we must not simply aim at one objective alone, which means that shifting from current forms of support to new and fairer systems is an incredibly difficult challenge. We should acknowledge the excellent work that is being done both in many of our farming communities and on environmental stewardship. We must find a way of linking those issues while providing the best incentives for our farmers in our rural communities. I echo the cabinet secretary's comments about the current system's flaws and point out, in addition, that it does not encourage or support  new farmers; that we have gone from having too many sheep on our hills to having not enough; that tenant farmers are under huge pressure from rocketing rents; and that the dairy industry is, as we have made clear in the past year, under major pressure, with some key players deciding that it is no longer economic or worth their while to keep going. Even though it provides major benefits for our economy, biodiversity and landscape, farming in our tougher and more fragile areas still remains in the economic balance. We should also play in to the debate the fact that our consumers expect strong and clear labelling, providing information about nutritional value, country of origin and so on. It is not good enough to say where the food is grown; we have to identify the whole chain, which will help to incentivise local food production and processing. Something that is grown in Scotland but processed somewhere else should not be described as locally produced, as it clearly is not. Demand is growing for more sustainably produced food, whether it is genuinely produced locally, is less intensively farmed or is organic. That said, cost is still a huge issue for many people in Scotland. Yesterday's parliamentary debate on tackling obesity stressed the need for healthier eating and exercise patterns, but the fact is that people in far too many of our poorer communities simply do not have a choice of affordable, healthy food. Until that situation changes, exhorting people to eat more healthily will make no difference whatever. All those issues have to be tied together, and our amendment seeks to add to the Government motion the statement that the system of funding must meet those objectives and that we use policy opportunities to focus on support for not only the production side but the consumption side of land management and farming. That is why we have been keen to support moves in public and private procurement to source more locally. We have also supported the establishment of more farmers' co-operatives to ensure that smaller farming businesses can band together, reduce costs and create economic efficiencies for their businesses. That is why we were keen for the supermarket ombudsman to be established; we want a fair playing field for our farmers and stable, fair prices for consumers. All those issues have to be tied together in any future system of support. I accept the cabinet secretary's offer to meet Brian Pack before he embarks on the next stage of his inquiry, because we want to tease out with him the funding options that he has identified. We agree that direct payments must be retained and that we should protect farmers from not only the risks of the market but climate change challenges; however, we need to be clear about how we link  together the market risk and food security agendas. We should not use direct payments in the way that Europe has done in the past and end up with too much of the wrong product, and I am keen to hear about the measures that the cabinet secretary thinks would help to shape markets. Moreover, I would like to hear about the relationship between other European countries and developing countries. We are particularly keen to hear about the cabinet secretary's discussions at a UK level with Hilary Benn. After all, we cannot afford to wait until we reach the end of our process and dot every i and cross every t on our perfect solution. If parallel discussions are taking place in the UK or Europe, we must ensure that Scottish objectives and concerns are fully plugged in to the UK lobbying system. Given that 2013 is only three years away, we should find out the cabinet secretary's views on transition policies. What are the options for bringing in new entrants now? After all, we cannot have what might be called a falling-off-the-cliff model of change. What assistance will our farmers receive to get them through the massive changes that are being promoted for 2013? The cabinet secretary mentioned options; we would like to hear more about what they are and what his views are. His speech was very light on that. We have looked at the issue of area-based or land capability analysis, and we have some concerns. We understand about targeting limited resources, but what are the measures of transparency? We are completely unconvinced about the transparency or credibility of the current Scottish rural development programme allocation process, and we want to see how choices will be managed in future. What will the safeguards be, and what does the cabinet secretary see as the necessary trade-offs?

I will not, because I have only a minute and a half to go. We agree that there should be no support for naked areas or slipper farmers, but how would the cabinet secretary see flood management or biodiversity, for example, in places where we do not want the land to be intensely managed or farmed for specified periods? How would that fit into the new system? We do not disagree with the principle of a top-up fund, but how will it relate to the core funding package? It goes back to the issue of balance. What is in the core package and how do the other support mechanisms link to it? It is difficult for us to comment on that in the absence of information  on the rural development funding side. The issues are inextricably linked and, if we want to incentivise best practice, and to see diversification and the creation of jobs, those issues have to be tied together. We cannot see how one set of funding arrangements can be signed off without looking at the full picture. That would miss the opportunity of taking the vital joined-up approach, which is why we want to have discussions before the next stage of the Pack report goes ahead. The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee should become involved in the process at this point, before we get to the final stage of the report. We would rather that discussions took place across all parties than everyone getting to the end of the process and throwing up their hands and saying that they do not like it. We would like to hear more about what the cabinet secretary currently thinks. We hope that colleagues will support our amendment and see it as strengthening the Scottish Government's motion to ensure that we keep the policy context alive and do not develop agricultural policy in a vacuum; it must be linked into our environmental, climate change and rural development policies. We cannot develop such issues in parallel; they must be developed together. We will not solve the problems that Pack identifies if we treat them using separate measures. I hope that we hear more from the cabinet secretary about his views at this stage, as well as get the chance to influence the future debate. I move amendment S3M-5807.4, to insert at end: "; recognises the need for any future framework to ensure a sustainable farming sector within vibrant rural communities; acknowledges the challenges posed by climate change and food security, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that there is a clear focus on the supply of healthy, affordable food produced as locally as possible with good environmental stewardship".

To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer to question S3W-27069 by Nicola Sturgeon on 17 September 2009, in light of the almost 75 per cent of consultation responses that raised concerns about applying national standard eligibility criteria and waiting times for personal and nursing care to adults with disabilities, what it means by saying that the criteria "should apply to older people in the first instance". (S3O-9458)

Is the minister not aware that, while we wait for that new guidance to come out, local authorities are viewing the phrase "in the first instance" as a green light to apply the criteria to vulnerable adults with disabilities; that constituents in my area of Edinburgh are deeply worried that that is being used to withdraw support from people who receive day-care services and respite and community support; and that family carers for people with learning disabilities will now be forced to spend longer caring for their relatives at the expense of their own health? We need clear, specific advice from the minister, as local authorities will go ahead and apply criteria for older people to groups to which they clearly were not meant to apply. There is real concern on the part of organisations such as the Garvald action group and Learning Disability Alliance Scotland. When will the minister get the new guidance out?

I add my words of congratulation to Ian McKee for putting this issue on our agenda and securing tonight's debate. I also offer my support and congratulations to the Bike Station which, along with other bike organisations in the city, has done a great deal of work to put cycling on the map over the past few years. I remember the statistics for the number of bikes that are locked up in garages and never used that were cited when the Bike Station was established. People buy bicycles, but never get around to using them. The Bike Station has prompted people to get some of those bikes out of their garages, get them refurbished and get them back into use, which has been of huge benefit particularly to the people whom Ian McKee mentioned, who otherwise probably could not afford to have a bicycle, or who might not get round to getting one. The Bike Station's work has been of superb benefit to many people throughout the city. It is important to inject new life into bikes in that way; otherwise, they just gather dust. Bikes are in the opposite situation to cars. People who have cars tend to use them a lot. Cars are quite expensive, so people think that they must get the best use out of them. When someone gets a bike, it is often tempting not to get on it. The project is really useful. As other members have said, there is no argument against the economic and health reasons for getting more people on to their bikes. The more people use their bikes, the more it attracts other people to do the same. There is a real issue about safety and feeling safe on the roads, but the situation improves the more of us people see on the roads. That could be seen in London after congestion charging was introduced, where there was a significant increase in the number of people who cycle to work. It is positive reinforcement. The project will encourage a little bit of thought about the blocks or obstacles to people getting on their bikes, which might include attitudes. Anyone who has been attempting to cycle in the city over the past couple of months will know that it has not been a joy on many days. That will not be the same for the rest of the year, however. There are issues with workplaces. How welcoming are they to bikes? Have they got secure parking? Do  managers support cycling? Do people have jokes directed against them if they cycle to work? It still happens in certain workplaces. For a lot of people, the key issue is safety on the roads, which I will return to later. The project will provide lessons that can be learned across Scotland. I hope that the minister will take them on board and use the influence and leadership of the Scottish Government to get more and more people to change their habits. I like the 80:40:20 targets. They are not overly ambitious; they are about making relatively small changes that will add up over time. If 12,500 people, working at different companies across the city of Edinburgh, make lifestyle changes such as those that have been suggested, it will make a big impact on the city. Everyone knows about the congestion. There are many more opportunities for people now. There is a bus company involved in the project, which is excellent. So is the City Car Club, which has continued to expand over the years. There are choices, which means that, even if people do not want to cycle to everything, they will be able to rely on either the bike, the bus or the City Car Club and, potentially, taxis. It is a mix of transport options that could help people to become more healthy. I would like a little more examination of the possibilities for promoting the project. There is a statistic that 45 per cent of the city's residents live less than 5km from their workplaces, which is an ideal distance for people to cycle. As long as people do not have a huge hill to go up—as I do—they can get to work in decent condition. It is possible for people to do that as they get fitter—their cycle route will get easier. Although it might be off-putting at the start, it really is a doable distance. We need to do a lot more to encourage people to get on their bikes. If we meet the targets that the Bike Station has set out, a reduction of 4,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions in one year will be a pretty good achievement, bearing in mind the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. What really leapt out at me was the figure of £2.8 million of savings to the people who get involved. That is a really good saving, and we should capture that. We need a positive message for employers, and we need the support of colleagues and families to encourage people not just to try out their bikes but to cycle regularly. The key thing is to make our streets more accessible and more welcoming to cyclists. I have noticed that the quality of the environment for cyclists in Edinburgh is deteriorating. We have a problem with potholes because of the recent weather. That is not just an issue for car drivers—it is also a real issue for  cyclists and it makes the streets less safe and less attractive. We have been losing some advanced stop lines. That is a small thing, but those lines are not just a token measure: they really improve cycle safety. I hope that the minister will take the lead. I hope that we monitor the project and that such projects will be rolled out across the whole of Scotland over the years. It is exactly what we need.

I agree with colleagues that the bill is landmark legislation. It has been a long time in coming, and a tremendous amount of work has been done not only by members and by parliamentary and Scottish Government staff but by all the national and local organisations that have given important expertise and given their time to participate in discussions to ensure that the bill is a decent piece of legislation. The Labour Party's key objective was to ensure that we came out of the process with a robust bill that would help to promote healthy seas. That is fundamental, as we have the responsibility for stewarding an incredibly complex set of ecosystems. I believe that the bill will help future generations to benefit from our seas. In previous discussions on the subject, we have talked about the fact that the bill must encompass around 80 previous pieces of marine legislation. I congratulate colleagues on taking a mature and hard-working approach to the bill, which is all the better for it. Massive opportunities will come from the bill, including the opportunity for joined-up thinking on interests that can sometimes conflict but which add to the health of our economy, such as fishing, leisure, shipping, renewables and wildlife interpretation. Those all have their place in our marine environment, but the key thing is that we act in a transparent and sensible manner. Liam McArthur mentioned the massive expansion in the new generation of renewables. I hope that the bill will help that process in a logical, joined-up way that puts sustainable development at the heart of it. I hope that we now have a coherent approach to marine planning and marine conservation, and I look forward to the network of marine protected areas being designated and put in place. There have been major changes to the bill that was initially proposed, which have resulted in the bill that is before us today. That is testament to the hard work not only of parliamentarians but of people who have lobbied us from outside. Labour members have seen the opportunity to strengthen the bill, and we have been keen to work constructively with stakeholders throughout Scotland. We have also been keen to work with other parties and colleagues on all sides of the chamber and in the committee. We may not always have agreed with one another, but we have teased out some of the difficult and complex issues very well. I hope that we can now consider the implementation of the bill. I remember being struck at a meeting last year by how much we do not yet  know about the marine environment around our country. Much of the work in relation to research needs to be pushed higher up the agenda. Like Karen Gillon, I will enjoy reading the Official Report of today's debate, in which we can relive the moment when Richard Lochhead gave a speech in favour of one position and then minutes later voted entirely the opposite way. There have been some light-hearted moments today, and some interesting choreography around the chamber. The key thing, however, is that we have improved our marine environment. A raft of amendments have been made to the bill today, and I pay tribute to my colleague Elaine Murray for her hard graft in ensuring that we get better protection for seals. I also thank the cabinet secretary and Robin Harper for making us debate the issue in detail at stage 3; I would like to have done that earlier, but we have at least done our jobs of scrutinising the legislation. I hope that the licensing powers will be used sparingly and transparently as a last resort, and I note the clause that states that we will review the measures within the next five years. That is crucial to the effectiveness of the bill, as everybody needs to know that the Parliament will be watching to see how the legislation is implemented. We look to the future, and to the implementation of the bill. Labour members are very keen now to talk about marine and coastal national parks. That was one of the issues that we logged with previous ministers—we got a commitment from Mike Russell that, once we had passed the bill, we could move on to consider marine and coastal national parks, which we want to do very swiftly. We also want to help to promote the work of the regional partnerships throughout the country, which have done fantastic work to promote nature conservation, tourism and local economic development opportunities. The bill gives us a platform and a fantastic framework in which to do that. I hope that we can all unite and support the bill tonight. There have been many disagreements along the way, but we will now have fantastic legislation that will join up with legislation across the UK, and we should all welcome that today. The hard work has been done to put the legislation in place, but the next bit is crucial. As with the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, we need to put the legislation into effect, and I hope that we will all work hard to do that.

The cabinet secretary will notice the date at the bottom of that article: it was not written today. Only once we see the detail of the Government's scheme—it is allocating only £2 million—will we know whether or not 12,000 people in Scotland will benefit.

Some excellent speeches have been made. I congratulate Richard Baker on securing the debate. The fact that so many of us have stayed to listen and speak shows the interest that there is in this issue in the Parliament. The sentiment with which Helen Eadie finished is the one that we need to capture: it is about action. I agree with Lewis Macdonald that people with disabilities need a range of employment choices. They also need a range of training opportunities, so that those employment choices can be a reality. Over the years, supported employment has been vital in giving people who have talent and skills a crack at getting a job when traditional industry would not have looked at them. I can look around my constituency and see a host of social enterprises that are an important part of our economy and which provide a variety of opportunities for people. The Cyrenians organics recycling enterprise ticks every box in this Parliament: it provides work-based training for vulnerable people, who start off a long way away from the labour market and end up being capable of employment and getting decent jobs. Such an approach is more expensive. The enterprise takes on 50 trainees a year, but although it pulls in charitable money, there is a need for public sector cash to help. Other social enterprises in my constituency include the Engine Shed, the Garvald bakery and the Soap Company Ltd, whose shop is on the Royal Mile just up from the Parliament. They all provide high-quality goods and services and high-quality training and learning experiences for people, who can then move on. Only this week, I heard of another fantastic social enterprise in my constituency that has been given a lifeline of an extra month. On 23 December, the staff were told that the place would shut the next day, but we have managed to get a stay of execution for a month. The social enterprise in question is a community cafe that trains up people with disabilities and gives them experience of cooking and serving. That  experience must be kept, so I hope that we are able to use that month's stay of execution. There are pressures on budgets, but there is also a cost in getting rid of such supported employment and training opportunities. The cost is that the people involved will not get the chance to be economically active and to support their families. They will not get the chance of dignity. To pick up Nigel Don's point, the opportunity that we gain from keeping people in employment is that fewer people will need to take up benefit so more of that UK money will come through the Scottish Parliament. There is a win-win if we can just construct things correctly. In Edinburgh, there are real concerns about Blindcraft, which was set up in 1763. There have been many economic crises since 1763, so surely we cannot let the current recession sound the death knell for that organisation. I understand that 63 per cent of those who work for Blindcraft are blind, registered blind or disabled. They do a proper job. They create products that people want to buy, such as beds and mattresses. We must be able to use article 19 of the EU public procurement directive to allow public sector procurement—in addition to private sector procurement—to give such companies the chance to compete and to market themselves. Ministers must have a role in that regard. Surely universities, prisons and other bodies issue public sector contracts for items such as beds and mattresses. Like other colleagues who have asked specific questions, I am keen to hear from the minister what the Scottish Government is doing through its procurement policies. There is clearly a role for monitoring and supporting social enterprises by sending out a leadership message to local authorities. Ministers need to ensure that local authorities do everything that they can to make the money work by considering public benefit opportunities when they enter into best-value contracts. Ministers have a leadership role not only in the £33 billion to £36 billion that they spend in the taxpayer's name, but in the wider public procurement policy. I hope that the interest in tonight's debate will send a clear, cross-party message that we would like to see action. Perhaps if we can have another debate in a few months, we will be able to hear that some positive action has been taken.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects to lay a statutory instrument relating to permitted development rights for domestic wind turbines and air-source heat pumps. (S3O-9097)

We have already lost one renewables company because of a lack of progress on planning. Does the minister accept that, given the new UK Government feed-in tariff, which starts in April, planning is now the biggest barrier? On what date will his statutory instrument be laid? I understand that he cannot meet the terms of the 2009 act in that respect. Will he provide us with some clarity on the issue?

I congratulate David Whitton on securing the debate. [Interruption.] I will move, because my microphone is not working—there is a minor gremlin there. As colleagues have said, this is a hugely important issue, which I remember discussing with Catherine Stihler several months ago—not long after the European elections. She was seized of the importance of getting clear Scottish representation on the issue. As colleagues have said, the draft directive would be seriously damaging to the industry in Scotland. I know from the briefing that we had from Scottish Financial Enterprise that it is, with the UK financial services industry, deeply critical of the proposals and has alerted representatives to the dangers that are inherent in the proposals. It is vital that we stand up for our financial services industry which, as colleagues have said, is absolutely crucial to Scotland's economy. As the MSP for Edinburgh Central, I am deeply aware of the importance of the quality and range of jobs in our financial services industry. As we have said in debates about banking, the industry does not just provide the top-line jobs, but supports a raft of other high-quality jobs in the city—such as in the legal services industry, which is related to the financial services industry, and in the hotel and catering sector—that are vital to the strength of the economy as a whole. Seven of the top 20 Scottish companies are in the financial services sector, so it really is an  important sector that we would lose at our peril. Colleagues have talked about the importance of the industry; it represents 6 per cent of our gross domestic product—a significant proportion of the country's wealth. We need changes to be made to the proposals. As an Edinburgh MSP, I am acutely aware that Edinburgh is a hugely successful centre. We need to talk up the success that we have had in the city and we need to help to sustain it through whatever measures we can use, for example in respect of education and housing developments. Major life companies, such as Scottish Widows and Standard Life, are here because they want to be here. They have chosen to be in this city and we have to keep encouraging them to be here. It is not just about the big companies that we all know. In addition to the major life companies are related asset managers and smaller, but successful, specialists who all thrive as part of a constituency here in Edinburgh. We need to ensure that those companies are supported. We must take seriously the real fears that this directive could damage our companies by imposing restrictions on their business. The global financial services index shows our competitors rushing up that scale and, as other members have commented, it is the countries that, ironically, our companies would be restricted in trading with that are doing well. China, in particular, is doing well and is potentially a major threat. The directive must be changed. David Whitton outlined very effectively the new barriers—the increased costs and bureaucracy—that would be created. As Gavin Brown observed, there has not even been proper consultation on the draft directive. When we are formulating incredibly complex regulations that aim to regulate an incredibly complex industry, the last thing we want is to get them wrong and to create unintended consequences. I am worried about the impact of the directive and hope that decent changes will be made to it. It has been an incredibly tough year across Scotland for jobs, particularly in Edinburgh, not just because of the recession but because of the fallout for jobs in the banking sector. Although some of those have been replaced by welcome new jobs, we would let more jobs go at our peril in what has been a thriving sector. The issue is not just the jobs but, crucially, the people who have savings, investments and pensions in those companies. We need to look out for them as well. For a number of reasons, we need to work together. This is one of those occasions on which there is a strong feeling across the chamber that we are all singing from the same hymn sheet. I hope that we can send a powerful message to  Europe, and I am sure that the minister will have comments to make about what more can be done to lobby. I hope that the cross-party support that exists will send a clear message from Scotland that the directive must be changed. It was drawn up in haste and we will repent it at our leisure. I hope that the strong voice with which we are speaking tonight will have an impact in Brussels.

Why does the minister think it might take four years to start the project? He has asked for applicants to be as flexible as possible on environmental mitigation and he keeps saying that he has put the decisions back to the companies. Will he clarify whether they now need more planning permission to proceed with the scheme? Will he give us a bit more detail on what he has decided today?

No.  Motion agreed to.

It is a pity that allotments have not had a great profile in the Parliament of late. I welcome Jim Tolson's motion and the debate that we have had so far. Some excellent points have been made. If we consider the big issues that we deal with in the Parliament, there is an extent to which allotments, community gardens and gardening can help with some of our biggest issues. We just do not make the connections. For example, we should consider the recession that we are going through; the debate about investment in public  services and the value that we get from them, particularly health and education; and the food procurement debate and concerns about food supply and food security, which link to the talks in Copenhagen this week. Allotments will not solve all those big issues, but they have a role to play in helping to tackle some of our problems. If we take the Copenhagen issue and consider the statistics that WWF has about the carbon footprint of local authorities that relates to food, there is a massive issue there. Although that problem cannot be fixed by allotments and community gardens alone, they could form part of a movement raising awareness of more locally produced food. I would particularly like the minister—who will get her turn in the sun at some point—to examine the regulations on selling food from allotments. At SAGS's June meeting, I was told that, because of many health and safety issues, people are not allowed to sell on produce from allotments, and I certainly think that that very practical matter could be looked at. In a recession, people will rightly be worried about money and the family finances. They are looking to cut back expenditure and get value for money, and the cost of food is a huge issue for many people who do not have much of a choice in their local shops or access to community food cooperatives. Moreover, for people who might have a lot of time because, for example, they have been made redundant early in life, are on the dole and cannot get back into work, training and the support provided by social networks are vital, and allotments can provide the kind of community support that not only stops people feeling isolated but allows them to make some kind of practical output. Jim Tolson was right to highlight Peter's Produce; I was stunned by the case study, which showed what one man in one garden—and not a particularly massive garden, either—could do in a year, and by the fact that he not only could feed his family but had food left over. If people realised how much can come from a well-run garden, they would be amazed by the various opportunities, the benefits to family health and welfare and so on presented by such activity. In its "Finding Scotland's Allotments" document, SAGS points out that, during the second world war, there were 70,000 allotments. Those allotments were established as a national priority, and I believe that, with the challenges that we face from climate change, the recession and so on, putting allotments, gardening and the production of local food higher up our agenda would have a marked impact on our communities. As SAGS rightly points out, we simply do not have enough allotments to go round, so we need to look at what more can be done in that respect. As colleagues have already covered the various  health and welfare aspects of this issue, I want to finish with some comments about schools. I believe that the current focus on healthy activity in schools should also include gardening, which could, for example, be linked into the eco-schools project—after all, people love eco-schools—while ensuring a practical output for children. This needs to be made a national priority, particularly for schools in disadvantaged areas where people have no access to gardens—

I hope that the minister will respond to the good ideas that have been raised in the debate.

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the alarm of parents throughout Edinburgh at the council's proposed 2.5 per cent cuts in school budgets in the next three years? Will he respond to the concern that those budget cuts will make implementing curriculum for excellence impossible? What support will he make available to the council to prevent those cuts and enable the educational success that he claims will be achieved in Edinburgh?

I thank the minister for agreeing to Labour's amendment to his motion. I understand that he wants to take with him to Copenhagen a motion on which there is consensus, so I have toned down what would have been a rather more robust comment on the progress that has been made on action. The words "implementation of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009" are now in the motion, in the interest of unity. Nevertheless, that will not hold me back in my comments. I will focus on Copenhagen and on Labour's disappointment at the Scottish Government's lack of progress on implementation of the 2009 act. We passed our radical climate change legislation in  June, after months of debate and lobbying. Amendments were lodged by us and by others to bring forward target dates and to add a raft of practical measures that would enable us to make big cuts in our emissions in the early years. Therefore, it is hugely disappointing that so little progress has been made on translating those legislative provisions into practical policies and spending commitments. Politics matters, and the choices that we make in electing government—whether at national or local level—matter. Kyoto did not deliver because we did not get Australia and the United States on board. It matters that Kevin Rudd is now Australia's Labor Prime Minister and it matters that Barack Obama is now the US President—someone who believes that the US must be part of the solution rather than part of the problem. The UK Labour Government has been key to the preparations for Copenhagen. At every level of government and at every opportunity—whether at the G8 summit in Gleneagles, in Commonwealth meetings or in meetings of the EU—the UK has tried to bind countries together in looking at the radical commitments of other Governments, in getting a binding deal and in providing financial support to developing countries. Even if Copenhagen secures a deal on emissions next week, significant amounts of money must also be given to developing countries to enable them to transform their economies, to sustain their citizens in the challenging years of climate change that lie ahead and to prevent deforestation. As the birthplace of the industrial revolution, Scotland can play a leading role in developing a route map to challenge climate change and develop action on a low-carbon economy. We all agree that we must seize the renewables opportunities but, whether those are in marine renewables or householder and community renewables, the Scottish Government could do much more now to support the expansion of those industries. That is why, if the Scottish ministers are going to be in Copenhagen, they should please talk about the progress that we are making and about what we will do when they come home. As we said in the debate on climate change this summer, it must be an honest offer—it cannot be a matter of "we will if you will"; there must be a commitment to act, whatever is agreed in Copenhagen. In June, when we moved our amendment for a 40 per cent reduction in carbon emissions, we believed that that was doable. We also moved a raft of amendments to make it happen. When the Scottish National Party Government's target leapt to 42 per cent—after it had repeatedly signed up to 34 per cent as a maximum—it raised the bar on what it needs to do.

No, thanks. My time is tight because I have not lodged an amendment. Disappointingly, the SNP Government has dragged its heels. We have not heard a word from it about putting in place the council tax and business rates reductions that we all agreed to. Where is the timescale for the land use strategy? How will the forestry targets be met? What plans will the Scottish Government put in place to tackle degraded peatlands? When will the public duty be put in place? Kicking such issues into touch until after the next election is not good enough. If the act is to be successful, it must be embraced by the whole of the public sector so that we can get on and dramatically reduce the carbon footprint. Scotland has companies that lead the way in electric cars and battery technology, which are vital components of a low-carbon transport strategy. However, companies need to be able to compete for business. If the Scottish Government were to change its procurement process, that would enable those companies to drive the market and cut costs. The same thing applies in relation to householder renewables and community heating systems. We know that they work, as can be seen across the country. However, the cost of delay on both those issues is that we have lost one of our best-known companies, Windsave, which went into liquidation because it could not get contracts in Scotland. What about the SNP's manifesto commitment to have renewables in every school? Will the minister tell us when that target will be met? I suspect that it is going the way of the class sizes target. What is happening is not good enough. We need to make progress now on our existing buildings and on the next generation of buildings that will be here in 2050. Soon, we will see the first annual implementation report. Setting up a fellowship and establishing the 2020 group, however worthy those ambitions are, are not enough; we need the practical stuff now. We need to do the easy stuff first. I want the minister to tell us, in his summing-up speech, what he is going to do to fund sustainable travel in the budget next week. Also, how much more money will be in the pot for cycling facilities, given that that funding is now at the lowest level that it has been for years? Will there be more money for bus and train travel, rather than forcing people to drive to work? Will there be more investment in energy efficiency, so that we can have a proper scheme that delivers, and a commitment to match the UK Government on its boiler scrappage scheme and its green investment plans? Is there any likelihood that, before the next Scottish Parliament elections,  we will be able to offer our constituents money off their council tax if they install energy-efficiency measures? We need action to be taken now. We are prepared to work constructively with the Scottish Government, and there is massive public support for action—that was evident at the wave demonstration at the weekend—and there is a similar appetite in the world of business. We must work together, but we need leadership now from the Scottish Government. We must have a timescale for action to drive towards a low-carbon society and a public engagement strategy to bring us all together to work for those serious carbon reductions. The Scottish Government needs to get on with it, not just talk about it.

Given that the Scottish Government proposed an emissions reduction target of 34 per cent when it introduced the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill but the Parliament adopted a 42 per cent target, how does the First Minister intend to meet the gap with new initiatives? Has he launched new initiatives in the past six months?

I agree that Mark Cooper's work in raising the campaign's profile and getting us all involved has been outstanding. Where does the campaign go next? Should we think about compulsion or should we simply encourage pubs to change and improve their facilities?

I add my congratulations to Shirley-Anne Somerville on securing the debate, which is timely and has allowed members from throughout the chamber to make good speeches about the background to women's suffrage. I particularly thank those who made the 2009 gude cause a fantastic celebration. It was a brilliant success. We had great weather, which we could not have predicted. The march itself was the culmination of a year's activities. There were a huge number of really good events run by local groups throughout Scotland, such as the quilting workshop, the banner-making workshop and the political discussions that sprang from the gude cause. I would heartily recommend the not-to-be-missed gude cause songbook, which includes fantastic songs by women from Scotland and abroad. We had the opportunity to celebrate the contribution that was made by the early pioneers of women's suffrage and equality. As Johann Lamont said, the gude cause event was an opportunity for us to celebrate sisterhood and solidarity. The way that it was organised epitomised that. I thank the organisers of the Edinburgh Peace and Justice Resource Centre, particularly Janet Fenton and Helen Kay, for holding together a huge range of projects with no money to speak of, as far as I can make out. Their imagination and determination really made the difference. Even in our own festival of politics, we ensured that women were firmly on the agenda this year with some fantastic discussions and celebrations. There was a focus on the poor number of women elected to the United Kingdom Parliament throughout the 20 th century and the change that we were able to introduce in the Scottish Parliament, to which groundbreaking numbers of women were elected. We also discussed the fact that the numbers have tailed off since 1999. There was a huge flush of enthusiasm at the start and, although we have managed to keep our 50:50 in the Labour Party, it is time for us to look at how we move forward. There is a role for women outwith the Parliament as well as in our parties to lobby hard so that the 2011 manifestos reflect women throughout the country. We all have our take on how to achieve women's rights and equality, but I hope that it will take centre stage in all our manifestos. My party has had strong representation of women in here in the past three sessions of Parliament, but we have also changed our party structures to ensure that they are 50:50. It is not just about women's representation in the Parliament but about their representation in the  whole of Scottish public life. Public bodies, trade unions, businesses and the professions all need to have women at their heart, not just doing the hard work and the fundraising but playing leading roles, too. When we set up the Scottish Parliament, women came from all the parties, the trade unions, the churches and civic society to work together for change. As we look to the next session of the Scottish Parliament, we need to reclaim women's right to be in the Parliament and to look at the women's claim of right that we had for the first session and think about it for the future. Now is a good time for us to look at the gains that we have made and to set an agenda for the unfinished business that some of us have talked about today. We have made massive progress. When we in the Labour Party set out our priorities for the first session of Parliament, we were clear that we wanted to ensure that our policies made a difference to women's lives. Those included domestic violence legislation; free nursery provision for three and four-year-olds to give all our children a decent start in life and to give women the chance to play a full part in society by being able to work and be carers; and policies targeted at pensioners, because we knew that women live longer and that many women who have taken time out to bring up their children or to be carers have traditionally worked in lower-paid sectors and do not have access to decent pensions. A huge inequality runs throughout our world. We need to ensure that what we do in the Parliament will redress the balance. My fear is that we are stepping backwards. It is not just about the numbers of us in here but about the policies. It is about ensuring that women do not lose out in a time of recession. We want to ensure that the gains that we have made are not rolled back. Some of our most vulnerable groups have begun to lose out as a result of the cuts that we see across councils. I hope that we will not let that happen and that we will move to ensure that we make more gains for women's equality. There is a huge amount still to do. If our committee rooms are to be named, let us not name just one after a woman. As Shirley-Anne Somerville and Malcolm Chisholm said, we should go not just for the name of one woman such as Elsie Inglis or Chrystal Macmillan but for naming at least three rooms after women. We must recognise women's role in history and our contribution to our country.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has had with the Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution regarding lessons that can be learned from the £600,000 loss sustained by the gathering 2009. (S3O-8497)

I welcome the cabinet secretary's acceptance that lessons need to be learned from the disastrous economic performance of this year's event. I ask him, in particular, to study the perverse economic analysis in the EventScotland report, available on the organisation's website, which suggests that gross expenditure and gross outputs are the same. According to that analysis, if £10,000 were to be flushed down one of the gathering's many portable toilets, it would make a £17,300 contribution to the Scottish economy. It completely misses the concept of value for money or accountability. I suggest that the cabinet secretary also tells us the final amount of public sector money that has been spent on the project. I have been able to work it out at something in the region of—

There is a point to this.

It is.

I have already asked the cabinet secretary a question. I asked him to study—

Like my colleagues, I congratulate Jackie Baillie on the timely and important debate that she has secured. I also want to add my thanks to Citizens Advice Scotland for the hard work that it has done to do research and produce policy briefings not only for today's debate but consistently over the years. It  has ensured that we are informed not only about the national picture but, crucially, about the local constituency issues and about what is actually happening in our communities. The choice of words for the title of the report—"Drowning in Debt"—is good, as that phrase sums up the helplessness, the despair and the sense of going under in a sea of debt that people in that circumstance must feel. The services that the CAB network provides are absolutely vital. From a visit to my local CAB office in Gorgie-Dalry, I know that the number of people seeking help is substantially up on last year. I record my thanks to the volunteers and staff for keeping that service going, even though they are under pressure. Although I do not want to exaggerate the situation, it is clear that the combination of recession and the steady loss of jobs in the financial and banking sector in Edinburgh is taking a severe toll on many households. The number of job vacancies is half what it was this time last year. We know that the unemployment rate is going up, as well. Clearly, many people are struggling to keep their heads above water. Statistics show that the key vulnerable groups are those who are already on low incomes, for whatever reason. Those people simply do not have savings to fall back on to get them through hard times. People who are in negative equity are now not able to sell their house, settle their debts and move to the rented sector. That choice is simply no longer available to them. It is a deeply worrying time. Jackie Baillie's motion is extremely well written and she spoke eloquently to it. I agree with her that it is vital that people who are already in debt are not ruled out of receiving financial assistance on the ground of a lack of money. To a lot of people, £100 does not sound like a huge amount of money, but to someone who is already in debt, £100 could be a completely insurmountable barrier. I hope that we can add our weight to that of those who are lobbying to change that situation. As I have said, by the time that people seek help, they are highly likely to have already exhausted their funds and any help from family. It is human nature to try to survive. However, for some people, it has become impossible to cope. We need to work together to try to ensure that our CAB network is robust, properly funded and capable of helping people to the level that they need. In Edinburgh, people who are in debt are likely to have five debts each. They are also likely to have more debts than the Scottish average, and those debts are likely to be complex and require face-to-face support from money advisers on, most likely, more than one visit to a CAB. Those  tough cases take up a disproportionate amount of time. I have written to ministers—not Alex Neil, but his predecessors—to urge them to provide more support for people who are in financial crisis. I know from my experience over the years that when we have lobbied the Scottish Executive, the Scottish Government and the United Kingdom Government, amounts of money have been provided, and last year's credit crunch money was hugely welcome. However, I sound a note of caution. The debt money that was allocated to Scotland last year was—although welcome—distributed in such a way that it disadvantaged the CAB network in Edinburgh. A couple of years ago, the Edinburgh network was pulled together, and the five offices were united as one organisation. That has ruled them out of being able to apply as individual CAB offices for grants and bursaries, and—crucially—for the credit crunch money. The city's network therefore received an allocation that in other parts of the country would have gone to only one bureau, whereas it had to cover five bureaux in Edinburgh. I met representatives from the CAB network in Scotland last year, and I made representations to ministers. I understand the variety of pressures that were placed on what was—although significant—not a huge amount of money. If more money comes to us this year, which I would strongly welcome, I urge the minister to examine distribution formula and to add his weight to that of those who are seeking a fairer distribution method, to ensure that Edinburgh does not lose out in the way that it did last year.

Presiding Officer, can I clarify how many minutes I have—is it eight?

Excellent. At the outset, I comment that, although I think we all know that this is a filler debate, it has drawn together those of us in the Parliament who are interested in building a central Scotland green network. It has enabled us to put our priorities on the table and allowed people to bring out their passion for and knowledge of their own communities. It has also given us a positive opportunity to make demands of the Government.

Of course—we are the Opposition. Such demands have been made in a constructive way and people have tried to use this opportunity to put the Government under pressure, which is our job, and to give the ministers a push to go back to their ministerial colleagues and ask what they are doing to address the agenda. Some of us have been in that position, and I urge the ministers to use that pressure and lever not just to get themselves out of jail today but to make their colleagues play their part. Some excellent points have been made about funding and priorities. Both John Scott and Alison McInnes spoke in their opening remarks about the need for clarity and greater co-ordination, and Alison McInnes's points need to be replied to in the minister's concluding remarks.  If the green network is to be a national planning framework priority, it needs to be a priority throughout Government; it cannot be just a little badge attached to the project. That means resources, clarity and commitment. I would like to hear about some of that in the minister's winding-up comments. Rob Gibson was right to ask for a debate about reality and what will be spent. His comments backed up some of the points made by Opposition members. We need more clarity on funding; that is absolutely crucial. George Foulkes was right to focus on reality, too. It is easy to come up with a title—it is interesting that every single one of us has bought into that title because we can all relate to it—but the green network needs to be a real priority. George Foulkes talked about spending £9 million on a referendum that most of us do not want versus spending £9 million on the central Scotland green network. That is a no-brainer, so I hope that ministers will think about it. They might not immediately be attracted to spending the £9 million on the network, but there would be vast support for it throughout the chamber. Hugh O'Donnell talked about land around some of our most disadvantaged areas and previous industrial communities. In Motherwell, we could demonstrate the importance of developing derelict land. The new town of Cumbernauld was a vision from the middle of the previous century of using urban planning to create green networks and a high-quality green environment for people who had come out of some of the worst slums in Glasgow, which had been created at the turn of the 20 th century. The link between our urban communities and their surrounding areas was made by member after member. The challenge is to get green fingers from the heart of our urban communities to stretch out into rural areas. Rob Gibson was a bit too quick to dismiss planning ideas. Green lungs are important in helping people in some of our most disadvantaged communities to have a better quality of life. In the previous session of Parliament, we had the sustainable communities fund, which was aimed specifically at redressing the environmental injustice in the heart of communities that have experienced some of the worst environmental degradation as a result of the exploitation of natural resources. People who lived in communities where the coal, iron and steel industries operated might have had jobs in those industries but, once the industries went, they had a fantastic opportunity to clean up the environment and give their areas new life.  Elaine Smith spoke eloquently about how tackling that environmental legacy and making the most of our industrial history should be a priority. Summerlee heritage park is a fantastic example of reclamation, which should be celebrated as it gives people jobs. If Rhona Brankin had been here, she would have talked about the Scottish mining museum in her constituency. Through such places, our industrial heritage provides a benefit for today's communities. The miners who take visitors around the mining museum and the benefit to places such as Summerlee have to be celebrated. Elaine Smith also mentioned the green gym initiative, allotments and other green projects, which general practitioners throughout the country are now recommending because their use is beneficial to physical and mental health. Elaine Smith was right to point to the need for a gender analysis. Statistics show that women have less time and money available to them, so access to green networks, which they can visit and take their kids to, is absolutely crucial. Local access is hugely important. The gender analysis will also show that the issue of personal safety is key and has to be plugged in. I know from talking to people when I walk and cycle that one of the things that puts them off accessing green spaces is lack of certainty about their personal safety. As ever, Robin Harper spoke eloquently about the need to make environmental justice a practical reality. He is absolutely right. Like Chris Harvie, he also spoke eloquently about the legacy of Patrick Geddes. Patrick Geddes was a polymath; he not only talked about town planning, industrialisation and philosophy but managed to tie it all together in a way that was relevant to his generation. We need to do the same. The growing support for allotments, which Robin Harper and Nanette Milne talked about, is crucial. There is a real opportunity for us to do something practical that brings alive the climate change agenda and addresses the fact that many families in Scotland cannot afford to buy high-quality fruit and vegetables. The local shop around the corner cannot supply fruit and vegetables at cost, so families have to travel longer and longer distances to centralised supermarkets. Supermarkets have many benefits, such as in cost, but they are not necessarily accessible to everybody and, increasingly, people need cars to get to such retail opportunities. Members have expressed lots of good and practical ideas. Robin Harper raised the specific issue, which others did not touch on in the same way, of the contribution that farmers and landowners can make; they can play a vital role.

I am happy to support that idea 110 per cent. I know that people in my constituency recognise and welcome the opportunity that the farmers market provides. Some of our most disadvantaged communities welcome food co-operatives because they give them a direct link to farming and affordable produce. We need more of that in our communities, so I absolutely agree with John Scott. Karen Gillon made an excellent speech about the importance of linking our heritage sites. What an exciting idea it is to link the New Lanark industrial world heritage site and the Antonine wall world heritage site with the world heritage site in my constituency. Karen Gillon could not have put it more effectively. This summer I spent a weekend cycling between Carlisle and Newcastle and saw the economic benefit that that region has been able to get from its world heritage site. The experience of cycling along Hadrian's wall—I hasten to add that I cycled adjacent to the wall, rather than on it—was fantastic. I saw the tourism and industrial heritage opportunities that the region has been able to link together. The last stretch towards Newcastle is all off-road; it is a magnificent cycle run, which is linked to the area's industrial heritage. There are fantastic ideas in other parts of the UK, and I hope that the discussions that we have had today will give ministers heart to go back and bang on the door of their ministerial colleagues. We will know that ministers are serious about the agenda and the ambition behind the network when they start to answer the specific questions that many of us have asked. The Liberal Democrat amendment asks detailed questions, to which we would like answers. I hope that in his summing up Alex Neil will go some way to answering the detailed questions that Alison McInnes and others have asked.

We have asked for an initiative on training and employment in the area for young people, which would be a practical result of today's debate. I hope that Alex Neil will take that on board.

For the moment.

Labour has long argued for the establishment of a network of green corridors across central Scotland. It was one of our manifesto promises at the previous election. I welcome the opportunity today for us to help shape the new network. I believe that it is a natural development of the groundwork that we laid over the past decade in, for example, the woods in and around towns initiative and the development of urban forest in central Scotland. My colleagues on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee have this year strongly supported the principle of developing and adding to the NPF a national, landscape-scale ecosystem  and land management project. The Scottish Wildlife Trust and RSPB Scotland are right to argue that the issue of scale is important in order to support diverse wildlife opportunities and create healthy biodiversity. Given the success of similar examples across the United Kingdom, it is important that we do not fall behind the superb best practice that the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds has been involved in elsewhere in the UK. As Scotland has a long tradition of urban regeneration and the restoration of landscapes that were damaged by heavy or extractive industries, the principle of environmental justice runs through our values. Ensuring that communities that have experienced environmental degradation are given the chance for investment in a much more attractive landscape and quality of life has long been a priority. Clearly, evidence suggests that investment in landscape and environmental infrastructure is good for economic development. Such investment has the capacity to transform and regenerate many areas, such as former mining communities whose economic core was ripped out of them. Our most disadvantaged communities present some really big opportunities. That should be part of the philosophy behind the massive habitat network opportunity that is being developed through the CSGN. What is really exciting and novel about the central Scotland green network is the scale of ambition that it represents. Roseanna Cunningham has outlined the sheer size of the geography that it will encompass. However, as well as considering the economic benefits that such a large network could bring, we should focus on the social benefits—such as enabling people to gain the health opportunities of recreation through walking, cycling and nature interpretation—and the fact that the network will improve the quality of people's everyday environment. Rather than being seen as an add-on, the network should be thought of as being linked into people's everyday lives. In light of some recent interesting research that suggest that proximity to green space is good for people's health, the green network can link into the whole environmental justice agenda, which should be at the heart of the network's philosophy. As Ramblers Scotland has highlighted, the CSGN provides an opportunity to create a network of paths and cycle routes that link people with home and work, connect communities, and provide safer options for walking and cycling. Given Roseanna Cunningham's comments about every department having its role to play, let me highlight as an example what should happen with our railway network. There should be good, high-quality, safe, secure parking for cycles at every rail station in central Scotland. We know from the  statistics that huge numbers of people drive comparatively short distances to work. The green network surely provides an opportunity to make practical changes to people's daily lives. Indeed, the network provides us with a radical opportunity. For much of the previous century, central Scotland was transformed—in many ways for the good—by human activity and urbanisation. In transforming our communities and landscapes in the context of climate change, the network offers an opportunity to reconnect habitats for wildlife and to support biodiversity, because the network will have sufficient scale and coherence to make a big difference. Given the projections on climate change and its impact on species, we need to give species opportunities to grow and survive. That must be at the heart of the network. Existing examples of good practice on the ground can be developed and extended. Those include the work that Edinburgh and Lothians Greenspace Trust does in my area, the investment that is being made in our canals, the developments in forestry that are taking place both in central Scotland and further west, and the superb work that is being undertaken by Glasgow and Clyde valley green network. Those examples indicate what could be done when the network is put together. However, it is critical to consider what can be done in future. For example, what are the opportunities for the Antonine wall? We need to go beyond just having a clever rebranding and ensure that the CSGN means more than just the renaming of an area. Effective co-ordination will be an issue, which is why our amendment highlights the need for partnership working. A host of organisations will need to work together effectively if the network is to do more than just look at the investment that is already being made. Therefore, the Scottish Government needs to answer questions on how the network's designation in the NPF will be underpinned with organisational and financial support, what analysis it has undertaken of the effectiveness of existing structures and how they might be changed, and how the influence of the different partners can be brought to bear to ensure that the network does more than what is already being done. The role of local government is key. Scottish National Party ministers need to do more than just make an allocation and tick a box in the NPF. The investment in the CSGN does not even begin to compare with the levels of investment that are being made in other NPF projects. We need to consider what each local authority can do to bring to bear resource and activity. Will the Scottish Government renegotiate the single outcome agreements—perhaps the Minister for Housing and Communities can deal with that in his  summing up—in the light of such a key project? If the green network is really to be a national project, what implications will it have for each of the 19 local authorities involved? Given that we already have some really good strategic partnerships—I refer to the Glasgow and Clyde valley strategic development planning authority, the SESplan authority and the Ayrshire joint planning steering group—what will happen with the delivery of local development plans on the ground and how will investment be targeted through local authorities? Tackling the resources and energies that are needed to transform some of our most degraded landscapes is another crucial issue. How will the work of different Government agencies be tied together? The Minister for Environment referred to the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, Scottish Natural Heritage and the Forestry Commission in her opening remarks, but how will their input be co-ordinated? How will leadership take place? I welcome the fact that Roseanna Cunningham will host a couple of events, but what day-to-day work will build up to those events? We need to hear about not just the headlines but the everyday work that will underpin the network's success. In addition, a host of environmental charities and voluntary organisations have energy and expertise, as do our local communities. In his winding-up speech, perhaps the Minister for Housing and Communities can say how those will be brought together to influence and direct the network around their own communities. We have been given the headlines, but we have not so far been told how the vision will be tied together. Detail on the strategy is crucial. I am also interested in hearing from the minister what pump-priming money will be provided by the Scottish Government. Environmental non-governmental organisations tell us that no new money seems to be coming to the network. Given its huge scale, the network will need new pump priming if it is to make a difference. What opportunities will come from the new paths that will be created? Ramblers Scotland has asked about the practicalities of that investment on the ground. We are told that no new money will be provided for that project. Perhaps the minister can clarify that in his closing remarks. Given the cuts that are being made in voluntary and charitable organisations as a result of cuts in Scottish Government money, what will happen to the capacity of the different organisations that are involved? Networking cannot be done for free and on the hoof. There must be a co-ordinated effort. Another issue that has been raised with me is the lack of ability to co-ordinate activity in the  eastern end of the network. How does the minister believe that that issue should be addressed? How much money will come from the SRDP, in particular for the forestry grants that will be made available within the network? We know that we are massively undershooting our forestry targets year on year. The network provides a key opportunity in some of our most disadvantaged communities to link up urban habitats and to create opportunities. What will be done in practice? Finally, as we are in the midst of a recession, I make two practical suggestions that I ask ministers to take on board. First, the network surely provides a fantastic opportunity to recruit unemployed young people to work on specific projects. We know that unemployment among young people is shooting up. The network could provide on their doorsteps opportunities to work in a practical way that could be mentioned on their CV. Secondly, spending in the early days should focus on those projects that bring multiple benefits to local communities. We need to build the profile of communities in the network locally, get local people involved and join up some of the investment to tackle the recession. We would like to see joined-up work on the ground and early investment. Could the network have a challenge fund so that local bodies could bid for projects in surrounding communities? We would like ministers to take forward those practical opportunities. I would like to hear the Minister for Housing and Communities' comments on those when he winds up. The central Scotland green network is a national project that needs national funding, but it also needs community buy-in. We have a fantastic opportunity to tie the two things together to help to build Scotland out of the recession in a way that ties in investment in our environmental networks. I would like to see some answers from the minister when he winds up. I move amendment S3M-5173.1, to insert at end: ", and believes that there is a need for cooperation among the Scottish Government, local authorities and agencies and groups working in the area to ensure that maximum opportunities are delivered from the network."

My point was that the cabinet secretary has many powers to tackle the recession and to help the communities that have been affected by it.

If a week is a long time in politics, a year is probably a lifetime. This time last year, the cabinet secretary was extremely positive: "A key part of the package ... must be a significant increase in the North Sea cod quota—with no unreasonable strings attached. We can catch less by reducing the amount of cod that is taken ... but we should land more of what we catch, rather than force the fleet to dump overboard." He continued: "I will also make it a priority to think of the needs of not only today's fishermen, but future generations, which is why we have developed this year's proposals to safeguard fishing rights for future generations of Scottish fishermen." — [ Official Report , 27 November 2008; c 12814-5.]  He gets 10 out of 10 for the rhetoric, but the reality is not quite there. Fortunately, the cabinet secretary's licensing regime sunk without trace after being panned by the industry and not being legal. We also had warm words from the minister on sustainability and a fair outcome for the fishing industry, but the industry has attacked his lack of  action and demanded more than rhetoric. It is significant that the cabinet secretary did not mention the four-point action plan until the final minute of his speech. This year, it is pretty clear from the fishing communities that they do not want the rhetoric. The fishermen and the processors have seen through it, as have we, so the party is over. The cabinet secretary must be really worried that the Cod Crusaders have reformed. It will clearly be a rough year. The first thing that the cabinet secretary must do is to stop pretending that not all of us in the Parliament want the best possible deal for Scottish fishermen. He needs to work with members, United Kingdom ministers and the industry to develop the best possible negotiating position for the December talks. The second thing that he must do is to nail the problems from last year that have arisen from the bizarre outcomes of tougher quotas and an even greater increase in discards. Despite all the talk about how last year's deal was great, the reality for fishermen is that, because of the combination of the recession and tight quotas, some boats have already landed their catches for the year and are now stuck, having exhausted their quota. We need to know what the cabinet secretary is planning to do to take the pressure off the industry and enable it to get through the recession. My colleague Karen Gillon has raised the issue of support for the fishing industry. It would be good to hear in the cabinet secretary's summing-up speech a bit more detail about the measures that he is planning to take to alleviate pressure on the industry. We in the Labour Party believe strongly that we need enough fish for future generations—that is the core issue of sustainable stocks. I would like to hear more from the cabinet secretary about the feedback on what has happened in the north-west. Last year, the prospect of draconian closures dominated all our discussions. I asked the cabinet secretary to put in place funding to ensure that we have a robust basis for assessing the health of our stocks in the north-west, and the proposal received unanimous support in the Parliament. Better information to track the health of stocks was to be tied into support for practical fishing measures so that conservation measures would be not just implemented but seen and accepted to be implemented by Brussels. Again, the reality has not matched the rhetoric—in fact, it has been a million miles away, because closure has occurred on the west coast. As this year's fishing negotiations loom—although we are discussing them early this year—it is clear to me and, I suspect, other members that we do not have a proper strategy to take us from now to CFP reform.  Worse than that, the cabinet secretary's press statements from earlier this week try to suggest—

I have not yet said what the press statements were, so it might be wise for the cabinet secretary to wait to hear what I will quote from him. The cabinet secretary suggests that CFP reform will mean that Scotland manages the fishing interests off our coast. However, I understand from this week's discussions between regional advisory councils, ministers from throughout the UK and fishing industry representatives that regional seas management will be determined not by political boundaries but—as is correct—by ecosystems that will be managed by shared interests in our seas. Fishing interests will not be managed by Scottish fishermen alone, and they do not expect that. We need a reality check and less rhetoric all round. The cabinet secretary needs to get the fundamentals right. What role does he see for tie-ups or new ways to help the fleet to spread its catch throughout the year? Given the low prices that fishermen are obtaining, which he talked about, what solutions does he suggest to bring prices to a sensible level? It is clear that the Commission does not want to act on that. What role will the Scottish Government play?

I have mentioned the recession, which the cabinet secretary will see is a core part of our amendment. He needs to do more to help the fishing industry through the recession—that is fundamental. I have read my briefings, which is why our amendment focuses on recognising the superb work that is being done throughout Europe. Scotland is doing good work on regional fisheries management, but it is not just us. There is no point in our doing that work on our own; we must do it with other parts of the UK, with other nation states  and with fishing and scientific interests. Scotland should not go it alone—we must work with others. The key point is that common fisheries policy reform is not here yet and will not be here next year or the year after. We need action from the cabinet secretary and his ministerial colleagues now, not lofty talk about what might happen. That is the core point of our amendment and that is why we have highlighted the recession. Our amendment stresses the need for the Scottish Government to act now to help our fishing communities and our industry through the recession, to deal with the fallout from last year's negotiations and to consider that in detail. Our fishing communities are an important part of our identity as a nation. Like our mining, steel and shipbuilding communities, they need regeneration. What is the cabinet secretary doing with his Scottish National Party Government colleagues not simply to consider what happens in the December talks year after year but to ensure joined-up government now to regenerate and to provide new support for skills, training and business development in the communities that are feeling the impact of reduced quotas? Those communities are dealing with the double whammy of the recession and the impact of last year's fishing talks. The recession is at the heart of our amendment and our world view, which is why we ask the cabinet secretary specific questions and request specific support now to help our communities and our fishing industry to get through the recession. What I have described is needed just to get through this year. We would like to hear more from the cabinet secretary about what is being done to give assistance next year. He has mentioned the four-point plan. We would like to hear the detail of that. He mentioned it as a bit of a throwaway remark in his last minute. My final two issues are discards and this year's talks. Last year, we all agreed on discards—indeed, the subject was a core issue in the cabinet secretary's speech last year. The point cannot be put better than Bertie Armstrong's comment that "discards are abhorrent and the reason why it occurs must be a mystery to the public. But if there were a simple solution, then we would have solved the problem a long time ago." It is obvious to us all now—as it was obvious to us all last year—that there is no simple solution. Given that the issue of discards was such a high priority for the cabinet secretary last year, I want to hear what progress he has made with the Commission on developing a sensible way forward to make a practical difference. It is difficult to imagine that there will be action from the Commission on discards without there  also being a complementary reduction in fishing effort. Measurable evidence will also be required. Currently, we have a lose-lose situation for fishermen: given that they cannot break their quotas, they take fish out of the sea but have to throw them back dead. We are talking about a mixed fishery; the practical measures that can be adopted are key to the issue. What trade-offs is the cabinet secretary prepared to consider in this regard? Does the cabinet secretary accept that he has to be very careful about the use of cameras? Unless they are introduced under the right circumstances, there could be a huge impact on our fishing communities. The detail of the negotiations has to be absolutely correct. I am very keen to know the extent to which he has raised the matter with our UK colleagues. We need to ensure a core UK negotiation so that we can be successful this year. As the cabinet secretary said, our fishing industry has rightly gained the reputation for innovative conservation measures, but—

We need to ensure that the Scottish Government supports the industry in going forward. This year's talks are crucial. Common fisheries policy reform is not—

Do you not want me to move the amendment in my name?

I move amendment S3M-5119.2, to insert at end: "welcomes the meeting of Inter Regional Advisory Council members, stakeholders and fisheries ministers from across the United Kingdom in Edinburgh this week; notes the growing support for ecosystem-based regional fisheries management amongst fisheries experts and interests, and agrees that the Scottish Government should put in place effective measures to support Scottish fishing communities in light of the outcomes of last year's fisheries negotiations and the ongoing recession."

The minister has provided an excellent opportunity for me to raise the point that I raised with Rob Gibson earlier, which is that the ministerial strategy group can identify a range of opportunities in different parts of the country. In some areas, national parks might be appropriate but, in other areas, SSSIs or regional parks, which the minister has mentioned, can not only take the weight off national parks, but provide positive opportunities that are not identical to those of the national parks.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

I note that the atmosphere is slightly more relaxed this afternoon. Rob Gibson makes a very good point, which follows what Peter Peacock said. Will Rob Gibson accept that that is why we have sites of special scientific interest, national scenic areas and other environmental designations that enable us to protect land? The national parks need to sit on top of those, however, because they also involve the community and economic development issues that we have discussed. The two things need not be counterpoised.

We know that this is not a filler debate that has been scheduled simply to enable others to go off to the by-election campaign. I have logged the fact that we have four environment debates in two weeks, which my team will cope with. Today's debate gives us a good opportunity to reflect on the contribution that our national parks have made to Scottish life and to celebrate some of the fantastic work that is carried out by our national park authorities and the contribution that has been made by communities and the range of organisations that are involved in making those parks a success. It also allows us to consider the minister's comments about the outcome of the review and her views on the proposals to set up a national parks strategy group. Further, it gives us a chance to look to the future. I want to spend some of my time talking about where we go next with national parks. We should not stay where we are; there are opportunities to develop our national parks and to have more national parks. At the outset, we should reflect on the reason why we established national parks. It was because we wanted to acknowledge and protect some of our most outstanding landscapes, our environment and our heritage. Ten years ago, when this Parliament debated the policy framework, the support that we gave it underpinned the first two national parks for Loch Lomond and the Trossachs and the Cairngorms. When we introduced the original legislation, the International Union for Conservation of Nature guidelines were the gold standard, and they have to be the gold standard today. That principle of looking after some of our most important national heritage has got to be at the core of our national parks policy.  I welcome the minister's comments about the success of the national parks. However, the national parks policy was drafted to ensure that all the aims of the national parks were met collectively—that has been the distinctive contribution that Scotland has made to the development of national parks across the world. We were one of the last countries in the world to develop national parks, which were one of the huge benefits of our new Scottish Parliament, and we need to ensure that we do not throw out our initial vision as we move forward.

The member did not need to wait until today to hear my comments on that. In numerous debates since the establishment of the parks, I have said that that has been a success. Indeed, at the time when that approach was discussed, I said that I hoped that it would bring benefits. I believe that the evidence shows that it has done so. The combination of directly elected local people who reflect the different geographies of our national parks, local authority representatives and national representatives has given the parks a range of people to draw on. When I address the Liberal Democrats' amendment, I will comment on how we can move forward in that regard. That is where we are now. The Scottish Government's motion does not tell us a great deal, apart from the fact that it has effectively decided to park the issue of what happens next with regard to national parks until after the next election. In some ways, that is a pity, because there are other things that we could be doing now with regard to setting up new national parks, particularly marine and coastal national parks. Roseanna Cunningham has not expressed her views on our amendment, so I hope that I do not talk her out of supporting it. We have crafted it quite carefully. It asks the Scottish Government simply to "explore the potential for establishing new national parks, including in marine and coastal areas." We could have just said that the Government should get on with setting up a marine coastal national park, because SNH has done work on the issue, extensive work was commissioned by Ross Finnie when he was the Minister for Environment and Rural Development, and the matter has been debated in Parliament and enthusiastically supported by a large number of us. However, I have accepted reality and that the SNP, by virtue  of having one extra vote, is in the driving seat. That is why I asked only that the Government should explore the potential. I do not think that that ties the Government down too much. The SNP ministers made a commitment to consider the issue of establishing a marine coastal national park once the wider legislative framework for the marine environment is completed. That work has not been totally completed, but it is well under way, and I know that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee is beginning to draft its stage 2 amendments to the Marine (Scotland) Bill. Given that a national parks strategy group is being established, it would be a great pity if marine and coastal national parks were excluded from its agenda, which is how it will be interpreted if the Labour amendment is not supported today. It is not only members on the Labour side of the chamber who hold that view. I know that the Liberal Democrats have previously been very enthusiastic about marine and coastal national parks, and a range of environmental groups outwith the Parliament view it as the next natural step in developing new national parks. We can see some fantastic examples around the globe of marine national parks that have been very successful in increasing fishing stocks and local tourism, and which have added to the protection of some of the world's most important marine environments. It would be a big mistake to rule out exploring the potential of establishing new national parks in general, and particularly in marine and coastal areas. The Scottish Wildlife Trust has argued that we need a timescale for action, and I look forward to hearing the minister discuss when she sums up the debate how the new national parks strategy group will progress those issues. It is not a question of only marine coastal national parks; a new national park on Harris has also been suggested. If the Labour amendment is not agreed today, will that proposal effectively be parked until the next Scottish Parliament elections? That would be a pity, as work could be carried out now to consider those issues in much more depth. There is a great deal of enthusiasm for national parks, and the experience of our first two national parks makes the case for more to be established. However, we need criteria for and a proper robust approach to developing those national parks, which is why we have—constructively, we believe—suggested an amendment to give the Government's motion a bit of bite. It would give the national parks strategy group the opportunity to examine the potential for new national parks, including in marine and coastal areas, and would be an intelligent amendment to the Government's  suggestions in its motion. I hope that the minister will agree to consider the issue. We want to celebrate the opportunities that have arisen from the creation of our national parks and the particular contribution that local communities have made. I have some questions on that, and I am interested to hear John Scott and Liam McArthur speak to their amendments this afternoon. With regard to John Scott's amendment, we on the Labour side of the chamber do not believe it is a simple equation to say that, if you reduce the size of the boards of the national park authorities, you automatically produce greater efficiencies and reduce running costs. We think that there are questions to be answered in relation to that amendment. It is clear from the responses to the minister's questionnaire from both national park authorities that they have reservations about reducing the size of the national park boards. One of the opportunities that have arisen from the creation of the new national parks is the contribution of local members, which is the point that I made in response to Mike Rumbles. The directly elected members and the local authority members have a very important role to play, and we should not kid ourselves by thinking that, if the minister is successful in reducing the numbers, it will not lead to issues that both national park authorities will have to deal with. Those board members are not just there to sit and vote through policies; they are there to work. If people are not sitting on the boards, the national park authorities will have to involve them in other ways. There are already sub-committees that deal with recreation and planning in both national park authorities, and certain issues need to be addressed. We should not assume that reducing the numbers will be an easy way to cut the budgets; it will not work like that. The issue of balance in board membership is important, and I look forward to hearing Liam McArthur's comments on the matter. Changing the balance has to be done with extreme care. Local authorities make a contribution to the national park boards, and even though their members are not directly elected the system enables political parties of all perspectives in different areas of the two national parks to be represented on the national park boards. Those members bring a partnership with and resources from local authorities, and it would be a pity to reduce that contribution. Equally, the national representatives—even though they were appointed under an SNP Government—reflect the national interest, which is one of the purposes of national parks. We are—perhaps like Roseanna Cunningham—slightly sceptical about the Liberal Democrat and  Conservative amendments, and we would like to hear the arguments. The national resources issue is important. I am glad that the two national parks contribute to the SNP Government's core objectives, but they have wider objectives too. Regardless of the colour of the Government of the day, our national parks must be with us for a long time and they must be supported. The strategy group must be seen as an opportunity to consider not just the successes of our existing national parks but where the new national parks should be and, crucially, the pressures that both national parks are facing. The national parks need support. Today's debate is an opportunity for us to suggest priorities and express support for the parks. Let us look to the future and consider where the new national parks should be, and let us not rule out marine and coastal national parks. A lot of work has been done already, but there is a huge contribution still to be made. I hope that the minister will listen to our constructive arguments today and think about supporting our amendment at decision time. We believe that the argument is strong and that it would add to the strength of the ministerial group that she is going to set up. I move amendment S3M-5110.1, to leave out from "to guide" to end and insert: "and believes that it should explore the potential for establishing new national parks, including in marine and coastal areas."

In light of the £600,000 loss that was made on the gathering, I raise the concerns of the chair of the Edinburgh Destination Marketing Alliance, on which a debt of £300,000 has been dumped. The DEMA simply does not have the wherewithal to meet private sector debts. Given the raft of unanswered questions and the need to learn lessons from the loss, does the First Minister agree that the Auditor General for Scotland should be asked to examine the issue?

I share Duncan McNeil's disappointment at the need for today's debate, although I congratulate the committee on producing a well-written report. It is clear from the evidence to the committee that not only is equal pay in local government incredibly complex but—as John Wilson has just commented—the longer it takes, the more complex and more difficult it will become to resolve. We need political will to ensure that a sensible resolution is achieved. We need leadership from the Scottish Government, which should not impose but should send a clear message that faster progress in working towards a resolution is needed. As Duncan McNeil outlined, and as the committee's report advocates, we need to think through a strategy that enables us to work through the different categories in the tens of thousands of cases, so that progress can be made. The report suggests a way forward. Its key recommendation, which I believe should be focused on, is on the need for pay audits to check the outcomes of the whole process. There is a danger that smoke and mirrors might be used, so we need to inject some political urgency into the issue. Delivery of the ambition of equal pay should not be a holy grail but a realisable political goal. Why should women be paid lower wages when they do work that is of equal value and which requires similar skills or training? The situation is completely unfair and unacceptable. Women have lost out because of the slow rate of progress on the issue: they have missed out not only on past pay but on future opportunities. The whole process has treated them like second-class citizens. It is  scandalous that the issue has not been resolved. The principal issue is not just about problems in the past, because we are not in a standstill position. For those women workers, things are getting worse. Just this week, the Liberal-SNP administration of the City of Edinburgh Council decided to investigate outsourcing a fifth of its staff, its clear objective being to cut the salary bill. That will solve the council's single status problem because, once low-paid women workers are transferred to the private sector, their pay will be a private matter that will be hidden by commercial confidentiality. We will lose accountability on quality of service provision, so any gains that are made through job re-evaluation will be lost. A couple of weeks ago, I attended a City of Edinburgh Council briefing on home care services, which are predominantly provided by women workers. Some innovative redesign work and investment will free up resources to provide improved quality for those who need support. However, buried in the backdrop to that work and hidden in the statistics was an admission that the council plans to outsource—that is, to privatise—its home care services. The council plans to shift the proportion of in-house provision from 55 per cent to 25 per cent. The council freely admits that it wants to cut costs and to bring down its wages bill. Any savings will be paid for by the lowest-paid workers, who are predominantly women. The cuts in their salaries will be paid to private directors, so there will be no equality of treatment. Has nothing been learned from the cost of privatising services in the national health service, where services had to be brought back in-house? I am already receiving complaints about the quality of care provision by private companies, which have cut hours, provide unreliable services and have a huge turnover in staff. The last thing that vulnerable clients need is to lose out, and women will lose out twice. The vulnerable clients are predominantly women and the hard-working care staff on lower pay are predominantly women. The costs will come in their pay. We know that demographic shifts will mean that we will all live longer and we will have fewer young people entering the labour market. How will we make local authority caring jobs—jobs that are held predominantly by women—attractive to young people in the future if we are cutting back on terms and conditions, on their hours and, in particular, on part-time workers? This is not a standstill debate—the legacy of inaction over the past few years has meant that some women have already lost out, but they will lose out doubly in the future.

Absolutely. That is why I fully agree with Duncan McNeil that it is a tragedy that the problem has not been solved. Although it is a complex issue, political will is required. The problem is that we have now got to the point at which the situation is getting worse. Local authorities are not adopting the right solutions. For example, my local authority, the City of Edinburgh Council, is considering shifting 20 per cent of existing council staff from in-house service provision to private sector service provision. That is the wrong solution. Councils needs to sit down with the unions and COSLA—

No, thank you. I have just taken an intervention. Rather than getting into a blame game, we need constructive action. We have debated the issue in the past. If Shirley-Anne Somerville had been here in previous sessions, she would know how passionate members of all the political parties in Parliament have been about the need to build momentum to resolve the issue. I hope that today's debate will result in the building of momentum that will lead to a solution. Some job re-evaluations are widening the pay gap. What is happening with home care services in Edinburgh, where the pay and prospects of some of our most poorly paid women workers is to get worse, even though Edinburgh has some of the highest living costs in Scotland, is making the situation worse. What does that say about our capital city? That cannot be right. We need action now. I hope that the tenor of the debate, together with the committee's specific recommendations and the fact that, in the past, the cabinet secretary has been involved in the debate on the issue, will mean that we see cross-party action. When I say "cross-party", I am not talking just about the political parties; I am referring to the involvement of COSLA, the councils, the trade unions and the Scottish Government, which I hope will add a sense of urgency to the debate so that in three years' time, whoever sits in Parliament will not be once again debating the issue because thousands of women workers have lost out and their job prospects, and the services for the people for whom they care, have been made worse. That would be unacceptable—we cannot let it happen.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution has had with the organisers of major cultural events regarding the need to reduce carbon emissions in organising such events. (S3O-7853)

I thank the minister for his reply, and I agree that there is a huge opportunity. I ask him to consider that the Scottish Government is well placed to lead on the issue, partly through funding, which he has talked about previously, and partly through the leadership that potentially arises from the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. Will he consider producing best-practice guidance to help those organisations raise their game and do the easy things, such as looking at energy-efficient buildings, ticketing initiatives to promote public transport access and ways to reduce waste? The minister will be aware that organisations such as the fringe in Edinburgh and some of the other festivals are beginning to focus on what they can do. Will he consider pulling together guidelines and formal discussions to bring together the best work that local authorities, arts and music organisations, community groups and public transport bodies are doing? That will mean that we will get the best ideas and experience and put them to good use, and it will ensure that people do not have to reinvent the wheel every time a festival is organised.

To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Government has put in place to assist local authorities dealing with flooding incidents such as those experienced last week. (S3F-1854)

I welcome the excellent efforts that have been made by our rescue services to deal with the immediate aftermath of the dreadful flooding problems that we had last week. Residents in those areas worry about the need for effective long-term flood defences. Will the First Minister agree to re-examine the issue of investment in flood schemes? When I warned that schemes would be hit when the national contribution of 80 per cent for schemes was removed, SNP ministers accused me of scaremongering. However, Edinburgh is now £22 million short, and Moray Council, whose residents were badly hit last week, is now £27 million short. This Parliament fixed the process of flood scheme approvals, and it is now 10 years since Edinburgh experienced devastating flooding. The council has the tender bids in, but it will have to go back to the drawing board. The process will cost more, it will take longer and it will give people years more worry. Will the First Minister act to fix the funding shortfall to enable the desperately needed schemes in those areas, and in others, to go ahead?

This session of Parliament is important not only because of the new legislation that we are debating today but because of the legislation that we have passed that needs to be implemented effectively. Both the crofting reform and wildlife and natural environment bills represent unfinished business. In the previous parliamentary session, we spent a great deal of time listening to crofters and working with them to identify the action that was needed to support them. I will not take a rewriting of the previous session from Rob Gibson. We introduced legislation for new crofts—legislation that was warmly welcomed. However, that work took time. Indeed, we made it clear that there was more work to be done. My point is that we listened to crofters. There are different crofting experiences across Scotland. It is vital that we get the legislation right. I say to crofters that there is absolutely no danger that the Labour Party will run out of patience with crofting communities. We understand the need to get the detail right—that is absolutely vital in the consideration of any new legislation. It is not simply a question of the Government of the day ticking the box and moving on to the next heading. Crofting law is complex. The Labour Party will give no lectures to crofters on the solutions; we want to listen to them. This summer, I met crofters in Camuscross—I visited the crofting area to which Rob Gibson referred. Legislation is crucial—it is part of the process—but so is the implementation of planning. The links between planning and crofting need to be made more explicit. The crofters who I met in Camuscross and Lochcarron are not opposed to the Government's proposals for the sake of it; they are opposed to the proposals because of their experiences. They do not want more bureaucracy; they want effective support for their way of life so that they can get through the recession and beyond. They bitterly resent being asked to pay through the nose for a register of crofts that, as we reported in the previous parliamentary session, the Crofters Commission should have implemented.  That proposal is hardly a help to crofters in a time of recession. The unprecedented alliance against some of the SNP's key proposals that was reported in The Herald last month is the result of careful consideration and debate by crofters.

No. The member has just spoken. I am replying to him. I was at a meeting in Lochcarron at which crofters teased out the proposals in detail. It is absolutely right that we should have such debates in the Parliament. The crofters reported the desperate need for support for young crofters to get them started. We still need to find them land to croft and somewhere to live. That is why we supported the re-introduction of croft house loans—a move that members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee unanimously supported. In addition, we need to pick up the Shucksmith proposals. The Labour Party has not rejected them out of hand, as Rob Gibson implied. There are particular economic support measures that need to be implemented—now. Other measures need to be implemented: a new land fund to enable communities to unlock the potential of land in our Highlands and Islands communities; and the restoration of money following the cuts that were made to Highlands and Islands Enterprise, which are beginning to damage communities in some of our most fragile areas. We also need to tackle dereliction and to get the link between planning and crofting right. Rob Gibson mentioned those issues, and they need to be tackled, some through legislation and some through action by the Crofters Commission. It is not only the Labour Party that is saying that. Even SNP's Angus MacNeil MP tore to shreds the proposals in his response to the consultation, arguing that they were unworkable and likely to result in crofters losing their livelihoods. We need to work together in the chamber to get the right proposals. The detail has to be right. We will play our part in supporting crofting communities and working constructively across the chamber to try to ensure that we get legislation that is fit for purpose. We also commit to doing that on the wildlife and natural environment bill. A lot of work remains to be done on the detail of that bill, too, if it is to have a clear focus and purpose. Groups that I spoke to over the recess expressed a range of concerns on the matter. A key question that we have is: exactly what will the SNP Government do on snaring? We know from all the consultation that there is strong support for action, and we are still waiting for the  concerted action that the previous Minister for the Environment promised on implementation of the Tomkins report on wildlife crime. We still do not have full-time, dedicated police officers in every force in Scotland. There is good practice in our communities on wildlife management, so why cannot ministers name and shame those estates that fall short of that good practice? We know that, scandalously, birds are still being poisoned. I started out by saying that government must not just be about getting a bill through Parliament, ticking the box and then moving on to the next headline. We passed a powerful climate change bill just two months ago, and it is clear from the First Minister's speech today that he thinks that he has ticked the climate change box. He even complained that he did not have a seat at the top table in Brussels, which completely ignores the good progress that is being made throughout Europe to rationalise and regionalise fisheries management. No doubt the First Minister wants to get to the top table to tell people how brilliant the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 is, but there was nothing in his speech today about what he will do to implement it. We have a big consensus on renewables, but nothing from the First Minister on the big change that he and his Government could bring about to link up those renewables projects and to get the Beauly to Denny transmission line right across Scotland to the rest of the country. It is not enough just to grab the headlines—hard graft needs to be done to justify those headlines. We passed legislation to enable local authorities to give people reductions in their council tax and business rates if they put in energy-efficiency measures. We need a dramatic expansion of action on energy and work on small-scale and household renewables. In June, we promised that there would be council tax discounts—we need action now. I call on ministers to tell us what action they will take. We need practical measures to boost jobs, save people money and save the planet. I will make a crucial point as the minister is listening: we need to make the most of the opportunity to link the measures in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 to the forthcoming insulation programme. There is a real win-win here, but we must work together—we need to take concerted action. I suggest a working party to involve all stakeholders. That was suggested to us by the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change's civil servants before stage 3 of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, but in Parliament today, the minister was not yet prepared to commit to it. I would like everyone to be involved. We built up a lot of cross-party support for elements of the  bill. We must ensure that we work together to implement those elements and make a difference to households in Scotland. There is a clear appetite from the construction industry, which wants to get on and tackle the climate change agenda. It is asking for leadership from the Scottish Government. We need to ensure that the hard graft happens, and not just the grandstanding and rhetoric. Let the work get on, and let us involve all the parties in the Parliament to bring about the success that we desperately need on the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has a timetable for implementation of the measures contained in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. (S3O-7652)

What timetable does the minister have for implementing the provisions on council tax and business rate discounts that we agreed to in the act? What discussions has he had with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities on implementation? Finally, does he agree with the suggestion that a stakeholder working party should be set up to ensure that all the key players are pulled together and to iron out the details? Such a move was suggested by his officials in discussions before stage 3. Even if he does not want to say yes to the idea today, will the minister agree to look favourably on and consider it?

Almost every day, we hear reports of new scientific evidence that warns us of the potential negative impacts of unchecked climate change and, crucially, of the changes that are already taking place in our world. Climate change is no longer an issue that exclusively interests environmentalists; it has become a factor for businesses, the education system and government at every level. As was demonstrated at lunch time today, more and more of our constituents are concerned about the issue. The challenge is to move away from business as usual to a low-carbon society. Each debate on the issue that we have had in Parliament has set down a new marker on members' knowledge of and commitment to the issue. Over time, more and more members have been drawn into the debates and into the thinking that is needed to underpin the required policy development. As John Swinney said, three committees took up the task of scrutinising the bill and engaging with the many witnesses and organisations who presented a range of evidence and views that we had to take into account. That involved a huge amount of work by members, witnesses, clerks and Scottish Government officials, all of whom should be thanked for their sterling work. In particular, we should thank the clerks and Government officials who helped us at stage 3. We are all aware that there was a lot of burning of midnight oil. Perhaps we will avoid that in the future, but it was completely necessary for the bill. I associate myself with John Swinney's remarks about the handling of the process by his deputy minister Stewart Stevenson. I have been in charge of difficult bills and I realise that the present one was particularly difficult. I suspect that, as a minority Government, the Administration faced a new set of challenges in getting the bill through in one piece and in a way that is legislatively competent. Members can see the bits of the bill to which they contributed and, even more important, people outside the Parliament feel that they helped to construct it. As part of the democratic process, as we hit the Parliament's 10-year anniversary, that is a significant achievement. It sets the bar for future bills, as well as for implementation of this one. Labour members have been particularly proud that the UK Government has genuinely led the  way in trying to get other countries to sign up to ever more radical measures to address climate change. EU countries have been crucial in leading the way across the globe. The election of Barack Obama signalled that the United States wanted to play a much more constructive part in tackling climate change globally and trying to ensure that we do not have a humanitarian disaster and economic catastrophe—which will come if we do not avert dangerous climate change. There is a mood around the world that we want to do more. We have debated the impact on developing countries if we fail, given that even minimal rises in sea level or increases in temperature could make parts of the world simply uninhabitable. Although we produce a relatively small part of the emissions in our world, the debates that we have had on the bill have demonstrated our desire for Scotland to play its full part not just in reducing our emissions but in participating in the wider global debate. I agree with John Swinney that our bill has been strengthened immeasurably by the process of democratic debate and discussion, which is a good thing. I am sure that we will hear lots of warm speeches today, but the challenge is what we do next to implement the bill, particularly considering the substantial amendments to which we agreed at stage 2 and stage 3. Labour members are committed to the bill. We do not think that the devolution settlement limits us in taking groundbreaking action; we see the bill as a big opportunity to go further. Our challenge is to develop action on climate change that goes with the grain of our principles of social justice and economic fairness. That is why we were so keen to see sustainable development built into the bill. I hope that ministers will seize the day, having voted for our interim target—and having decided to go further. I noted John Swinney's comments when he intervened on Des McNulty. I very much hope that the 42 per cent target, which he said was seen as absolutely doable if we sign up to the deal at Copenhagen, can be realised. I hope that we can also consider carefully amendment 94, which we agreed to today. It is a fallback amendment; we will absolutely go to 42 per cent if a deal is reached at Copenhagen, but our amendment provides the opportunity to look at how much further we can go than our initial advice from the Committee on Climate Change suggested, should that not happen. We have all signed up to that now, so the challenge is where we go next. We are in a recession and we have to build our way out of it using low-carbon technologies, redesigning our public services, looking at the carbon-counting commitment that John Swinney will bring forward in next year's budget and looking  at how we redesign our public services to avoid dangerous greenhouse gas emissions. The Royal Society of Edinburgh warned us that, given that we are in a recession, we should not assume that any decrease in emissions has happened as a result of the good things that we are doing in the Parliament; it might have happened because of the recession. Secondly, as we climb out of recession, there is a danger that the trends that we saw before the recession will pick up again. There is a real warning for us to look at the detail and to work harder on emission reductions. There are many things in the bill of which Labour members in particular feel proud. They include earlier action targets; making the most of our employment opportunities and public procurement targets; looking hard at the contribution of domestic action, with clear limits on international carbon credits; duties for public bodies, which we have strengthened today; and a public engagement strategy, to which every member is signed up 110 per cent—let us see what we can do to take that further, given the emotion, energy and commitment around the bill. There were specific amendments on the land use strategy and sectoral work—on key sectors in which we have to do better, such as energy efficiency, production of energy, and transport. The work that we have done on energy efficiency is something of which we can all be proud, although the real challenge is making it happen. We have all debated the promise, made in 2002, for the early action energy efficiency strategy. Now it is in the bill. It really must happen and we must all sign up to what comes from that. Regulations on domestic renewables will come into force more quickly. I am delighted that we agreed to a commitment on planning, which will mean that with all new housing and buildings we will be able to seize the day by taking the opportunities that come from low-carbon buildings and technologies and looking at how we decentralise our energy networks and go for decarbonised energy. The bill contains a huge amount that is fantastic. Every one of us is under a huge obligation. I have noticed that more members from across the parties have engaged in the debates. The challenge lies in ensuring that they remain engaged. The three committees that were involved and the colleagues who lodged stage 2 amendments must stay on track. The Government has a key challenge of leadership. We have made a complex bill more complex—that was the clear will of Parliament. Stewart Stevenson's burden was to guide us through that. We need to consider a revised delivery plan, how the bill will work, the annual targets that we have set and the parliamentary  mechanisms—the accountability mechanisms—about which I remember John Swinney was enthusiastic when he introduced the bill at stage 1. The bill contains a lot for everyone. The Parliament needs to assert its role in holding the Government to account and to do that constructively with ministers. Labour members will not just vote to pass the bill, but commit themselves to remaining enthusiastic about it and to working hard to ensure that its implementation is delivered.

At stage 2, I moved an amendment that aimed to enable the best use to be made of our buildings and land assets in relation to climate change objectives. The minister agreed with the aims behind that amendment but politely suggested that it needed to be reworked. I am grateful to the committee clerks for their assistance in the drafting of amendment 135 and to the minister's officials for their advice about how to get the amendment right. The climate change burden will be applicable under the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003. It will enable public bodies, at their discretion, to add heightened mitigation or adaptation performance standards to the title deeds of built and land assets that they wish to sell and which could be developed in the future by a purchaser. Those standards will be applied in advance, before the land is put up for sale, so that developers will be able to take the burden into account when paying for the land in question. The amendment seeks to introduce an enabling mechanism that a public body can use if it wishes to do so. That mechanism will be available to any public body or agency in Scotland, such as local authorities, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Scottish Water, and it will enable local authorities to exercise leadership and send a clear signal about expectations to people who want to develop land or buildings. We are talking about a great deal of land. Public bodies have a keen interest in selling their land, and they often negotiate and set conditions when they do so. The provisions in amendment 135 will enable them to take an up-front approach in relation to climate change, and will mean that someone who is buying the land will know exactly what the burden is when they negotiate the price. Clearly, a local authority or public body will use this mechanism only when it fits its objectives. The provision builds on the current legal framework in the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003. It builds on those burdens, but it will be a new type of burden. The closest comparator is probably the economic development burden in  section 45 of the 2003 act, which enables a burden to be established for the purpose of promoting economic development. The new burden will be wider than that in terms of who can exercise it, and it will be exercised in relation to climate change. I hope that colleagues will support the amendment. I move amendment 135.

The reason why the sections that now have the heading "Permitted development rights" were accepted at stage 2 was because of a general feeling in the committee that we need to get going on producing a credible statutory instrument to provide rules on permitted development rights. The Government produced a draft statutory instrument, but it was flawed in relation to mini wind turbines, as it included a bizarre condition that there could be permitted development only if a building was 100m away from the next property. That would have ruled out many wind turbines not only in urban Scotland but in rural Scotland, too. I am glad that we are debating the issue. COSLA's briefing raises concerns about the potential adverse physical impact of microgeneration in buildings. It is appropriate that we address those concerns head on. Permitted development rights will not apply automatically to listed buildings or in conservation areas. We all expect that when a statutory instrument comes before us after due consultation, there will be a mechanism that will focus particularly on the noise issue. There is a requirement on the industry to  ensure that its equipment is certified properly and that householders and their neighbours can rely on that certification to be absolutely accurate. However, we must get going on giving householders the opportunity to use the right form of equipment if it can help to provide energy for their houses and if it is appropriate—that must be their call. Microgeneration is part of decarbonising our energy system and part of delivering a more decentralised energy supply network throughout Scotland. As a representative of a city that has tremendous heritage, I think that the qualification that permitted development rights will not apply automatically to listed buildings or in conservation areas is important. In some areas, it would not be appropriate to have modern technology. However, that must be the call of the local authority and it must be done intelligently. We should be able to get to that point with the new statutory instrument.  The feed-in tariff that will be coming soon will help to promote these technologies, but there is unnecessary red tape. The amendments in my name are intended to ensure that the intention behind my stage 2 amendment is delivered in practice. When we read the bill as amended at stage 2, it appeared that the amendment might not have helped to speed up the minister. I hope that the amendments that I have lodged for stage 3 will do that and I am grateful to the minister for accepting them. We are all keen to get going on this issue. It is not about requiring people to use these technologies; it is about ensuring that the technologies can be used where people think that they will make a difference to their property. That is the key point. It might not be the biggest change that we make in tackling climate change, but it is important nonetheless.

In my view, the amendments in this group are probably the most important practical policy provisions that we will discuss today, from the point of view of their power to transform people's attitudes to energy and their capacity to start making a difference on the huge amount of energy and heat that is wasted in this country. Somebody said earlier that 80 per cent of the buildings that will exist in 2050 have already been built. Our challenge is to encourage householders to make their houses more energy efficient. Energy efficiency measures are incredibly cost effective and are the cheapest and best way to start to tackle climate change. However, people do not routinely put such measures into their houses, because they think that it is a hassle, they do not know how to get advice on them, they do not know a supplier and they do not know where to start. Even simple measures such as loft insulation or cavity wall insulation need to be put in place. For example, we could install cavity wall insulation in about 700,000 houses in Scotland, but we are not doing so, because we cannot put the pressure on and do not have the mechanisms to let people get on with it. Last year, the Energy Saving Trust published research in England and Wales and then in Scotland that demonstrated that a one-off council tax reduction is an incredibly effective way in which to draw people's attention and persuade them to act. Thousands of businesses have properties that could be changed. A reduction in council tax and business rates would mean that people could save on their bills—that is crucial, given that fuel prices for domestic properties have gone up by about 50 per cent over the past five years—and play their part in saving the planet. The message is really simple. As colleagues have said, I have worked for five years now to bring these measures to the chamber. I thank everybody; I have previously thanked colleagues in the Parliament and the members of my steering group. I am delighted with where we have got to today. I would have loved it if the minister had sat down and talked to me about the measures months ago, but the Government had a they-shall-not-pass policy on council tax. However, I give the minister credit, because he has been incredibly helpful in the past week or so in ensuring that we have something in the bill that will work, which is my top priority. It is not the scheme that I wanted, but it is a good place to start. I listened to the minister's officials last week and I do not want to impose a scheme  that they do not like and which they could not make work. The proposed measures will bring in CERT money. A sum of £50 is a good start and is enough to catch the attention. The review mechanism will be included, if we vote for all Lewis Macdonald's amendments in the group. Crucially, I want to ensure that the scheme cannot be a cherry-picking one that would mean that people could get money off their council tax only if they lived in particular local authority areas or certain streets. The scheme must be implemented across the country. The minister has given a commitment that there will be guidance from the Scottish Government. That will be crucial in helping local authorities and in ensuring that they do not have too many burdens. In addition, with regard to the money for energy efficiency in the budget that we passed this year, I hope that the proposed provisions will allow us to draw in additional money from the private sector through CERT, which would make the £15 million that we supported earlier this year go much further. There will be another discussion about the issue next year, but I hope that the scheme gets up and running, that we begin to see a difference and that we can tackle not just climate change but fuel poverty, which afflicts almost 25 per cent of households in Scotland—that is a national disgrace and a national shame. The proposed measures will not fix that issue tonight or tomorrow, but they will put in place a mechanism that will let councils work with the power companies and individuals to make a difference. I hope, too, that the Parliament will support the measures in Alex Johnstone's amendment 132, on non-domestic rates. The Tories have been supportive of my member's bill proposal throughout, for which I give them credit. It is probably appropriate that amendment 132 has fewer faults than my amendments in the group—that is the benefit of lodging a smaller amendment. I know that the business community is seized of the need to undertake energy efficiency measures. There is much support for the measures from big companies such as Tesco and groups such as the Scottish Property Federation. I hope that we can all move forward today on the measures. The test will be next year, when we assess how far we have gone. I will not move my amendments in this group—amendments 126 to 131—but I will support the amendments in the group in the names of Lewis Macdonald, Alex Johnstone and Stewart Stevenson, which take us a lot further forward.

It is helpful to get the minister's clarification of the Government's view. It is important that, even in a concise and visionary plan, we can indicate support for low-carbon technologies and strategic developments that relate to local provision. I welcome the fact that the  minister will bring along supplementary guidance. I have been careful not to be specific in the bill about types of technologies because I do not think that would be appropriate. New zero-carbon technologies that none of us has heard of will probably be available in four years' time. The issue is about a principle being established in plans and not detailed requirements on developers, who must be left to choose the right kind of zero or low-carbon technologies for their own developments—I very much agree with the minister in that respect. However, if we do not have the planning policies in place in every development plan, they will not happen. As an ex-planner, I know that guidance from central Government is crucial. I therefore hope that, if we pass my amendments in this group, the Government will bring forward guidance. One of the concerns that informed my lodging of the amendments is that the recasting of planning policy guidance, which in many ways is admirable, will potentially water down what was in SPP 6, which would be a great mistake. Local authorities such as the City of Edinburgh Council and Midlothian Council, which have already started down that track, have begun to make a difference to the standards of new buildings. I therefore hope that what I propose will go into statute and make a difference in all our new developments. I press amendment 121.  Amendment 121 agreed to.

It is fair to say that we are all marked by our experience before we arrive in the Parliament. I own up to being a former town planner, which is a dangerous thing to admit in any public organisation, but it makes me determined to use our building and planning process to tackle the challenge of climate change effectively. I am convinced that we are not currently taking many opportunities that we need to take. All the amendments in group 14 are about enabling the planning system to look to the future, plan  intelligently and future proof our new buildings so that they take on the challenge of climate change, particularly in relation to reducing emissions. We can all be proud of the fact that the Scottish Parliament has ratcheted up the standards that are required for new buildings. The intention of Scottish planning policy 6, which was passed two years ago, was to incentivise all developers to build homes and buildings that were more efficient and more reliant on locally sourced heat and energy. We adapted the Merton rule for our purposes in Scotland, but we now need to do more to push ahead on that agenda. All our new developments and buildings should incorporate low-carbon designs and technologies. Each building will bring its own opportunities, but also its own challenges. We can see from the way in which the code for sustainable buildings is beginning to transform the building industry in England that setting a level playing field and ensuring that there is clarity for developers does work. Amendment 121 requires the Scottish Government's energy efficiency plan to give details of how ministers intend to ensure that all new buildings avoid a specified and rising proportion of the projected greenhouse gas emissions from their use, calculated on the basis of designs for specific building, through the installation and operation of low and zero-carbon generating technologies. New buildings will have to meet the building standards that are set by the Government of the day. If they do better than those standards, there is the incentive that they will not have to produce as many on-site renewables and zero-carbon technologies.  Amendment 121 would mean that new developments must take account of those issues. In committee, the minister objected to the terms of my stage 2 amendment. Now that I have re-examined the issue from first principles and considered the code for sustainable building that is employed in the rest of the UK, I want to push the point because it is entirely possible to predict buildings' notional impact when they are built. That is no guarantee of how buildings are used. There is nothing to prevent people who have fantastically efficient boilers from putting them on full and leaving the windows open, but that does not mean to say that the builder installed the best technology. How we use our buildings must obviously be part of the agenda, but it is possible to predict their notional impact. SPP 6 sought to deliver houses that were cheaper to heat and power in financial and carbon terms. Another key objective was to promote  decentralised renewable energy networks. The Department of Trade and Industry estimated that between 30 and 40 per cent of locally sourced heat and power could come from such networks. We are nowhere near that yet, but SPP 6 is beginning to incentivise people to move in that direction. Aberdeen is a good example of where that is beginning to happen. We must deliver on the potential that exists, and development plans are the key. The Royal Town Planning Institute has signalled its commitment to play a part in reducing carbon emissions. It advocates that regional and local plans and policies should be climate change proofed to ensure that they are updated, and amendment 137 would ensure that all local plans are updated. The minister is unhappy about the fact that amendment 137A refers specifically to strategic development plans but, as a former strategic planner, I am afraid that I must debate the point with him. There might be a different way of phrasing it, but the principle needs to be in the structure plans. The structure plans set the framework for local planners to follow, and there is a role for them to play in regional community heat provision. Amendment 138 is crucial as it provides for a review process. When SPP 6 was put in place, a criticism that was made was that neither local authorities nor the Government showed enough leadership or pushed it enough. We need to get the momentum going again. I believe that, taken together, my amendments represent a good package that would ensure that, at least for new developments, we could be confident that a good process was in place that developers across the country could work with, that was clear to them and that met local circumstances. My amendments would allow ministers to review progress in the future and identify what more needs to be done. That is crucial given that we are discussing a moving target. Finally, I thank the minister for his gracious lodging of amendment 138A, which probably makes amendment 138 competent and therefore—I hope—makes members more confident about voting for it. I move amendment 121.

A week is a long time in politics. Last Monday, John Swinney was adamant, in setting out the delivery plan for the bill's provisions to my colleague Iain Gray, that the Scottish Government could deliver a target of 34 per cent and no more for emissions reductions by 2020, without a Copenhagen agreement. However, Alex Salmond admitted to members in the chamber last Thursday that the figure was 36 per cent. At both stage 1 and stage 2, Labour members argued for earlier and tougher targets. We said then that we would lodge amendments at stage 3 because we wanted a more ambitious trajectory. Our reading of the delivery plan is that it is still business as usual in many respects. However, the science says that we must be more ambitious. If we all believe that our bill should be more ambitious and world leading, that must be demonstrated in the bill's detail. The chief executive of the UK Committee on Climate Change made clear the position when he gave evidence on the bill to the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee. He said: "The preliminary assessment does not reflect specific circumstances in Scotland. That is something that we need to bottom out. We have said clearly in our report that the figure would not be an appropriate basis for target setting, because further work is needed to tailor it to the specific situation in Scotland."—[ Official Report , Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee , 27 January 2009; c 1399.] The guidance that the UK committee came up with was clearly an initial assessment and does not cover all areas of the Scottish economy, so more work needs to be carried out. The Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change agreed with that point when Des McNulty put it to him at stage 2. The figures cannot be a back-of-an-envelope job. In that respect, I call on the minister to publish the letter that he sent to the Committee on Climate Change only last Wednesday. I think that we are all intrigued about what questions he asked. We have set out clear criteria in amendment 94, which is important.

It would have been good to have it before the debate, because we have seen all the other bits of the exchange. We have said consistently that a tougher interim target will be challenging, but we need it now to drive the change that we need in the early, not later, years. We need the Committee on Climate Change to do a serious piece of work and the Scottish Government to report back to us in Parliament. The bill that we will pass today will provide a range of policy options—many more than were included in the bill as introduced. For example, the council tax provision has the potential to transform attitudes and to deliver carbon reductions. We need to send a clear and honest message to the Copenhagen conference. When I set the first environment target in the early days of the Parliament, I was told by officials, in true "Yes Minister" style, that it was a bold target. We need to be ambitious today, but we must ensure that we follow through with the policies—that is the critical bit. There should not be a bidding war. I welcome the Government's shift from its position of last week, but it would be useful to get clarity from the minister on where he now stands, given the letter that he sent out yesterday to MSPs. He was adamant that the transport delivery plan was as much as the Government could do. Indeed, Alex Salmond said last week that the Government could not do more unless Scotland had complete independence. We think that that is an excuse, because we could do much more now with our devolved powers. It is vital that the Government's commitment is not a heat-of-the-moment one just to get the Government through today's debate; it must be followed by radical action in the weeks and months following the passing of the bill. The Stop Climate Chaos Coalition has built up a huge coalition of support. Amendment 94 will help us to keep faith with that coalition. The amendment is ambitious, but, crucially, it provides a transparent and rigorous policy proposal that we would have to debate later in the Parliament. We would have to debate how much further we could go from the existing delivery plan to the 42 per cent figure. We cannot let down people outside the Parliament. We welcome and will support the Scottish National Party Government's amendment 94A. I move amendment 94.

To ask the Scottish Executive how the "Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland" framework will contribute to resolving repeated instances of antisocial behaviour by users of holiday flats. (S3O-7423)

I welcome the fact that the minister is beginning to look at the issue. The focus is on addressing the causes of antisocial behaviour but, if antisocial behaviour by users of holiday flats is to be dealt with, effective enforcement of antisocial behaviour measures is required. Does the minister agree that it is difficult to identify who lets such flats, as section 83(6)(d) in part 8 of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 exempts owners of holiday accommodation from having to register with the council? Will he use the powers under section 83(7) to amend the act to ensure that local authorities have the right range of tools to apply antisocial behaviour notices in such circumstances?

Will the cabinet secretary tell me when the parents and children of Edinburgh schools will get the new secondary schools that they desperately need? Can she not see that the cuts in financial support that the cabinet secretary has announced today will be met with bitter disappointment in Boroughmuir and James Gillespie's high schools? What is wrong with reports from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education that tell us which schools need action now? How can she justify waiting until 2013? I hope that her rate of progress on new schools in the past two years does not include schools that were commissioned by the previous—Labour—Administration.

Elaine Murray was right to say that we were hoping that the Government would have made further progress along the tracks, given the statement that was made in January 2008, but we have had a good discussion on the issue today. If we go through the discipline of thinking through the waste hierarchy, a good pointer for the consultation is that every level of the hierarchy needs to be fleshed out in detail through the questions that are asked on the strategy when it is produced by the Government. It is clear, from listening to colleagues on all sides of the chamber, that there are some fundamental choices to be made and questions to be asked, regardless of how the vote goes tonight. I have the sense that it will be one of our scrappier votes, in which members—although they might agree with other members' speeches—try to work out what is meant by the wording of each amendment. We should not regard today's vote as the final point of the debate, because the nature of the issue means that the words are important when we are considering the waste issue. Roseanna Cunningham made some good points about the importance of waste prevention. Although prevention will not soak up the most money, changing attitudes and culture and how we view waste and resources must be a fundamental part of any national waste strategy. Her comments about providing advice to businesses and the importance of home composting were crucial. Chris Harvie made some fundamental points about food waste. In a time of recession, we must communicate those ideas to people in a way that does not put them off but which rewards them and makes them think that they are doing the right thing by not throwing food away and not buying too much food in the first place. There are lessons for some of the retailers in relation to buy-one-get-one-free offers; they are great for tinned food, but not so useful for strawberries, because unless you have a big family or are having a party, they will not all be eaten and will go in the bin. A dialogue needs to take place on that issue, but it is not the most expensive part of the equation—it is about how we think it through. Many members mentioned eco-schools, with which I absolutely agree. I was at High School Yards nursery's green flag celebration this week, but getting from the nursery level right through to  the senior years in secondary school will involve changing our whole culture. We need to give political support and leadership to that initiative. Prevention must come first. I am disappointed that there has been little talk today about reuse, which is the second level of the hierarchy. It is a difficult issue because, as Nanette Milne said, many small local groups that are involved with it have lost out through the change in funding arrangements for local authorities. When the money was ring fenced, local authorities had a degree of certainty and they felt that they could give some of their money to somebody else. Now that the money is buried in the big budgets and not ring fenced, it is much harder to see where it will come from. Local authorities always fund their own projects first, particularly when they do not have enough money in the first place. There are some real problems. I would like reuse to be given much greater prominence when the report is put out for consultation. Many colleagues have talked about recycling and the key funding problems. Elaine Murray made the point, which was repeated by Des McNulty, that the Audit Scotland report stated that funding for recycling needed to rise from £89 million to £289 million. That is a huge gap, which needs to be addressed. I also suggest to the minister that the strategic approach that was taken during the eight years of the previous Executive had its benefits. After all, not every local authority can do exactly the same thing and the strategic waste fund was designed to allow authorities not only to do what suited them best but to negotiate and work with one another. Moving from a strategic to a local approach without ring fencing any money is almost the worst of both worlds for local authorities, which do not have enough money and find it difficult to co-operate with one another. Moreover, waste is not at the top of every authority's priority list; schools and transport have much more importance and, without ring fencing, local authorities will find it hard to do anything about the issue. In an intelligent speech, Liam McArthur focused on funding, and I would like the cabinet secretary to address that issue in his winding-up speech. Hardly anyone in the chamber thinks that the funding system is working in local authorities; indeed, it is the number 1 issue for authorities at the moment. If, as we all think, they have done only the easy bit with recycling, they will need funding to tackle the hard bit. Quite a few members mentioned new ways of tackling the waste that it is difficult to deal with. In that respect, we need to rethink what we do with that waste and, although we agree with the sentiment behind Robin Harper's opening and  closing speeches, we have a fundamental problem with the comment in his motion that "there should be no necessity for any large-scale waste-to-energy plants". What would that mean in practice? The issue certainly needs to be considered when the Government's next strategy is published. We do not want to rule out the potential of waste-to-energy plants and in any case what constitutes a large waste-to-energy plant is surely a moot point. In what communities would it be appropriate or indeed totally inappropriate to build such a plant? We need to find the best available environmental option, which not only is a matter of funding but involves the consideration of issues such as supply chains, traffic on the roads and the provision of heat to local communities. Such factors cannot be ruled out by that part of Mr Harper's motion.

No—I have only about four seconds left. Des McNulty's comments about ring fencing and the funding problems that are faced by local authorities are crucial and, as I have said, I hope that the cabinet secretary will focus on such issues in his closing speech. However, not only is there a lack of funding, there is also uncertainty. People simply do not understand what the cabinet secretary really meant in the statement that he made last year. The debate has been good in flushing out what some of us think about this issue and in highlighting areas where there might be political consensus. Although it would be good for us to reach some consensus, the wording and detail of the consultation will be crucial. We all have to sharpen up our act, think through the measures that we will support and use the consultation to frame our views on this matter. In summary, we want the cabinet secretary to say more about waste-to-energy plants and funding in his winding-up speech. If we do not think through those two crucial elements of the equation and get them right, we will not solve the zero waste problem which, after all, is about trying to reduce the waste going into the system and using what is left much more intelligently. Finally, one issue that has not been mentioned this afternoon and which must be covered in the consultation is procurement which, for example, covers the product design issues that Roseanna Cunningham rightly highlighted in her speech. Developers need to think more intelligently about the design of products and their packaging; indeed, this week, Hilary Benn made an important announcement about packaging in the UK.  Procurement also comes into service design. For example, it might mean ensuring that more recycled material is used in any roads that are procured and that certain buildings are recycled and reused properly instead of simply being knocked down. The issue of procurement design is fundamental, but no member has mentioned it. The debate has been a good run round the houses, but it is absolutely not the last word on this subject. Like other colleagues, I am very much looking forward to the consultation, and it would be good if the minister could publish it next month.

I would normally start by thanking the cabinet secretary for an advance copy of his statement, but we had considerably less than an hour to read his statement and the 55-page Cook report. It would have helped to have received at least the Cook report earlier, as it contains much useful detail, so we reserve our position until we have had a chance to study that report in detail. I welcome the fact that the minister appears to have responded to some of our criticisms about support for hill sheep farmers, entrant farmers and the SRDP system's many bureaucratic failures. However, the regional proposal assessment committees are still shrouded in mystery. We are disappointed that the cabinet secretary has failed to dump the discredited online applications system. Does he not accept that that disadvantages farmers and crofters in our most fragile areas? Overall, does the cabinet secretary see that his statement is a missed opportunity? We do not understand why he has yet again kicked into touch the big issues which we all know about and have known about, such as land managers options and single farm payments. We wish Brian Pack well,  but does the cabinet secretary not see that he is just kicking the issues into the long grass again rather than making decisions and providing certainty? How sustainable are the cabinet secretary's new funding proposals? Funding appears to come from underspends and currency fluctuations. Who are the losers in the package? The statement suggests that everybody is winning, but that cannot be the case. Some people have lost in the past and it is clear that some will lose in the future. The statement relies on the EU's being able to approve all the measures. What discussions has the cabinet secretary had about the proposals that he has presented? How confident is he that Brussels will approve all the proposals?

I thank the minister for that information. We will all look forward to the conference as a good opportunity to talk about what we do in Scotland and to learn from others. What is the minister's timescale for getting the carers strategy in place? It would be good to have it in place and under way for some time before the conference starts.

I was keen to have a debate in Parliament on carers because, over the years, I have met many carers through community groups, campaigns and, crucially, my casework. Our carers are our unsung heroes. There are about 660,000 unpaid carers in Scotland, which is nearly one in eight people, and the work that they do for us saves the taxpayer about £7.6 billion a year. Locally, in the Lothians, there are 71,000 carers and, in Edinburgh, more than 8,000 people care for 50 hours or more a week. It is estimated that, in Edinburgh alone, without the work that carers do, the cost to the public purse would be £554 million. As I am sure all members agree, carers are important not only because of the money. Carers UK put it superbly when it stated: "The true value of the care and support provided by carers cannot be quantified, as caring is also an expression of love, respect, duty and affection for another person. However, it is important to recognise the true scale of carers' support provided to frail, disabled and ill people." One thing that keeps the carers I know going is the knowledge that there simply are no better alternatives for the people they care for. However, we need to acknowledge that many carers pay a price: their health can be affected; they can be isolated; and the physical hard work can take its toll. At my surgeries, I have met carers whose decision to look after somebody for a long period has affected them personally. A key worry for many of them is that they do not know who will  look after the person they support if they themselves become ill. That worry can be deeply stressful. I am told that those providing in excess of 50 hours a week of care are twice as likely to be permanently sick or disabled as non-carers. We need to think about that. Shockingly, around 40 per cent of carers have not had a break of more than two days from their caring responsibilities. I know from speaking to constituents how hard it is to get respite of any sort. Another major pressure on carers is financial. More than 50 per cent of unpaid carers are in debt; half of them cut back on food to make ends meet; and 79 per cent struggle to pay utility bills—up from 32 per cent in 2007. That probably does not tell us anything that we did not already know about fuel poverty, but the issue is crucial. People who are cared for often have extra costs that need to be met, and caring for someone is rarely a short-term commitment. Two thirds of carers have cared for somebody for more than 15 years. Women in particular are likely to give up their work to look after somebody. I will bet that every member in the chamber will have a friend or a family member who has had to take that tough decision. Many people put their job on hold in the hope that they can come back to it, but without reliable or flexible care services that is a difficult thing to do. When somebody is unable to work, the issue is not just about the money; it is also about the loss of social networks and the support that people can get when they are in work. Without proper support, many people who are carers actually become vulnerable and need support themselves. Parliament needs to debate that issue. More and more people will be living longer—people who care for people, and people who need care. There is a long-term challenge for us. We need to do what we can to make people's lives easier. On 27 May, we had a fantastic piece of lobbying from carers across Scotland—people who wanted to lobby us for change. We know from recent work by the Social Work Inspection Agency that carers have reported a number of key issues that would make their lives easier and more bearable. The right to respite care is of key importance. I know that, in its manifesto, the SNP supported an annual right to respite care. I would therefore be keen to hear from the minister what progress she is making on that commitment. The right to training and education on issues relating to the caring role is important, and I believe that that can be delivered on the back of progress that is already being made. There should also be a right to emotional and therapeutic counselling and to  social support. Those rights will be crucial in giving people the confidence to keep going when they know that their commitment will be for a long time. In my casework, another issue that comes up is the right to advocacy. If someone is a carer, they need support. It is one of the hardest jobs there is: it is a constant struggle. Getting their rights met, and the rights of the person they are caring for, is crucial. There is bureaucracy to deal with, including paperwork for appeals and negotiations with social workers, health services and council housing departments. Support is needed for all of that. Far too many carers do not get the support they need because the hassle of lobbying everybody they need to lobby is simply too much. Caring for somebody is a job in itself. From my mailbag, I know that that job is not getting any easier—the situation is getting worse. In Edinburgh, many people are struggling. The hours for support for carers are being cut, and that directly affects people's quality of life. Even getting assessed can take far too long.

Margo MacDonald has made a very telling point, and I hope that the minister will pick it up in her winding-up speech. Earlier, I said that two thirds of carers had cared for somebody for 15 years or more. That is not necessarily the plan when people start out, but once they have made that commitment very few of them would want to step back from it. People do not think of themselves as unpaid carers; they just think that they are supporting a member of the family. More support and more information could be helpful. Direct payments is a key issue. I understand that in England and Wales carers can use direct support to ensure flexibility in the support that is given to the person whom they look after. However, in Scotland many care packages put together by local authorities operate only within business hours, which prevents people from having any chance of working. I suspect that we are all aware of cuts in social services, which is certainly a major problem for us in Edinburgh. If carers were normal workers—apparently, there are Scottish Government documents that list carer support under workforce headings—they would have maximum working  hours, access to training, tea breaks, holidays, the ability to stop work when they are ill and someone to look out for their rights. However, they do not have any of that. Although we have some fantastic carers groups, such as the Voice of Carers Across Lothian, carers need more support from us. Where is the guaranteed annual entitlement to breaks from caring for those who are in greatest need, which the Scottish National Party promised by 2011? Carers of all ages face challenges. Respite care is an issue not just for older people but for young carers, too. Young carers are often isolated at school and suffer more often from some form of stigma, which can impact on their personal development. They have mental and physical stress, and it might be tougher for them to get into further or higher education. A lot of issues have to be addressed. It is not just about recognising the problems that carers have. We have to move from talking about carers rights to delivering them. I thank colleagues for showing their support by turning up for the debate. I ask the minister to set out what more can be done to develop a carers strategy that will make the difference that the hard-pressed carers, who I suspect we all have worked with and know from campaigning, know has to be made. I hope that we can make the difference for those hard-pressed carers and that we can give them the support that they and the people for whom they care so desperately need.

Will the minister ensure that, when such research is carried out, it focuses on the potential benefits of peatland restoration to our greenhouse gas emission targets? Does she accept that the restoration of peatlands would deliver early and significant results in meeting the Government's climate change targets? She may want to consider the potential extension of environmental liability to sites of special scientific interest, which could play a positive role in that regard.

Is the minister aware that, in cutting funding for project Scotland, he has  effectively axed 263 placements in Edinburgh, leaving just 49 places available for volunteers who are willing to contribute to vital work in their communities? The feedback from groups in my constituency, such as the Canongate Youth Project and the Collective Gallery, is that volunteers have made a fantastic difference to their work. Will the Scottish Government please listen to those groups about the case for supporting project Scotland as the best way to boost volunteering?

I welcome the chance to put on record my thoughts following my participation in this year's tartan week. I enjoyed the cultural elements of the visit to New York—I will say a few words about that first, but I want to focus on our political discussions with colleagues in Quebec and the US. It is difficult to find an easy slot in which to do that in the Parliament, so this debate is an excellent opportunity. We enjoyed meeting members of the New York Scottish community both on our visit to the UK's memorial garden for the victims of 9/11 and in relation to the work of the St Andrews society, which does a huge amount to build links between Scotland and the US, as well as doing charity work and organising of the tartan day parade, which Tricia Marwick and the minister have already mentioned. As Mike Russell said, we were very well served by our tartan day marshal, Alan Cumming, who is much better known and recognised in the US, and in particular in New York, his adopted home, than he is in Scotland. That is the measure of his success as a Scot who has gone abroad. Although our visit to New York was interesting, I found the visit to Quebec a fascinating experience, because it gave us an insight into how asymmetrical federalism works in practice and offered interesting parallels with our development of asymmetrical devolution. It would be appropriate to record our thanks to the President of the National Assembly of Quebec and his deputies and their staff for the fantastic welcome that they gave us and the hard work that they did to ensure that we had a successful visit. In Quebec, it was interesting to sit in another Parliament watching the mechanics of how members hold their ministers to account. The dynamic is very different, and not just in relation to the politics. Obviously, the nationalist Government there has been defeated, which was a cause for joy among at least three quarters of our delegation. The ministers and the Opposition parties are limited in the time that they have not just for questions but for answers. The clock ticks backwards, a bit like it does during our speeches, from 90 seconds, to 45 seconds to 20 seconds, which really forces the ministers to answer the question. If they do not answer the question, it is completely obvious—it is not just clear from the  record. It was fun for us to consider how that might work in our Parliament. The other element that I particularly enjoyed was the excellent presentation on Quebec's promotion of renewables. Quebec, like Scotland, has some fantastic natural and geographical opportunities. I had expected Quebec to be promoting marine renewables, as we are doing, but that is not its focus. When I talked to people there, I understood the reasons for that: they are focusing on proven technologies for wind and hydro power, for which they still have massive untapped opportunities. I am not saying that they put us in the shade; they just have different opportunities. I found the differences very interesting. Quebec and Canada did not go through the Thatcher era. Its company, Hydro-Québec, is owned by the Quebec Government. Quebec has massive opportunities to exploit the resources and export to the US. As it toughs out the recession, it knows that it has a renewables dividend, which will come directly to the Government. All members of our delegation were pretty envious of that. When I came back from the visit, it was interesting to reflect on how much more we could do with our public sector organisations in Scotland. We have debated the Forestry Commission Scotland and I know that Scottish Water has ambitious plans to promote renewables on its estate. What other land do we have that could be used for renewables in order to reinvest directly in our services. Part of the delegation went off to the Carolinas and the rest of us—Tavish Scott and I—went to Maryland and Washington. The trip to Maryland and Washington gave us a good opportunity to follow up discussions with different sets of politicians and officials. We spent a long time talking to the governor of Maryland's chief of staff. I understand that we are the third delegation to have gone there—Jack McConnell and John Swinney have been there—so it was interesting for us to follow up on earlier discussions. There was a big focus on climate change and the state statistics system. There is a very tough focus on management in the public sector, on how the dollars are spent and on allowing the public to see what they get for the money. The journey that we took by train through the state gave us a good snapshot of the physical evidence of the economic restructuring that Maryland has gone through. We were privileged to get an hour of Governor Martin O'Malley's time. Our visit to Washington was fantastic. We met US business leaders, with whom we discussed climate change and the Blue Green Alliance, which would translate in Scotland to a red-green alliance. It was very interesting to meet the Sierra  Club, the trade unions, representatives who are working on the climate change bill in the United States and senior officials of the US Department of Energy. That is where the most stark differences were. All the states in the US are going for 25 per cent renewable electricity by 2020, but I have to say that their challenges made our challenges look easy. They do not have the planning system that we have. However creaking members will often say it is, we have a democratic system that offers certainty and does not just deal with issues in the courts. In the US, they have ambitions for renewables and for developing a smart grid. They have a very different energy system from ours. The transportation of electricity from one part of the US to another makes the transportation of our green electricity from the Highlands to the central belt and to the rest of the UK look like a piece of cake. I am not underestimating our challenges, but their challenges are much greater. I hope that we can continue to have dialogue. That would not mean sending us all back to the States—much as I would love to go back on another trip. We could use teleconferencing and electronic communications. Thinking of ways in which our legislators can link together could offer interesting opportunities. I have not been stopped yet, Presiding Officer. Do I still have 20 seconds to go? Are you being lenient with us today?

Many thanks.

That is great—I knew that we would have slightly more time in this debate. The other big lesson that I picked up in the States was from Obama's climate change ambitions and fiscal stimulus package. In the US, they are at a different stage in the debate: there is not the same level of acceptance of the need for action. The business community in the States is not in the same place as CBI Scotland, which sees the challenges but also the opportunities. Things are different in the US. Here, businesses have been brought on board to tackle climate change, and that is something that the US could learn from us. However, we can also learn from the US. The minister will be delighted to know that I have found yet another country where domestic tax breaks are offered to people who put energy efficiency measures in place. We also had the chance to meet people in Congresswoman Kathy Castor's office, to talk about how her staff will be working through the  legislative process on their climate change bill, and to talk about her work on foreclosures to protect her constituents in Florida. It was fascinating and a privilege to be part of the delegation; I very much enjoyed the opportunity. I will finish by picking up on Tricia Marwick's point. I get the sense that we could make more of some of these visits—both in promoting team Scotland while we are there, and in reflecting on the trip when we come back and thinking about how to broaden the links. We have to develop those links, not just on a personal basis but institutionally.

This is an important issue. I have constituents who regularly suffer sewage flooding problems but cannot get resolution through Scottish Water, even though councillors and I have lobbied it. Scottish Water would like to address the issue. It has bid for funding to give it the capacity to do remedial work to solve the problem, which is caused by greater flooding incidents. However, Scottish Water is not able to secure funding, because that would contravene the advice given by the WIC. That means that my constituents will not even be considered for the next round of  improvement works until 2014. They have property that is regularly flooded with sewage, but the problem will not be addressed. That is not just an economic problem for my constituents, it is also a health and safety issue. It is directly related to the way in which advice from the WIC is structured. That is why we need to ensure that sustainable development is added to the calculations when investment advice is being set for the next period. At lunch time today, the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on renewable energy and energy efficiency held a meeting at which we considered energy efficiency and water use. There is at present no way of ensuring that the economics of climate change are factored into investment programmes. Amendments 15 and 16 will go part of the way towards ensuring that the issue is at least on the agenda. We must not simply take the short-term solution that seems economically appropriate now. That would mean that our medium-term decisions would be the wrong decisions for climate change and sustainable development.

I am very gratified to hear support for that strong policy. Will the member also comment on the proposal to incentivise businesses through business rates? Is there scope to pick up on the point that Stewart Milne made about new developments all being required to have an appropriate level of renewables development.

To ask the Scottish Executive in what ways the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 contributes to addressing antisocial behaviour carried out by people using short-term holiday lets. (S3O-6788)

Is the minister aware of the growing problem, which has been brought to the attention of the Parliament by members of different political parties? Will he examine part 7 of the 2004 act and, in particular, commit to examining the use of powers in paragraph 6 of part 7 to amend the act to make it absolutely clear and beyond doubt that antisocial behaviour notices can be applied to circumstances particular to holiday lets? We have a cross-party meeting of councillors and MSPs next week. It appears that the issue is growing in Edinburgh and beyond the city. An intolerable strain is being put on local residents, and I have been made aware of serious health and safety issues.

I associate myself with Mike Pringle's question. Members have had several goes at getting the cabinet secretary to tell the chamber exactly when fresh local food will become part and parcel of day-to-day procurement work. We are particularly keen for schools, hospitals and prisons across the country to benefit from this procurement exercise, particularly given the situation of our local farmers. We want to see local food that is directly sourced. As the East Ayrshire Council project under the previous Government shows, it can be done.

I concur with John Swinney that what we are debating today is a significant bill, and it is highly appropriate that we do so as we hit 10 years of the Scottish Parliament's operation. It will be the most important bill that we pass. We can debate that among ourselves afterwards, but in terms of its long-term ambitions and the challenge that it attempts to address, I think that that is a fair argument. Nevertheless, the bill will be successful only if we all buy into it. That does not mean that we all have to agree with one another at this stage. There is time for more detailed consideration of the bill at stage 2. We believe that the bill is not strong enough at the moment and that there are significant gaps that need to be addressed. In particular, we think that climate change needs to inform all Government decisions from now on and that our agenda must involve all of us as citizens, consumers and people who are involved in businesses, trade unions and church groups. I will address three things: the need to act now and to set ourselves the right targets and benchmarks; the need to get our governance structures right; and the need to put in place a series of policy programmes that tackle at the same time both the recession that we are currently experiencing and climate change. Our top line is that the bill does not go far enough. We welcome the announcement and the comments that have been made by the cabinet secretary today, but we still feel that the bill does not go far enough. It does not address the early years, and it would represent a massive missed opportunity if the bill were to be passed as it is currently drafted. The policy in the Scottish National Party's manifesto for annual statutory targets of 3 per cent reductions was not one that we considered took the right approach during the election campaign, and we argued our corner. Given that that policy was dumped as soon as it had done its job of harvesting green votes for the SNP, we believe that it was more a cynical election strategy than a genuine commitment to radical action. The alternative approach that is laid out in the bill is simply not good enough. It is a betrayal of the trust of the many thousands of people who voted for the SNP on the basis of that policy.

No. I want to get started. The critical time to act is now, and the action that we take must be meaningful and real. The driver for success must be tougher, quantified  interim targets. We have lodged our amendment to concentrate minds on that. We need to send businesses, Government departments and agencies and people in Scotland a clear message that the Parliament intends to act now. We believe that political accountability needs to be built into the system. We need to incentivise the sort of thinking that starts to turn things around now, not in 2018, on the eve of our having to meet a 2020 target. We believe that that 2020 target is too far off. Not only is it too far off to drive short-term action with a sense of urgency, but it is too far off to incentivise the medium-term policies that Governments will need to deliver on by 2020. It is three elections away. We need to bring the day of action closer to home—to the SNP today and to the next two Governments, which we hope will be Labour ones.

As we understand the position, the targets are not quantified. The targets in the bill will kick in from 2020 but, before then, the targets will be in regulations. We absolutely support a 34 per cent target. I understand that that is what John Swinney said will be in the bill, and that the 42 per cent target will be adopted if we get collective action at Copenhagen. I am not critical of the target that has been set for 2020. We understand why the Government has gone for that target. The challenge is to supplement it. We did not believe in annual targets, but we think that we need mid-points. We accept the point made by environmental campaigners that each Government should be accountable for what it does. We welcome the SNP's support for our amendment today.

We think that we need quantifiable targets on the way, and our amendment is designed to ensure that the progress of each Government can be assessed. Every time that respected scientists review the position on climate change, they tell us that, although they cannot be certain of how climate  change will work in the future—particularly in relation to feedback mechanisms—the situation is more urgent than it was the previous time that they reported. That is what the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the UK Committee on Climate Change report, and that is why we want tougher earlier action. We do not agree with the setting of arbitrary annual targets, because different things can happen each year. We need to judge each Government on its track record. We know that we need to go beyond paying lip service to the challenges and actually change how we do things. We believe that it is the next 10 years that are crucial, not the debate about 2050. It is easy to get sucked into discussions about long-term targets and ignore the short-term challenges. That is why we want to go for unambiguous, quantified targets. We need to start doing something now, and we need to set ourselves on a path of radical reductions in carbon emissions. We need to focus not only on how we are doing, with annual reporting to the Parliament, but on the consideration of cumulative targets. Everything that we do in the early years has an extra dividend. We are not just meeting a target; we are ensuring that those carbon emissions are not created in the atmosphere for generations to come. Surely we can all agree about that. However, we do not believe that that will happen without more serious pressure, and that is the purpose behind our amendment, which is designed not only to affect the current Government but to signal to the system as a whole that we are all serious. We believe that the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee's report on the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill is excellent. It is the latest stage in a lengthy process of debate. Similarly excellent is the report from the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, particularly its recommendations on waste and the position that it took against dumping 25 per cent of the Forestry Commission's estate. Further, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee has given us an invaluable set of recommendations, all of which the Government should implement. We argued for a whole week's debate on the bill not just because three committees have been involved in its consideration, but because of the range and depth of issues that the bill needs to address if we are to get it right. If we had only debated the issue this afternoon, we would not have covered the range of issues that need to be picked up before stage 3. Last month's lobbying was a graphic illustration of the support that there is in our communities for radical climate change legislation.  Our support for the bill's principles will be clear, but we want to flag up that many amendments will be needed to make the bill more radical and effective.

No. I need to get on. Today we will focus on the overarching principles of the bill and amendments that are needed in that context; tomorrow we will focus on practical progress, provision for which needs to be slotted into the bill, to support economic activity and build a bridge from today's technology and expertise to future priorities. The recession makes such an approach all the more important. There is a need to incentivise local authorities and businesses to rethink their day-to-day approaches. The briefings that we received from Scottish and Southern Energy and Scottish Renewables, and the business community's contributions to our stage 1 consideration, made it clear that companies are beginning to focus on serious action. Businesses need amendments to the bill at stage 2 that introduce practical measures on energy efficiency and small-scale renewables. Such amendments would strengthen the bill and the ability of the Government and future Governments to deliver on carbon reductions, which are needed in all sectors. If we are to make the bill work, the business community, trade unions and communities must buy into it. That is why we are committed to developing green jobs, not just in the renewables industry, which is hugely important, but in other industries. There are opportunities to invest in public transport and support for electric cars and other vehicles. There are opportunities in energy efficiency in the building industry, in relation not just to new developments but to the need to build mass markets for the retrofitting of our existing, inefficient infrastructure. We must not just talk a good game but put legislation on the statute book and implement it. Public duties need to be more effective. We need climate change action at every level of government. What will the concordat deliver on climate change? The issue needs to be addressed. What carbon emissions reductions will be achieved? There will be different challenges and opportunities for each local authority, but there are huge common areas in which a common approach and clear leadership will deliver results. We need concrete results, not vague aspirational language. More work is needed.

I have taken a couple of interventions and I want to move on.  Particular issues need to be explored. After the debate, I will consider John Swinney's comments about the nature of the advice that is given to ministers. The work of the UK Committee on Climate Change has been crucial in setting the UK Government framework, which the Scottish Government is adopting, and in translating IPCC findings into action. However, we need to consider particular challenges for Scotland that arise from the nature of our geography, land and communities. We also need a land use strategy, so that we can plan for the future and ensure that we do not ignore challenges until it is too late but address them head-on. We particularly need to tackle our housing. A raft of practical actions are not in the bill. We welcome Government responses to the stage 1 report on minor issues, but we want more action. In particular, tax incentives are crucial, to ensure that people act. That view is shared by Scottish and Southern Energy and Scottish Gas. Such an approach could be linked with the energy efficiency action that was provided for in this year's budget, which members supported. We need to ensure that there is area-based action from which every citizen in Scotland can benefit. In England and Wales, 67 local authorities are doing such work, and Northern Ireland is putting a system in place. We do not need to be told that the Scottish Government has no legal power to act, as the Government said in the paper that we received last night; we can use the bill to give the Government that power. The bill presents us with an opportunity to plug a gap, which we will try to take by lodging amendments at stage 2. We need practical policies now if we are to deliver on energy efficiency. We cannot let political prejudice stand in the way of action that is being adopted throughout the UK. Council tax incentives would be a good fit with other work that the SNP Government is undertaking. We support the early production of an energy efficiency action plan. The plan has been delayed for years—the SNP Government is not the first Government to delay it—and is needed soon. I am not making an excessively party-political point when I say that we need to ensure that energy efficiency reaches the top of the agenda not just in a single debate but for the future. We need to do that within six months. I think that all members agree that one of the toughest issues that we must address is emissions from aviation and shipping. We cannot turn back the clock on social aspiration and economic progress but we must find ways to take account of aviation and shipping. That is a challenge. It is vital that we do not ignore other forms of transport. Day to day, people make fundamental choices, but they are not being given the necessary, high- quality public transport choices, particularly in areas where those could be delivered. We need to introduce tougher, cumulative emissions targets to drive early action on the issues on which it will be relatively straightforward for the Government to act. In the first eight years of the Parliament, there was major investment—championed by Labour—in public transport, but that needs to continue at the same level. It is inevitable that we will focus on hitting targets, but we must involve people, businesses, communities, churches, trade unions and schools. We all should feel part of the process, because there is an appetite for change. The bill will be a framework for action. It cannot be a question of passing the bill, putting it on the statute book and the Government, or even the Parliament, patting itself on the back for being radical. We need an implementation plan, which must be discussed during the stage 2 consideration of the bill. We must do that both to concentrate minds and to deliver policies that will create a track to a low-carbon society. I agree with the cabinet secretary that the next Scottish budget must be more ambitious. We will need not only dedicated energy efficiency schemes and individual community schemes—welcome though those measures are—but mainstream Government expenditure if we are engage with the climate change challenge and determine how to reduce carbon emissions. We are still waiting for some assessments to take place at a Scottish level to enable a public debate on that. The power of the state, whether national or local, is crucial. The state has the potential to play a huge role in enabling us to make the transition to a low-carbon economy. Through public procurement of food, buildings, infrastructure or services, the Government can make practical greenhouse gas reductions in the early years, not the later years. The Government should use the hiatus caused by the lack of investment, while we wait for the Scottish Futures Trust or public-private partnerships, to reconfigure contracts so that the next generation of investment in public transport and buildings is greener and more energy efficient and reduces carbon emissions from day one, not from some future point. The challenge is in front of us all. It is time for the SNP to implement some of its forgotten manifesto pledges that would help to reduce carbon emissions. When new schools are built, they must all be heated and powered by on-site renewable energy. The same should go for hospitals and other public sector buildings. We need a bill, targets to drive action, governance structures and the accountability  mechanisms of the Parliament and wider public life. We also need to ensure that the bill is matched by the development of policy measures that will deliver carbon reductions. There has already been a robust debate on the bill in our communities. It is a landmark bill, but it needs significant amendment at stage 2. I move amendment S3M-3963.2, to insert at end: "and, in so doing, further agrees that unambiguous quantified targets for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions for the period between 2010 and 2019 are needed so that the current government and governments elected in 2011 and 2015 can be held to account for delivering early action on tackling climate change."

The minister has to listen to the residents of the city as well as to the tourism industry. He said that he is not prepared to act solely on grounds of antisocial behaviour, but I put it to him that my constituents have raised significant safety issues with me about the lack of appropriate regulation in the sector, which urgently needs to be addressed.

In my speech, I will focus first on the difference that the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 has made to constituents of mine who have had to suffer horrendous antisocial behaviour; and secondly on areas where the 2004 act does not go far enough and on the current loophole involving party flats and short-term lets in Edinburgh. Like other MSPs, I have had countless numbers of people asking for my help and wanting to know what I can do about antisocial behaviour. Before the 2004 act came into force, all I could do was refer them to the police and hope that the behaviour would become so appalling that the police would arrive within 10 minutes, see what was happening and accept that it needed to be legally challenged. As we know, before the act was passed, there were no powers and therefore no ability to ensure that action was taken. I agree in principle with many colleagues that not only is prevention the best option, it should indeed be the first option. However, such an approach is not a great deal of help to many of my constituents—and their families and communities—who are already experiencing antisocial behaviour. This is not a choice between tackling antisocial behaviour and tackling deep-rooted social problems; the challenge is working out how to tackle both problems without letting either side down. By the time people get in touch with us, they have quite often experienced not just months but years of harassment, abuse and intimidating behaviour. We cannot just tell them that someone else will sort out the matter; it is our job to use the legislation and work with our councils and a whole range of agencies to get action. There are countless stories of all-night parties every night of the week; disturbance from 24-hour lifestyles; loud noise from laminated flooring; repeated vandalism and far worse goings-on in people's communal areas and stairwells; and harassment and intimidation. We cannot sit back and let such unacceptable behaviour happen. However, individuals cannot take preventive measures. Of course, I would always encourage mediation, but what if the two parties involved simply cannot agree? I have found that the provisions of the 2004 act tend to concentrate the minds of those who perpetrate this kind of behaviour. Those people do not always know that  they are engaged in antisocial behaviour and sometimes the situation can be resolved when they are challenged. However, in many, many cases, it is simply not enough to challenge people, and they need to know that their actions will have consequences. The threat of eviction or an ASBO can be very powerful in changing behaviour; of course, the behaviour will probably not change automatically or overnight, but such threats can concentrate people's minds and send a message that their behaviour must be addressed. Fergus Ewing's comment—repeated, I have to say, in the framework document—that we on this side are in favour of simple, quick fixes shows a complete misunderstanding of people's experience. The provisions in the 2004 act are certainly not simple or quick to implement; they do not provide a long-term fix in every case, but they at least allow some of the issues to be resolved. In some cases, the police have become involved, and privately owned houses that were used for drug activities have been boarded up. It took months—in fact, years—to get such a resolution, but it happened as a result of the very powerful antisocial behaviour legislation.

That is partly why the process takes months or years. I always advise people to keep diaries and talk to their neighbours. I receive letters that have been signed by every person in a stairwell apart from those in the one tenancy that is causing the problem. People are not believed. They are told that the noise that they are experiencing is not that bad or that the intimidation and abuse are not really happening to them. Last week, I was contacted by someone who has experienced mental health issues and received fantastic support from agencies in the city, but who is being intimidated and harassed by two tenants in his stairwell. I cannot tell him that that is not important, that I am not interested or that those other people need to be sorted out first. I have to deal with his issue. I must ensure that the council lives up to its responsibilities and deals with his issue, as well as providing support for the people in the stairwell who are causing him a problem. He has been successful in tackling his mental health issues, but he is being set back because he is intimidated and afraid where he lives, which is the one place that should be his safe harbour and where he should be able to shut the door and know that he can live safely. He knows that that is not the case, which is not acceptable. Such people need support, so we must focus on providing it.  My second point is about short-term party lets, which is a big issue in Edinburgh. I asked Alex Neil about that at question time this morning and was disappointed by his response. The landlords are not required to register their property with the council, which makes it difficult for antisocial behaviour to be tackled or for residents to complain to the right person. There is also a loophole in the licensing process for houses in multiple occupation as a result of which irresponsible landlords can have short-term lets without an HMO licence. That leads to overcrowding and repeated bad behaviour, which is happening in countless flats throughout the city. I had to explain the situation to a colleague, who just did not believe me. If members Google it, they will see how many flats are up for rent. My constituents who have a petition on the issue need support from us now. They do not need to be told that simple short-term quick fixes are not required; they need a fix and they need our support. Rather than say that the legislation is irrelevant, we must consider how it can help them.

To ask the Scottish Executive with what legislation landlords offering short-term holiday lets must comply. (S3O-6514)

Is the minister aware that many of my constituents have to endure deeply unpleasant antisocial behaviour by people in overcrowded flats—often drunk revellers—that presents not just serious fire and health and safety issues but makes their lives a misery? The minister's predecessor, Stewart Maxwell, made it clear to me in a letter that the Scottish Government did not intend to take legislative action to tackle what is acknowledged by the local council to be a loophole in the legislation. Is that still the case, or is the minister prepared to listen to the evidence of my constituents' experiences?

I took part in my constituency in the spring clean that Mike Pringle mentioned—it is a long corridor. One of the key issues that many members of the public raised was the difficulty of getting ready access to information for new environmental projects. The project that we were considering would be around Holyrood park down to the Dumbiedykes. Would the minister consider publishing an EasyRead document for communities so they do not need to be experts or consultants to work out where to go for the variety of grant funding that is available?

Will the member take an intervention?

I find it astounding that the member is hinting that no other suggestions were made whatsoever—that is not my reading of the responses to the consultation. The criticism was that the leasing proposals would undermine the strategic integrity of the Forestry Commission and would be damaging to its work. That was the problem that everybody had with the proposal.

We want to move on from the diversion of the past few months. There were sharply differing views, and the unanimous decision of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee was a vindication of the campaign by Forestry Commission Scotland staff, unions, members of the public and all those concerned about the future of our forests. I thank Roseanna Cunningham for accepting the inevitable, but I have a question for her. Last Thursday, when she was asked when she would announce the Government's response to the consultation, she said that she would take the decision in her own time. She announced her decision less than 24 hours later. When did she make her mind up? Would it not have been better to have announced her decision in the chamber on Thursday? However, I want to move on. We have argued all along that the Rothschild proposals were ill thought out and did not have the benefit of a business plan. Having read the Forestry Commission's options paper, I believe that that view has been reinforced but, as I said, our intention today is to enable a debate that lets us move on and focus on the way forward. The first issue that must be sorted out is the Scottish rural development programme. We have previously discussed the scheme's complexity and excessive bureaucracy, and it is clear that, in relation to forestry, it is not working on any level. The consultation responses demand an urgent streamlining of the process, but it is also clear that the level of support is not sufficient to persuade landowners, foresters, investors and farmers to plant trees. The Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment has already set in train a review. It would be good if the minister confirmed today that she is committed to increasing the level of financial support to boost applications, as set out in the Forestry Commission's options paper, because there are opportunities that need to be seized. The common agricultural policy health  check recognises woodland creation as a means of helping to tackle climate change. Land afforested under the SRDP is now eligible for single farm payments, which would offer farmers the chance to remain in farming but transfer some land into forestry. The Forestry Commission's figures show that its intention is that 5,000 hectares are currently planted but that, if an extra £10 million were made available, the figure would rise to 8,000 hectares. We understand the worries about the loss of prime agricultural land or peatland areas, but enough land of a lesser quality should be available. The expansion needs to be managed properly, and we support the suggestion that a land use strategy be developed. There is also the issue of CO 2 absorption. The science is complex, and it is clear that forest planting can play a role—but only if it is done in a sustainable way. It is certainly not a get-out-of-jail-free card that means that the rest of us can avoid having to think about making carbon cuts in our use of energy and in our travel. Extra wood for sustainable buildings, for processing and for meeting the growing demand for biomass could play a part in a climate change strategy. Wood is also crucial for thousands of jobs, particularly in our fragile rural areas. The other major contribution that the Forestry Commission can make to tackling climate change is to develop renewables on its own land. That was one of Labour's key policies at the previous election, and we believe that it is a vital part of the solution to the funding of new planting. Within five years, £10 million a year would be being generated to fund new planting and management—a virtuous circle of creating renewable energy and funding new forests to help tackle climate change. The £10 million would grow to £30 million a year, which would pay for a lot of tree planting and management. The challenge is how to address the crucial short-term period. The SRDP is clearly important in attracting new planting and, with an uplift in grant funding, more people would be attracted to apply. Labour has consistently argued that we need to be spending Scottish Government money with the carbon implications clearly understood. The benefits that would come from properly managed new tree planting would score highly not only in value for money but in value for the planet. The financial gap is relatively small and short term. The Scottish Government has choices. If ministers were to make a relatively small injection of investment to boost the value of grants, it would transform prospects. If they are serious about delivering on the target of an 80 per cent reduction in CO 2 emissions, they have to put the financial  investment into carbon-saving policies over the next decade. Under Labour, we introduced the idea of repositioning, in which land is sold off and the income is recycled by the Forestry Commission, but the Confederation of Forest Industries—ConFor—makes the valid point that repositioning must not be the only source of new funding for planting. There is clearly some scope to increase the rate of repositioning in the first few years, but it would have to be done sensitively—there would be no point in knocking out the Rothschild proposal if our forests were to suffer death by a thousand smaller cuts. Repositioning could work on a short timescale—five rather than 75 years—and we would want a guarantee that, once the renewables funding kicked in, the Forestry Commission would buy new land and fund new tree planting to replace areas lost through repositioning for the public good. In respect of the carbon contribution made by the Forestry Commission estate, there is also RSPB Scotland's point that the Forestry Commission's peatlands should be looked at as an option to lock in carbon. There are options, and this is a matter of political will and support. Now that the leasing proposals are off the agenda, there is the space to look at better alternatives. It also means that there is confidence for the supply chain and continuity of supply, which means that the processing industry can move forward with greater confidence, and an opportunity to build the biomass industry and strengthen those supply chains. The Forestry Commission is responsible for only a third of Scottish forests. Any strategy must therefore include the perspective of the forestry industry so that we gain maximum economic benefit from our forests. ConFor makes the point that the Scottish Government's target for planting was nowhere near being met last year. When the economy picks up, there must obviously be a role for the Scottish Government to encourage the building industry to use wood to ensure that our buildings are a much more sustainable product, but in the short term the challenge for the Government is to sort out the SRDP, increase the payment rates and get a move on with joint renewables projects. Given the clear parliamentary support that there is for the principle, ministers should accelerate the process so that, as soon as there is a legislative framework, schemes can be given the green light. I welcome all the amendments. I move, That the Parliament notes the unanimous recommendation of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee that the Scottish Government drop proposals for  leasing up to 25% of the Forestry Commission estate for a period of 75 years; welcomes the decision of the Scottish Government to amend the Climate Change Bill to remove the relevant clauses, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward its review of the operation of the Scotland Rural Development Programme urgently, including reviewing the level awarded for grants, and to pursue proposals for joint ventures to deliver renewables projects in the Forestry Commission estate.

Does the minister accept that our amendment concerns a point of principle about how we debate in the Parliament? A major consultation has been held, with many responses that we welcome. However, not seeing the Government's response to those responses has made the debate difficult, because we have been unable to focus on how we move forward and we are stuck having the same debate as we had a year ago.

Will Robin Harper tell us what is so problematic about our amendment? It has been lodged for only a few hours, so I am wondering why it has generated such huge opposition from the Green Party.

Nowadays, we regularly have debates in the chamber in advance of a stage 1 debate. In some ways, that is good, because it lets us focus on issues for proper discussion, and we on the Labour benches are very much in favour of extra discussion, particularly about a major bill such as the marine bill. Given the arithmetic in Parliament, it is important for us to tease out the issues, particularly in such a complex and substantial bill, which has been a long time in gestation and is incredibly important for our fishing industry and communities, for the development of the renewables industry, for nature conservation and for biodiversity in our seas. I know that the minister would rather that we all agreed on exactly what we will end up with at the end of the day, but we on the Labour benches do not see the point in pretending that everyone agrees on everything at the outset, or that we always have a cosy consensus when one does not  exist. We are absolutely not going to pick fights where that is not appropriate—and that is not what we are doing today—but it is daft to pretend that everyone is happy with everything that the minister has proposed. In a way, it would have been better if the motion simply acknowledged that and focused on some of the issues that Richard Lochhead mentioned and some that he has not. It is not just me who thinks that we need robust debate. I quote Roseanna Cunningham: "We know how to do robust argument and debate in Scotland. It's important so that we know what comes out at the end is in Scotland's interest." She said that to us at the Scottish Environment LINK reception last night. I welcomed her then to her new ministerial position and I do so again today. I very much look forward to debating with her in the months and years to come. There is truth in what she said last night. It is worth taking the time to tease things out. It is not just those of us on opposite sides of the chamber who do not always agree with each other; some of the external representations that have been received need to be teased out. Today is a good chance to do that before we get into the detail of the bill at stage 2. The Scottish National Party's motion classically accentuates the positive and ignores anything that does not agree with the Government. We agree with a three-tier marine planning framework and with Richard Lochhead's point about streamlining the decision process. That is not to say that there is unanimity on all the key details, and we will focus on that today. Given that we have a minority Government, the point of a parliamentary debate before the bill has been published—presumably it is not yet completely drafted—is to enable the SNP Government to test the water on some of the issues. I will take this opportunity to quote three organisations on the issue of marine Scotland. The Labour amendment expresses our disappointment at the fact that the Scottish Government has already decided the body's status. That would have been more properly addressed in the bill. The Scottish Fishermen's Federation says: "the Federation has fundamental objections to the status, role and responsibilities of Marine Scotland."

I have read the Scottish Fishermen's Federation's submission and the key points in it, and it does not seem to me that the cabinet secretary has dealt in detail with everything that it raised. I am happy to talk to the federation's representatives about that afterwards, but we are proceeding on the basis of the submission that it gave to us and to everybody else. Its points were about the management process and the clear intention, as the federation saw it, "that Marine Scotland will champion the interests of Scottish Ministers. If those interests coincide with any wider interests, that will only be a happy coincidence." The Scottish Fishermen's Federation has not written to us to say that it has withdrawn those comments. I will now quote two other organisations. The minister might wish to intervene on me with regard to both, and to tell me that they, too, have now withdrawn their submissions to the consultation. However, we can only go on the submissions that have been received. Scottish Environment LINK stated that it "strongly favours the status of Marine Scotland as a Non Departmental Public Body, thereby increasing the independence of Marine Scotland from Government." I do not know whether the minister would like to intervene to tell me that Scottish Environment LINK has now clarified that point and withdrawn its objection to the proposed status of the new organisation.

I was just coming to RSPB Scotland. The quote that I am going to use was also given in response to the consultation. Again, RSPB Scotland's points about the status of the new body do not seem to have been addressed. There is absolute agreement about the need for a marine Scotland organisation—we all agree on that—but the issue is its status. RSPB Scotland said: "given that Marine Scotland will also take responsibility for marine nature conservation, this would appear to be a clear conflict of interest" in the context of increased economic growth. RSPB Scotland strongly recommended that "Marine Scotland should have a duty to have regard to ... advice from SNH" in all its decision making. The cabinet secretary did not mention that in his speech. If organisations write in with their comments in good faith, we as the Opposition will pick up on them. The cabinet secretary does not seem to  have addressed the strong concerns that organisations have raised about the operation of marine Scotland. The cabinet secretary is not listening—he is whispering to the Liberal Democrats. The status of marine Scotland is fundamental—

No. I have taken a couple of responses from the cabinet secretary already. Marine Scotland's status is important. We are being denied the opportunity to debate it in the proper way—we should be able to do that at stage 1, following the introduction of the marine (Scotland) bill. I will issue a series of questions to the cabinet secretary after this debate raising the objections of a whole range of organisations on the status of marine Scotland that I do not believe were addressed in the cabinet secretary's speech. We need to start from a set of principles that involve the Scottish Government laying down the policy and marine Scotland implementing it and delivering on it. That framework needs to be clearly set out by the Scottish Government, which is accountable to us and to the Scottish people. There are issues around how marine Scotland will relate to the new marine management organisation that the UK Government is setting up. That was not addressed in the cabinet secretary's speech. Issues clearly need to be addressed. There needs to be a transparent and fair framework. That is why we have a problem with the proposals. The Scottish Government is to centralise decision making and implementation in-house. What opportunity will local communities have to get involved in the process of marine planning? How will interested parties such as local communities, fishing interests, economic interests such as renewables companies, environmental organisations and animal welfare groups be able to take part in the planning and decision-making process? There are understandable concerns about how marine Scotland will work with the Crown Estate, which has hugely ambitious plans for marine and coastal renewable energy across Scotland. How will the licensing regime actually work? That is a crucial issue for the many organisations that are involved in marine activities. The cabinet secretary argues that we need to get on and establish marine Scotland to enable decisions to be made, but a whole raft of questions remain unanswered. It was not possible, in his brief speech, for the cabinet secretary to go through all the issues in the way that might be possible in committee.  What sort of appeals process will the Scottish Government develop? It cannot be judge and jury on all the issues. I would like to have heard the cabinet secretary's thinking on appeals, especially as they are a core concern of many organisations. It is not fair for the cabinet secretary to say that all the issues have been resolved, because clearly they have not. We need to consider how marine Scotland will be organised and exactly how all the detailed questions that many stakeholders have put to the cabinet secretary will be addressed. This debate is about teasing out those issues. We do not see why the cabinet secretary has to be precious about it and say that everybody agrees with everything. It would be unbelievable if everybody agreed with everything that the cabinet secretary is proposing at this stage. He is suggesting that when we come to the debate in committee, no one will have any concerns about anything in the bill. That is not sustainable—detailed questions need to be examined. We will not have moved far today unless we get to the nub of some of the issues—we do not need to shy away from them. We have not taken a final view on all the issues—that is the point of not only today's debate but the detailed discussions that we will have in committee. We look forward to that debate and to hearing what other parties have to say on these crucial issues. I move amendment S3M-3528.3, to leave out from "to drive" to end and insert: "; acknowledges the positive response to the consultation, Sustainable Seas for All , but expresses its disappointment that the Scottish Government acted in advance of the Marine Bill to establish Marine Scotland; notes the concerns that have been expressed regarding its lack of independence and the lack of clarity regarding its status among stakeholders and other agencies; notes the importance of healthy marine ecosystems and the need for a coherent sustainable development marine policy framework to support economic development, nature conservation and decision making; further notes the recent agreement with the UK Government to secure executive responsibility for marine nature conservation and planning in the offshore zone, and calls on the Scottish Government to work with other legislatures to ensure a joined-up approach to marine management of our shared seas."

Is the minister aware that the RSVP supports a range of initiatives across the country, one of which is energy efficiency advice? That service is being rolled out on a peer basis: older people are giving advice to other older people. The service has had huge success in generating lower bills for older people, thereby saving them huge amounts of money. Energy costs are a major issue for older people who are strapped for cash. Is he not concerned that we could lose that service across the country if local authority funding to meet its costs is not found?

To ask the Scottish Executive what financial incentives it will bring forward for householders to stimulate a mass market for microrenewable technology and energy efficiency measures. (S3O-5780)

Does the minister accept that existing microgeneration measures are not sufficient to deliver a mass market, given the obstacle of planning red tape? Does he have a date for the introduction of his much-delayed statutory instrument on permitted development rights? Is he aware that renewables companies are warning that they will have to make staff redundant because of the delays? Has he decided yet whether the guidelines will be based on sensible decibel levels rather than on arbitrary distance limits, which would rule out most housing in Scotland?

I welcome the debate. As an Edinburgh MSP, I want to say how important the issue is for the city of Edinburgh, the Lothians and the Scottish economy. There are many jobs in banking and financial services, but those sectors also support a huge number of indirect support services across the city, for example in catering and legal services. Important sectors in the city will be damaged if there are problems in banking and financial services, so I welcome today's focus on the jobs task force for the financial sector. The support that we gave yesterday for increasing investment in partnership action for continuing employment is crucial, as is our support for modern apprenticeships. Although Edinburgh has a strong labour force and a good set of skills, we must ensure that there is re-investment for the future so that, when new opportunities come, we can seize the day and make the most of them. Alongside the specific issue of financial services jobs sits the crucial issue of financial services investment and what the lack of confidence is doing to development in the city. There are real concerns across the country, not just in Edinburgh, that major construction developments are now not going ahead. Our last briefing from the City of Edinburgh Council focused on that issue.  In the past couple of weeks, three major announcements have been made, one of which was in my constituency—a huge Royal Bank of Scotland development in Fountainbridge has been stopped completely. As a lecturer in town planning more than a decade ago, I was able to use the Shawfair project as a student project for more than five years. For the project to fall back after it had finally reached the development stage is a major setback for the economy of the Lothians and the south of Scotland. We should not forget the restructuring of the Granton project. All those big projects had the capacity to provide more than 10,000 new houses, which would have been crucial for the financial services sector because people need to be able to afford to stay in the city. There is a real issue for the city's wider economy so, while I support the motion and amendments, I hope that ministers will also focus on it. We need banks to continue to lend, and I ask ministers to tell us what they have done to help financial services jobs and how they have focused on the construction industry and the wider Edinburgh economy. In particular, will they focus on the £10 million that was allocated to accelerated house purchasing in the private sector? That £10 million was allocated to the whole of Scotland, but Edinburgh will now not get the 10,000 houses that it needs in the short term. Good things are happening. Statistics show that financial sector employment has gone up during the past year. It is a very small increase—only 0.5 per cent—but banking employment is down by 1.9 per cent and is 8.5 per cent lower than it was at its high point in 2007. We have not seen the massive shake-out that we talked about in the previous parliamentary debate on the subject, but restructuring is clearly happening. John Park told us about his discussions with senior representatives from the banking industry, and we know from the trade unions that discussions are taking place. We need talks on how to get positive support from the Scottish Government for training and apprenticeships alongside support for restructuring that creates jobs and finds opportunities for those already in the skilled sector in Edinburgh and the Lothians. We need to consider how to support the wider economy through incredibly difficult economic times, and we must consider the impact on jobs in the city. There is a relationship among the financial sector, construction, catering, hospitality and theatres, and we need to take a joined-up approach. I support short-term action on financial service sector jobs, but I urge that it be linked to the wider economy so that we take a joined-up approach on the issue.

Will the member give way?

I made it clear in my opening speech—and have made it clear from day one—that we strongly support measures such as joint ventures for renewables that ensure that money is recirculated back into our forests. However, the current grant system needs to be sorted out. There are opportunities for increasing the number of trees that are planted, but the work needs to be carried out properly.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that specific point?

The widespread and clearly expressed concerns that have been raised throughout the country about the Scottish National Party's proposal to lease substantial areas of the most commercially successful parts of Scotland's national forest urgently need to be brought before the Parliament. The contracts will last for decades, deprive the Forestry Commission Scotland and 18 future Scottish Governments of the revenue from forest that was planted at public expense and, in the process, damage the Forestry Commission's ability to manage the strategic change that is needed in our forests. We are not opposed to all the suggestions that the minister has made. Indeed, the proposal to enable the Forestry Commission to enter into joint renewables ventures to plant more forests was in our manifesto and we strongly support it. However, we are opposed to the main proposals on leasing, which are set out in the policy memorandum and financial memorandum to the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. They are ill thought out and lack a published business plan. Moreover, the Government has given no substantive answers to a series of questions on fundamental aspects of the proposals. It is unacceptable that ministers, who have had 22 months to work up proposals for the bill, have suggested the major leasing proposals at the 11 th hour. As people in the industry have put it to us, they are a bolt from the blue. The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee will be put in an unacceptable position because, in two weeks' time, it will be expected to consider the implications of those huge proposals in one brief meeting without having seen the full results of the hurried consultation, which was put together at the last minute. The consultation closed on Tuesday and we waited until then so that people could pass us their  comments. The Scottish Parliament information centre tells us that ministers will not see a full report of the consultation until the end of February and the responses will not be made available to everybody until March. When we have asked questions, we have been told that we are scaremongering and being deeply misleading, but we have referred back to the initial consultation document, which gives no detailed information. The minister keeps attempting to reassure people by saying that the leasing proposals are just ideas, but it is stated clearly in the financial memorandum to the bill that the Government intends to secure powers through the bill to make secondary legislation on the release of capital from the national forest estate through the letting of timber-cutting rights. The memo is clear that it would be "a 75 year lease over about 100,000 hectares (or up to 25% of the national forest estate)" but is extremely vague about the income: it could be an up-front payment or an income stream. That is a pretty basic issue to pin down at the start. Without guarantees, this is money up for grabs by a cash-strapped Government. The proposals would mean the SNP borrowing from the future. It would take at least two years for a lease even to be drawn up. At a conservative estimate, the steady income stream to the Forestry Commission is £10 million to £15 million in today's money, so we are talking about a minimum loss of £750 million for a paltry income of maybe £200 million—if there are no plans to spend it. The sums simply do not add up. It is a bad deal for Scotland but a really good deal for one lucky private investor. The proposals are a damaging diversion from the debates that we should be having on the other parts of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. We are concerned about biodiversity, the promotion of access and the loss of jobs, particularly in fragile rural areas. Understandably, forestry workers are deeply concerned about jobs, but they are also concerned about the integrity of the Forestry Commission and the sustainability of Scottish forestry for the years to come. They are not reassured by the minister's comments about their jobs. Many of them work in our most remote rural areas and they understand employment law and the financial imperatives of a single employer that would want to recoup the money that it has paid up front as fast as possible. Industries that rely on the long-term contracts that the Forestry Commission manages are also deeply concerned. They know that, even when wood prices drop, they have long-term contracts with the commission that deliver a steady stream of wood. They believe that the proposals will cause irreparable damage and cost jobs. The  sawmill sector is made up of successful Scottish family businesses that want to expand but which worry about the implications of one big company coming in and vertically integrating the whole operation. The processors are not the only ones who are worried. Climate change means that we need more wood for our sustainable construction industry, and the renewables industry needs more wood for local supply. There is no point in developing local biomass plants if the wood pellets are imported while Scottish wood is exported abroad. The Forestry Commission guarantees that that does not happen, but that guarantee would be lost under the proposals. Environmental non-governmental organisations are also worried about the loss of biodiversity and the loss of the strategic management and experience that the Forestry Commission brings to our forests. They would rather that the commission focused on other challenges, such as the stewardship of our peat bogs, which is vital if we are to tackle climate change. Forestry expansion must be underpinned by a coherent land use strategy—we must put the right tree in the right place at the right time. We have mountain biking facilities that simply would not have been developed without the Forestry Commission's long-term partnership, investment and expertise. Multi-use forests are in the public interest and we must not damage that interest in the future. The plans do not add up and are deeply unpopular. The Forestry Commission trade unions' petition has already been signed by more than 3,000 people and the Labour Party's petition has attracted more than 800 responses. People have expressed their views strongly. I will quote one comment from our website: "As a lifelong member of the SNP, I am appalled and embarrassed by this proposal. If money is needed to fund an extra 10.000 hectares of new plantations, then it should come from the Carbon Emmission Reduction Target program (CERT) funded by the energy utilities who are the major CO2 polluters, and not from a flawed, irresponsible and uncosted adventure to privatise our greatest national sustainable asset, ie our land and all that grows on it." Our motion asks for the plans to be dropped now. They will be deeply damaging to jobs not only in future but now. We are in a deeply difficult national financial situation and the last thing that the Government should do is make that worse. Alternatives exist, so let us focus on them. Let us sort out the rural development plan. Less than £1 million out of the £14 million woodland challenge fund has been allocated so far this year; that is not good enough. We should look at the new revenue streams from renewables and look at community participation.  The SNP Government must do the right thing: dump these unpopular, ill-thought-out, damaging proposals. Let us focus on the way forward. I move, That the Parliament notes widespread and clearly expressed public concern about the potential effects on biodiversity, access, employment and the ability of Forestry Commission Scotland to continue to carry out its functions effectively as a result of the Scottish Government's proposals to lease large tracts of the forestry estate to the private sector for decades into the future; notes that the Parliament is being asked by the Scottish Government to scrutinise a proposal that it has now said does "not necessarily represent the best or only option" to achieve its objectives; also notes that the Scottish Government has not set out what it believes would be the other or better options; further notes the lack of published detail or business plan and the inability of the Scottish Government to answer a series of questions on the full implications of its proposals at this time, and calls on the Scottish Government to reconsider its plans to proceed with the leasing proposal and end the uncertainty surrounding the proposals by dropping the provisions that would permit this from the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill.

The scheme that I am concerned about, in Edinburgh, was under the wire in that respect. I ask the minister to investigate the matter and to report back to the city council. I would be grateful to have a meeting with the minister, if that would help. What he is trying to say would be helpful to us in Edinburgh.

The Labour Party supports the principles of the bill and is happy to support the Government's motion. The Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill is one of those that we would have introduced had we been in government. The Government has an opportunity because there is broad consensus across the parties on the need for the bill. As Roseanna Cunningham pointed out, there has been a lot of discussion on the bill and its principles in the Parliament, which is a very good thing. The committee's inquiry into flood prevention was a model of pre-legislative consultation. It was targeted and gave the public and all the organisations involved the chance to air and get to grips with some of the fundamental principles that we now see in the bill. There are still issues that we would like to be addressed in the bill, such as the conflict of interest between SEPA's new role and its existing responsibilities. It is still crucial to consider how the bill will operate and the impact that it will have on people and organisations. One of the key challenges is the confusion and buck passing that members of the public and businesses still face when they deal with flooding incidents. It is fundamental that, when the bill is enacted, people understand everybody's role and where responsibility lies. There are a number of issues that need to be addressed and a number of holes in the bill. We want to examine the gap between flood risk management plans and implementation. I heard what the cabinet secretary said on that in his speech, and we will examine the detail carefully when he makes proposals to the committee at stage 2. There are also outstanding problems with funding. They are not getting better and, in fact, problems are beginning to escalate throughout the country. The next point that I was going to make concerned our interest in strengthening the bill's provisions on sustainability, so I welcome the cabinet secretary's commitment to change the bill in that regard and to amend its long title. That brings us back to the point of the exchange between Roseanna Cunningham and Michael Russell, which was that the problem is the existing culture. We need to move away from the business-as-usual solutions. Hard engineering solutions are picked not necessarily because they are best but because they have historically been used. In some places, natural flood mechanisms are superior and are the right way to go. The  change to the title of the bill will help to change the culture and will send out a strong message. That change needs to be followed through elsewhere in the bill with a presumption in favour of sustainable flood management measures, on which an informed discussion is needed at stage 2. In planning, there is a presumption in favour of development unless the development plan provides good reasons why a development should not go ahead. Given the need to future-proof the impact of measures that will be in place for years to come, the detail of the sustainable flood risk management requirement and how Scottish Water is involved in that will be important. Those who were members of the Parliament during the passing of the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003, which established an independent regulator for Scottish Water, will remember the endless discussions that we had on environmental considerations and sustainability. Such discussions will probably move centre stage if we make sustainable development a key overarching principle of the bill, given that that is not how economic regulation works. The Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment will remember our committee discussions on that. Another crucial issue is the gap between the creation and implementation of flood management plans. Partly, the issue is ministers' reluctance to place a duty clearly on councils in case that duty supersedes other legal duties. The problem is that the lack of such a duty provides a get-out clause for local authorities. We are not convinced by that argument, which we think is an excuse. In the current financial climate, in which councils are incredibly cash-strapped, clarity on their duties is essential for them as well as the public. That issue needs to be looked at. We also think that SEPA and Scottish ministers should be under a duty to ensure that the objectives of flood risk management plans are met. Again, clarity on what different organisations are responsible for is crucial. A long-term strategy on flood prevention priorities would be helpful for central Government as well as for local authorities. Such a strategy would help to inform decision making. If, in making planning decisions, local authorities are conscious of future priorities, we will begin to ensure that we get the right decisions. We need to move away from business as usual. We need a long-term shift. The bill still provides for no real assessment of human and economic issues in relation to flooding. The Scottish Government needs to provide guidance to responsible authorities so that such issues are factored into their assessments. On funding issues—lest I lose the opportunity in the short time that I have been given this afternoon—the Finance Committee was very  critical. It is apparent that local authorities are not coping with the current system. Last year, for example, the minister reassured me that the City of Edinburgh Council's previous funding commitment for flood prevention was included in its grant-aided expenditure. I understand that the council has written to ministers about the central Government's decision to change the system that had been put in place. Because changes have had to be made to the flood prevention scheme, costs have gone up so the estimate that was included in GAE is already out of date. Funding for the scheme that the council is now trying to put in place is short in future years—

We have not heard anything about what the SNP Government thinks about the global justice point—I refer to subsidies to other European countries—that colleagues across the chamber have made. This is not just about Scotland; it is about the rest of Europe as well.

This is an important debate that comes at a significant time. Although we are not there yet, the process of redesigning support for agriculture and our rural areas has begun. It is a big challenge to get all the states in Europe to sign up to a new system—a better system that is capable of supporting our rural areas through the challenges of tomorrow, not the challenges of the post-war era. In our previous debates on CAP reform, it has been absolutely clear that it is relatively easy to identify key principles but difficult to shift the way in which money is distributed, both at Scottish level and at European level. We broadly agree with the Scottish Government's motion. Scotland is different from the rest of the United Kingdom—that was one of the founding principles of devolution. We have a tougher climate and areas where farming and crofting are marginal and difficult activities. We also have hills and upland areas where getting the right balance of livestock is important but difficult to achieve. However, there are two areas in which we should not have fundamental differences: we must recognise the importance of globalisation and the need to tackle climate change. Farmers in developing countries have their hands tied behind their backs. They compete with farmers in countries that have far greater resources, that receive relatively massive subsidies and that are subject to trade barriers. We believe that we need a fairer set of relationships between the developed and developing worlds. Climate change has also pushed food security issues up the international agenda. We strongly support Hilary Benn's attempts to put food security on the agenda for the G8 and the Copenhagen discussions later this year. His "Bread and Roses" speech before Christmas set out an absolutely clear vision for development of a food security policy that would respect our environment and our global commitments. As the cabinet secretary himself said earlier this year, the UK line is stronger when Scotland's distinct perspective is fed in. We also have a better chance of a positive outcome for Scotland if we are within the UK negotiating position. However, as we have debated before, if we are thinking about food security, we must think the  matter through properly from a Scottish perspective, which is why we strongly support the principle of subsidising agriculture but believe that the current system is unfair and not fit for purpose. We must bring to an end the scandalous situation whereby money is paid out to people who have ceased to farm. We must also continue the shift away from production subsidies to wider farming and rural support. Our farming and rural support must make clear the public benefits, with more support for environmental stewardship and clear support for higher standards of habitat, biodiversity and animal welfare. We have all followed the concerns about the Farming and Wildlife Advisory Group. I say to the minister that we believe that that group does a good job and that we would like the issue to be properly resolved. Although we support the SNP motion, it needs to be strengthened—specifically, it should mention the need for new measures to maintain and enhance habitats following the loss of set-aside provisions. We do not see a conflict between that and food production. We accept that set-aside has gone and that something new needs to be introduced to deal with habitat enhancement. We want to ensure that farmers and land managers are paid when they clearly add value through field margins, hedgerows and other forms of active enhancement. Those are public environmental goods that benefit our environment and for which we should pay. Good value for the public purse means ending the historical but out of date payments for land that is no longer farmed or properly managed. We therefore do not have a problem with the Tory amendment, because that is our interpretation of it. However, in our debate on CAP reform, we must ensure that we do not lose focus on what is happening to our rural and farming communities now. Last week, we had an excellent members' business debate on a motion that was lodged by Jamie McGrigor, in which a great deal of consensus was shown around the chamber. Since then, Rhoda Grant has met European Commission officials to talk through bull hire support. We are absolutely clear that a bull hire scheme is both essential and not against European Union rules, as long as it keeps within the de minimis rules, which is entirely possible. We have crafted our amendment so as not to tie the minister's hands too firmly. However, I warn him that we will listen carefully to his further comments. We are intrigued by his suggestion to Alasdair Allan that private sources might be acceptable. We want to put on record that we want Government provision of a bull hire scheme for crofters. Experience has shown that merely giving them advice or suggesting that they go to private  hire sources does not work; we need something more organised than that. There are also things that the cabinet secretary needs to do immediately, such as ensuring better support for new farmers and taking urgent action on the rural development plan, which is obviously failing to deliver for specific farming sectors and our rural environment in general. One issue that has been raised in the consultation on the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill is the need for new investment in forestry. However—surprise, surprise—the SRDP, which is the Government's main tool for delivering new planting, is completely failing. It is too bureaucratic and lacks transparency. It is not that there is no demand from the private sector for forestry investment—indeed, previous schemes were oversubscribed—but such investment is not happening through the rural development plan. Action needs to be taken to fix the situation. We have debated the pig sector before, and have talked about the need to ensure that we do not lose so many sheep and cattle from our hills that the pendulum swings from overgrazing to insufficient grazing, which would be bad for the rural economy and bad for the environment. The milk industry is in meltdown. Only last week, Jim McLaren made the hugely symbolic announcement that he is considering moving out of dairy farming. That is not a good position for us to be in. The cabinet secretary needs to act now, so I call on him to hold a summit of all of the key players—we are happy to sit around the table with him—and examine ways to ensure fairer and more sustainable prices. We cannot wait until we have no more milk producers in Scotland: the time to act is now, not when they have all gone. Procurement has to be part of the agenda, as it is one of the ways in which we ensure fair prices and fresh, good quality food produce. I ask the cabinet secretary to update us on his work in that regard. There must be much wider support for our rural communities. The SRDP is a crucial part of the armoury of the Scottish Government, but it is simply not working. The scheme needs to be completely overhauled sooner rather than later. Only a week or so ago, Rhoda Grant asked for details of the review, but the cabinet secretary said nothing about it today. We want to know what is happening, and when. In a debate on CAP reform, we must consider not only what we are doing now but how it links into future CAP reform issues. We cannot divorce the two issues. It would also be helpful if, in his summing-up speech, the minister would talk about RSPB Scotland's concerns that he is watering down the Scottish Government's commitment to the  importance of environmental benefits as environmental goods. That must be commented on by the minister. The RSPB believes that the minister is stepping back from principles that we have all supported in the past. From talking to colleagues in Brussels and south of the border, I know that they think that the SRDP is having less impact on environmental enhancement policy than it did previously. We need it to do more. Labour strongly supports change to the CAP. We think that the reform process is a positive one and that, although the Scottish Government and the various stakeholders do not always agree with one other, there are areas of consensus in which we can pull together some key principles. However, the tough issue is for the minister to get the scheme's design right and to act. I want to put on record the fact that we think that where farmers, crofters and land managers are providing public goods in environmental quality, landscape enhancement, biodiversity and unpolluted water courses, it is absolutely right that they be supported in their stewardship. However, we have to join that agenda to the food security agenda. We must have an integrated approach that deals with the challenge of creating jobs in our rural economies and which takes a joined-up approach to agriculture, landscape management and environmental enhancement. The rural development plan is absolutely vital in that respect, which is why we are keen to hear what the Liberal Democrats have to say in support of their amendment. We are interested in the points in Robin Harper's amendment, and we support monitoring and control of pesticides. We have concerns, however, about the policy that has been passed in Europe. More needs to be said on that, and we do not think that the Greens' amendment captures the argument entirely. I move amendment S3M-3250.4, to insert at end: "and calls on the Scottish Government to work constructively with UK ministers to ensure that the United Kingdom's negotiating strategy delivers the right framework for rural Scotland, including support for farming and crofting in fragile rural areas, to ensure that new policy mechanisms are in place to maintain habitat programmes, following the loss of set-aside provisions, and to continue a bull hire scheme."

I, too, welcome the debate and congratulate Jamie McGrigor on his success in securing it. As he observed, he and Peter Peacock had complementary motions that we wanted to sign. We wanted a proper discussion in the chamber, and we wanted to show crofters that we were listening to their concerns and wanted to support them. We have debated before the economic benefits of crofting and the need to consider crofting as a  way of life that is important to Scotland because it sustains the population in some of our most fragile rural communities. We have also discussed the importance of crofters' cattle in sustaining the quality of our environment, our unique wildlife and our landscapes. Powerful arguments for a bull hire scheme have been made by crofters, by RSPB Scotland and by NFUS—and they do not always argue the same position. For both those organisations to brief us in advance of tonight's debate and to come up with broadly the same proposals says a lot. I hope that the minister listens to them as they urge us to ensure that the scheme is saved. Does the Government have a legitimate role in running a bull hire scheme? I believe absolutely that the answer is yes. It is a pragmatic and sensible solution to the genuine problems that crofters have of operating in marginal areas. As other members have said, the scheme has lasted for more than 100 years. Every Government since the turn of the previous century has concluded that it is a worthwhile role for it to take on. If government is about anything, it is about achieving collectively what we cannot achieve individually, and there could be no better example of that. I would be interested to hear, in the minister's concluding remarks, whether he agrees that it is a legitimate role for the Government. Even if the minister argues that that is not a legitimate role for the Government, he cannot simply wash his hands and walk away from the current arrangements. It is up to him to find an alternative collective arrangement. For the Scottish Government to abandon the scheme would be for it to say that market forces should prevail, although the evidence shows that they simply cannot for our most remote crofters and those in rural areas where there are no economies of scale. The minister's stated objective is to see cattle numbers maintained in hill and island areas. We agree completely with that objective. Sadly, we are currently seeing a decline in those numbers, and ending the scheme could only speed up that decline. It may even mean the end of cattle breeding on some of our islands. I listened carefully to the comments of Alasdair Allan, who had some important points to make in the debate. There would be negative wider economic effects, but ending the scheme would also have environmental effects. That is why RSPB Scotland gave us such a strong briefing before the debate. We often take the landscape of our crofting communities for granted, but it is the result of many years of stewardship and extensively based farming and crofting in areas that are hard to farm. There are difficult weather and soil conditions to deal with and none of the economies of scale that  many of our other farming communities are able to deliver. Let us not make things harder for our rural and crofting communities. The minister has previously cited the Shucksmith report and its recommendation as his reason for acting. However, Shucksmith made his recommendations before the Cook report revealed that the alternative of a decentralised scheme would be more expensive and that private hire would be unlikely to work because there is no private market. That is particularly an issue in our island communities. If anything, the evidence is that the number of private hires is declining for health reasons. The minister did not accept other Shucksmith recommendations; he does not have to accept that one. I hope that the minister will listen to the good arguments that have been put in the chamber and outside it, as the previous minister did when we debated the issue four years ago. I urge the minister not to proceed with his plans and to acknowledge the importance of retaining cattle numbers to the protection of some of our most important rural landscapes and wildlife. I urge a rethink. He should look at the current scheme, survey cattle numbers and consider the potential environmental impact before acting. He should listen to the suggestions of crofters, RSPB Scotland and NFUS. Our crofting communities need certainty, confidence and our support—they do not need to be fobbed off to the SRDP, in which we know that they have no confidence.

I welcome the minister's commitment to the promotion of citizenship in schools. The eco-schools programme, which the minister has continued, is a fantastic way of promoting global  and environmental citizenship and of showing how children can play a role in tackling climate change. In light of the announcement this week by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning on the roll-out of small-scale renewables in schools on Monday, will the minister tell us how many schools it is intended should benefit this year? When does she expect the Scottish National Party manifesto commitment on renewables for all schools to be implemented? If the minister does not have that information to hand, I would be delighted to receive an answer in writing.

The cabinet secretary talks about the commitment of extra funding, but is he aware of the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy's rating review, which states that, despite the 5.5 per cent education budget increase in 2008-09, which has been much vaunted by the First Minister, in reality and although 37.5 per cent of local authority  expenditure will go on providing education services, that is 2.1 per cent lower than in 2007-08? Will the cabinet secretary explain why he says that more money is going into education and front-line services when in practice there are serious cuts in staffing and other front-line education services in schools throughout my constituency, such as Boroughmuir high school and Abbeyhill, Balgreen, Craiglockhart and Roseburn primary schools? Will the cabinet secretary admit that the First Minister's comments were completely misleading?

I join colleagues in congratulating Pauline McNeill on bringing this matter to the chamber for debate. The debate is timely because of the longevity and severity of the crisis. As Pauline McNeill outlined, there is a real humanitarian crisis because of the long-standing failure to find political solutions to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We must not forget  what happens to the ordinary Palestinians as a result of that political failure, and I will focus on what we can do to help people in a practical sense. There is a shop in my constituency called the Hadeel fair trade shop. It is based in St George's West church on Shandwick Place, and it aims to provide a sustainable source of income for craftspeople who work in community groups in the west bank and Gaza. It is a member of the British Association for Fair Trade Shops and it supplies other Fairtrade shops and traders as well as Palestinian solidarity groups. It is the only recognised fair trade Palestinian importer, so it acts as an important focus for Palestinians who want to get their goods out to market. Hadeel, which sells Palestinian handcrafts, is seen as a symbol of the people and as a way for them to establish some normality in a world that is anything but normal. Like all fair trade initiatives, it makes a practical difference to people's lives. Making craft products helps people to survive psychologically during the long hours and days when they are not permitted to leave their homes because of Israeli-imposed curfews and they do not have any water or electricity. The profit from the shop goes directly to local traders, so they see the benefits. That is a practical way to support people and show that we have not forgotten them. I will mention just two of the active local groups, to give members a sense of the work they do. Sulafa is an embroidery project in Gaza, which, as Pauline McNeill said, has suffered enormously. The project, which is supported by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, encourages self-support and provides income for about 400 refugee women in eight refugee camps. It is an amazingly difficult project to co-ordinate, but those involved have managed to do it. Without trade or any economic activity, people have no income and no way in which to support themselves, so that project is hugely important. The Atfaluna Society for Deaf Children is the first institution to be set up to support deaf people in Gaza. It was founded in 1992 and it boasts a modern school that gives people practical support. In particular, it supports parents and helps them to raise their children in what must be an incredibly hard life. Its income generation programme provides jobs and work-from-home opportunities for more than 350 women, men and their families. It provides training, particularly for young adults and women, to give them a future and some opportunity to support themselves. Just yesterday, I got an update on those projects for today's debate. They cannot get any materials in or out of Gaza and they are running out of basic materials. Locally, nobody has money to buy  presents for Christmas—there are people who will be celebrating Christmas in Gaza and the west bank—and their borders have been shut for two months. I ask the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture to do what she can, and I ask colleagues to support Palcrafts by visiting the Hadeel shop and ensuring that it gets Scottish Government support as one of the fair trade organisations in Scotland that we have all supported on numerous occasions. I ask members to ensure that Palestinians are properly included, because it is incredibly tough for them to do that work. I ask members to visit the shop and look at the beautiful embroidery, pottery and little wooden jewellery boxes. When people buy those tokens, they should remember that they do not have to buy them only for Christmas presents; they can buy them all year round. People are not just buying a one-off gift; they are providing tangible support to a people who are trapped in a terrible tragedy. They are trying to support themselves; the least we can do is give them our support.

I congratulate Des McNulty on bringing the debate to the chamber. No doubt we will agree that the issue is very topical. I cannot be the only member in the chamber who has been asked to represent several churches and make members aware of the superb work that is being done. I began to be aware of the work that churches are doing on climate change when I was visited a couple of years ago by someone from the church and nation committee of the Church of Scotland who interrogated me about what Parliament was doing to create greener transport options and about climate change. The eco-congregations are not a new thing; the issue has been being raised in churches for quite a few years now. It gained speed and depth, especially in Edinburgh churches, when the G8 summit was held in Scotland. A series of seminars was held in churches focusing on trade and aid relationships and on what we in Parliament could do, along with United Kingdom parliamentarians, to take tougher action on climate change. Peace and justice groups, such as the one at the Sacred Heart church in Lauriston, which is quite near the Parliament, held a special event to focus on what we could do to change the world. Their debates had a different flavour from those that we have in Parliament in that they had a much stronger ethical dimension. They compared the wealth of developed western countries with that of developing countries and looked at what we can do to spread our wealth across to those countries, while avoiding making some of the most damaging changes to our climate that will be caused by our historical and future emissions. There were some very powerful discussions, which were significant in that they cut across the churches in Edinburgh. There was a huge amount of enthusiasm for that work. The other aspect of the work of eco-congregations of which I have been made very much aware is churches getting in touch and asking what we are doing on these issues in the Parliament. For example, the congregation of St John's church invited me to address it when it gained eco-congregation status. That is not a simple box-ticking exercise; a church must demonstrate commitment and say how it is going to go further over the next few years. St John's already has a One World Shop in its complex, which promotes fair trade goods, and it was already active in the fair trade debate. It is now thinking about what more it can do. Murrayfield parish church is also an eco-church that is active in fair trade. It is keen to see what its members can do not just as individuals but as a  congregation and a parish to lobby organisations. One member of the congregation wrote to me when she knew that tonight's debate was going to take place. She wrote: "On a personal basis I have reduced the temperature in my home by 2 degrees Celsius and do not find this a problem. I would like to think that many larger organisations could do the same. Would anyone notice? I am thinking of shops and offices." Everybody has walked into a shop and just about got fried alive. When they walk in through the door with their jacket on, it is hot; then, when they walk out, it is freezing. There are issues about what the right temperature is for those organisations that must spend a lot on heating bills. There are other practical ideas. Gorgie parish church is not yet an eco-congregation but, knowing members of that church, I believe that it soon will be. They are keen to make practical changes to their local community. They started with small changes that we may take for granted if we have been on this track for some time—they recycled paper and sold fair trade tea and coffee—but they have begun to move on and want to do more. They have carried out local garden project works and have been involved in trying to help local communities to make the local environment more attractive. They recently had 40 students with links to the church working on Gorgie city farm, clearing litter and making practical improvements to a garden area just opposite the church. People are not just involved in the high-level ethical and political debates about climate change; they are active in churches, making changes to their communities. That has to be commended. There is some interest among Edinburgh churches in microgeneration, which is an issue that we have discussed in the chamber before. They have become interesting advocates, lobbying in the city to persuade other organisations to let them use microgeneration to reduce their bills and produce green energy. Only last month, the churches across Edinburgh came together to bring UK, Scottish and European parliamentarians to debate with one of our local councillors what we could do collectively. There is a lot happening. I hope that Des McNulty's motion will add to the support for that work and encourage people to go further.

This time last year we in the Labour Party warned of the impact of the tight financial settlement offered by the SNP Government. We warned that the money did not add up, but SNP ministers told us that there was sufficient cash for services. We were roundly criticised for scaremongering. I have raised issues relating to Edinburgh's housing crisis before. In the past year, the problem has got worse—we are nowhere near to being able to achieve 1,300 affordable housing starts every year for the next decade. Today, the city's housing leader said: "we are faced with a crippling shortage should investment remain unchanged." Today, Keith Brown reminded us that last year some members indulged in dire warnings. I invite him to speak to the many staff who have been sacked from voluntary sector projects across the city—people helping some of our most vulnerable citizens with employment, housing and homelessness. Those jobs have gone because of the cuts.

No. On flooding, we have developing problems. SNP ministers promised us that there would be no problem with flooding schemes, which were fully funded and under the wire. However, the council has told me that the second scheme—the Water of Leith scheme—is no longer fully funded and that in later years the necessary cash will not be there. I will concentrate on Edinburgh's education services, because the financial settlement has had a deeply damaging impact on our schools. As one parent suggested to me yesterday, we are looking at a "hugely deteriorating education system". There are big problems with lack of investment in school buildings and cuts in school budgets. For the older schools in the replacement queue, there is a double hit, as they are the most expensive schools to maintain, and the money must come from individual school budgets. When Labour was in power in the Scottish Parliament and the City of Edinburgh Council, we built or commissioned 34 new schools. It was not about the numbers, which I merely put on the record, but about the need to modernise old  school buildings that had been neglected during the Tory years. In my constituency alone, the new St Thomas of Aquin's school was opened five years ago and Broughton and Tynecastle high schools are under construction; all that has happened since I was elected. As Jeremy Purvis predicted, SNP ministers are no doubt queuing up to open the new high schools. The difference in the morale of teaching staff and students in the new schools across the city is palpable—they know that they are important and believe that we know that they need the best and most modern teaching facilities. However, since May 2007 the building programme has juddered to a halt. From a meeting between parents and councillors in the city last night, I understand that the SNP-Lib Dem council is proposing to rank schools in order of priority. The problem is not simply the order in which schools are ranked—even the top school on the list, Portobello high school, is £8 million short. The kids in my area will not get a new school even if they have only just started at primary school—there is a huge long-term problem. In practice, that means that schools such as the Victorian Boroughmuir high school are years away from the urgent action that is needed now. Last week, Boroughmuir high school's HMIE report praised standards of teaching but urged action on the inadequate state of the building. When I visited the school just a couple of weeks ago, I could see where water was coming in through the roof, the draughty classrooms and how difficult it is for teachers to keep up standards against that backdrop. The issue cannot be left to drift. This week, parents from the 28 parent councils in schools in Edinburgh got together to present a dossier to the city council's education leader. They do not want to be caught up in the politics of the situation. Before the election, Labour promised them that it would build the schools that were on the list. The SNP promised them that it would match our plans brick by brick—what a hollow promise that must now seem. The lack of a funding mechanism is entirely the fault of the SNP Government. The Scottish Futures Trust is nowhere to be seen—there is no answer to the parents who want their schools now. The problem is not limited to buildings—it is worse than that, as the impact of efficiency savings must also be taken into account. At First Minister's question time today, Malcolm Chisholm asked a perfectly reasonable question, but he did not get an answer. John Swinney has said: "What might be described as crude cuts in services can in no way pass the test for efficiency savings."— [ Official Report , 20 November 2008; c 12632.]  Parents from five primary schools and the one high school in my constituency have written to me with evidence of what is happening. There has been an increase in their energy bills that was not budgeted for, so they are now in overspend. They have also had to deal with lengthy staff absences. What happened to the SNP manifesto promise of renewables in every school? That would have provided them with greener heat and power and a reduction in their fuel bills. Boroughmuir, Balgreen, Abbeyhill, Flora Stevenson and Roseburn have all experienced a loss of teaching cover. Members of senior management have had to step into day-to-day teaching to cover for posts. Schools have also suffered from cuts in additional support staff such as classroom assistants as well as from reductions in material supplies, neglect of repairs and improvements and reductions in extracurricular activities such as sports. The cuts are having a material impact on the quality of learning. That is happening as a result of this year's cuts. I am not talking about theoretical cuts; I am talking about what has happened this year in Edinburgh. Next year, the SNP-Lib Dem council proposes a 2 per cent efficiency cut. We need solutions and action from the Government now. Parents are calling for the Scottish Government to ensure that all the schools on the list get investment now—either as new schools or as refurbished schools. The settlement that we have heard about this afternoon cannot be the last word. The SNP must act now and consider what is happening outside the Parliament.

Given the key criticism in the commission's report, how can we have confidence that Scotland will meet the 80 per cent carbon reduction target by 2050 if we do not have in place the short-term strategy that the commission identified that we need? Surely ministers must now identify specific carbon reductions across every portfolio? Ministers need to do that if we are to meet our 2050 target and get the early action that we all agree is needed.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it envisages meeting all of its expenditure commitments as outlined in its draft budget for 2009-10. (S3O-5067)

Is the minister aware of a report by the Centre for Public Policy for Regions that highlights the fact that the Scottish Government not only will spend more than its allocated budget but will use 90 per cent of its reserve at the Treasury? Given the expenditure commitments and in the light of the Parliament's vote on Labour's energy efficiency debate on 13 November, what progress has been made on identifying new funding mechanisms to promote an area-based roll-out of energy efficiency measures and microgeneration technology across Scotland, to the order of around £100 million?

In the current economic climate, how can giving away the most commercially successful parts of our forests be good news for skilled jobs and our fragile rural communities? Is this not all about short-term cash for the Government at the expense of access, biodiversity and vital income for the next 18 Scottish Governments?

In this morning's debate in advance of the sea fisheries negotiations, we want to be both positive and supportive. We do not disagree with much in the Scottish National Party's motion, but we note its suggestion that the negotiations are carried out by the Scottish Government. It is actually the UK Government that is responsible for the negotiations. We believe that it is important that any motion that the Parliament passes is accurate, so our amendment reflects the fact that it is team UK that carries out the negotiations. In our amendment, we also note the positive approach that the new UK fisheries minister, Huw Irranca-Davies, has taken since his appointment. His predecessor, Jonathan Shaw, made a positive and constructive contribution in his time, and it was partly his ability to work with people that led not just to our having constructive debates in Scotland but to last year's deal, which we talked about as being a good one for Scotland.  When I spoke to Huw Irranca-Davies, I was impressed by the speed with which he got on the case. He understands both the big picture and the potential impact of decisions on the sustainability of our stocks and our fishing industry's ability to be successful. Like his predecessor, he does not just understand devolution but is committed to making it successful. Reading Hansard , I was struck by his willingness to listen to his colleagues in the House of Commons, not just in terms of geography but in terms of political representation. That bodes well for the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment's work with him. One of the most important markers that Huw Irranca-Davies has laid down is the fact that he will come to Scotland next week to meet the west coast fishermen. I welcome his commitment to supporting them and to tackling Richard Lochhead's point about the severe impact on our west coast fishermen if the European Commission's response to dealing with the fragility of stocks is a draconian closure. There must be another way to address the issue. Our amendment is an add amendment that is intended to keep the spirit of the cabinet secretary's motion. We want to reflect the importance of his and his officials' work in making the case for the Scottish fishing industry, the protection of stocks and biodiversity now and in the future. The cabinet secretary and his officials are a key part of team UK, and their expertise, depth of knowledge and ability to talk regularly to our fishing industry and environmentalists are critical to our putting forward a powerful case in Brussels. When we debated fisheries this time last year, the Labour amendment was passed. That was a first for us, and I hope that it was not a last. At that time, our amendment highlighted the need for the Scottish Government to draw on the full range of expertise in Scotland, including industry, our environmental non-governmental organisations and, crucially, our scientific community. I welcome the effort that the Scottish Government has made in the past year to ensure that those groups work together and are part of our discussions. Throughout last year's budget discussions, and since then, Labour MSPs have pushed the Scottish Government to provide proper financial support so that our fishing fleets can obtain the equipment that they need to fish more sustainably. Last year, we discussed net sizes, fishing effort and the need to demonstrate that we have intelligent fishing approaches and reduced effort that is backed up through monitoring. We also discussed how to tackle the scandal of discards. We need a more sustainable and responsible industry and progress is being made.  It is clear that we need a range of measures that are appropriate to the different marine geography and stocks in different parts of Scotland. The fishing industry has responded to that complex agenda too. Our amendment commends the Scottish Fishermen's Federation's recent environmental statement, which is an important marker that shows that the industry is committed to environmental stewardship and management of our fisheries. Crucially, the industry sees itself and our fishing communities as part of the solution. As the cabinet secretary said, the industry is proactively taking up a raft of environmental measures. Today, we put on the record our support for those initiatives. Our amendment suggests that our fishermen are leading the way in Europe, but that is not just our view. Significantly, that is also recognised by our environmental NGOs. It is clearly the view of the RSPB, whose briefing states: "We believe the Scottish Government and Scottish fishermen are leading the way in trialling new methods to conserve stocks and reduce discards. Although there are signs of recovery in cod stocks they must be allowed to rebuild through precautionary fishing methods." As we move into the final stages of this year's negotiations, we must ensure that we have a constructive and well-made case so that the European Commission understands the effort that has gone into the arguments, which were rehearsed effectively at the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee earlier this month. The cabinet secretary and his colleagues do not have an easy task, but we must get the message across to Brussels that everyone is on board with our approach, both in Scotland and throughout the UK. The detail is vital. The RSPB is right to point out that the cabinet secretary's land more, catch less approach will have to be monitored. It must work for the future of the industry and it must be credible. It cannot just be about stock management. It must also persuade Brussels that we are serious about making stock management successful. In last year's debate, we discussed how to deal with discards. I am glad that the cabinet secretary mentioned that in his speech, but I ask him to reflect on the alternatives that could be developed to ensure that we get the best value from the fish that will now be landed instead of discarded. Not all the fish have a premium value; some are currently regarded as worthless. Some thought about how that fish can be used constructively to get value for our fishermen would be a good initiative. Labour is clear that we need to get certain principles right in the long-term discussions about CFP reform. We need a stronger focus on the  conservation of fish stocks and on long-term viability for fishermen and the associated industries that are so crucial to some of our most fragile parts of rural Scotland. We must not just have a series of prescriptive rules. We need a stable regulatory framework that focuses much more on long-term management planning and involves stakeholders more efficiently. We all agree that we must move away from the annual horse-trading that goes on, which is not good for the future of the industry or for long-term stock management. We must move away from the one-size-fits-all approach towards more regional management, not just in Scotland but beyond. We must consider the different challenges in our regional fisheries in Scotland, but we must do so within a consistent and principled approach for the whole of the UK. When I spoke to Huw Irranca-Davies this week, he was clear that we need stability for our fishing industry in the long term and that our priorities must be North Sea cod and whiting, cod recovery, nephrops and west of Scotland white fish. His commitment to keeping talking to our fishermen directly—as his predecessor did—is good news. I hope that it means that he will have a real grasp of the issues as he goes into his first talks along with our colleagues in the Scottish Government. We all want to achieve the virtuous triangle that Bertie Armstrong mentioned to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee earlier this month. The virtuous triangle is one that sees the fisheries scientists, civil servants in the Scottish Government and the fishing industry working closely together. That joint work is crucial if we are to be successful in the future. We have the whole of team UK behind us, but the negotiations will be tough. We must work hard to persuade the EC that closure of the west coast fisheries is simply unacceptable and cannot be the way forward. We need to be successful in the negotiations because the stakes are high. We support the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's plea for an improved base of scientific knowledge. As we move towards the marine bill, all the key parties accept the need for a better information base. I am keen to hear from the minister how he intends to take that forward. We now have responsibilities out to 200 nautical miles and we are working with the fishing and nature conservation industries to bring their interests together. We must ensure that we have the best information at our fingertips and that we consider not just our fishing interests but the wider sustainability and ecology of the seas around Scotland. The ecological health of our seas must be part of our agenda. We have a clear opportunity to work together and recent  discussions show that there is strong cross-party support for that. We wish the cabinet secretary all the best in his work as part of the UK team to put Scotland's interests at the heart of the discussions. There are many positive comments in the amendments from the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives. I hope that there will be constructive cross-party support for the cabinet secretary. That will show the European Commission that Scotland has a positive, united approach. I move amendment S3M-2966.3, to leave out from "the Scottish Government" to end and insert: "Team UK and in particular the positive approach taken by the new UK Fisheries Minister and the work of the Scottish Government in seeking to negotiate a deal that is fair and just for Scotland's fishing communities, and which will secure sustainable fisheries for Scotland, and commends the Scottish Fishermen's Federation's recent environmental statement and for the leadership and innovation being shown by Scotland's fishermen, demonstrating the way forward for the rest of Europe."

I welcome the announcement that renewable heat can be included in the central heating programme in rural areas. Given that, will the cabinet secretary encourage housing associations and local authorities to include renewables in their new build and refurbishment programmes? Housing associations are being told that Government funding does not provide for renewables.

I hope that MSPs throughout the chamber will support my motion today. My motion calls on "the Scottish Government to take steps, as set out in the Energy Efficiency and Microgeneration Bill proposals, such as fiscal incentives for householders and businesses, to improve the energy efficiency of new and existing housing stock and ensure that microgeneration technologies become widely available and used." My member's bill is drafted, but with the imminent introduction of the climate change bill and John Swinney's announcement that he is prepared to include measures on energy efficiency and microgeneration in that bill, I am keen to work constructively with him to ensure that the measures in my bill are included in the climate change bill. Those measures would greatly strengthen the climate change bill. If we are to have any hope of delivering the 3 per cent annual CO 2 reductions that we need, we must maximise the potential contribution of energy efficiency, microgeneration and local community energy as we move towards becoming a low-carbon society. I have met John Swinney, and although I recognise that he is keen on targets and monitoring, I do not think that there will be any progress to monitor without the other measures in my bill. I am happy to work with him constructively, but I put it on record that I believe that the cabinet secretary has not gone far enough to date. I hope that today's debate will encourage him to go further in the climate change bill. I started work on my member's bill three years ago. I wanted to tackle climate change and fuel poverty and I believed at that point that we had achieved a huge amount with our main target of generating 20 per cent of our electricity from renewables, which we achieved early. However, making the shift to becoming a low-carbon society means that we need to involve people in the clean energy debate. We need to bring home to people  their personal role and ability to tackle climate change. It will be a big cultural shift, but having spoken to colleagues at countless meetings throughout the country, I know that there is a powerful appetite for change. Housing associations can demonstrate that measures in new houses, such as high energy efficiency standards and microgeneration technologies, lead to warmer homes, cheaper bills and reduced CO 2 emissions. When I started work on my bill, every 5 per cent increase in domestic fuel bills led to 30,000 more people being dragged into fuel poverty. Energy bills have shot up and Energy Action Scotland now believes that every 5 per cent increase in fuel bills leads to 40,000 more households being dragged into fuel poverty. The tragedy is that we have the powers in Scotland to do something about that, but we are not using them to the full. We have targets to reduce our carbon emissions by 80 per cent by 2050 and to increase electricity from renewables to 50 per cent by 2020. If we are to have a chance of achieving those targets, we have to tackle our housing stock. Our homes account for 34 per cent of our energy demand and a third of our emissions. Microgeneration schemes and combined heat and power schemes are efficient, because the power and heat that they produce do not have to be transported long distances across the grid. They can also produce much-needed base-load. We have made progress in the past three years. I thank the MSPs from all parties who have supported me. I thank members of my party, the socialist environment and resources association and the trade unions, who have campaigned consistently over the years. I refer to my entry in the register of members' interests and thank in particular the organisations that agreed to form a steering committee to help campaign for my bill—Energy Action Scotland, Energywatch, Friends of the Earth, WWF Scotland, Barnardo's, Age Concern Scotland and the Scottish Renewables Forum. Their support and advice have been invaluable to me. We have secured a number of significant wins, but the work needs to continue. Planning guidelines that have been in place since March 2007 now require all major developments to include on-site renewables to reduce CO 2 emissions. Research by Friends of the Earth, however, shows that the guidelines are not being applied consistently by every local authority. We need all authorities to follow the examples of Edinburgh and Midlothian. We have had progressive increases in the amount of money allocated to the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative; we have had the renewables pilot for the warm deal in rural areas that are not on the grid; and we  have had the recent announcement from Gordon Brown of a major energy efficiency programme. That programme needs to be followed by action, which is why my colleague Lewis Macdonald has been lobbying the major power utility companies to ensure that we get the full benefits of it in Scotland. Only last month, the United Kingdom Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, Ed Miliband, gave the green light to feed-in tariffs, renewable heat incentives and a roll-out of smart meters. Although it is clear that things are happening, barriers remain—not enough trained installers, not enough advice to householders, and none of the economies of scale for renewables kit that a mass market would bring. There is still planning red tape. SNP ministers' draft proposals to cut the red tape were roundly criticised—we are still waiting for the final Scottish statutory instrument, and it would be great if ministers would tell us today when it is coming. Let us make no mistake: jobs are at stake, particularly in the microwind industry, and jobs will go if we do not get fast action from ministers. I hope that we will get that fast progress. We are still waiting for the much-vaunted energy efficiency strategy. I quote my opposite number, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, who said in 2004 that "energy efficiency is the missing link in the Scottish Government's efforts to tackle climate change and fuel poverty." Again, we are waiting. A lot has been done, but there is a lot still to do. We urgently need fiscal measures to get going so that householders and businesses can install energy efficiency measures and microgeneration kit. People in England are far ahead of us. They have that power, through council tax reductions, and we need the same opportunities in Scotland. Energy efficiency and microgeneration go together. If we are to tackle climate change and fuel poverty, we need to amend the climate change bill. I am very keen to work with Scottish National Party ministers. We need to make sure that change happens through collective will in this Parliament. We want to ensure that we benefit from jobs, reduce fuel poverty and lower our carbon emissions. There is a great industry out there that is waiting for us to take action. I move, That the Parliament recognises the significant role that energy efficiency and microgeneration measures could have in reducing energy costs for householders and businesses, in achieving urgent reductions in greenhouse gas emissions of at least 80% by 2050 and contributing to the eradication of fuel poverty by 2016; notes that research carried out by the Energy Savings Trust suggests that  widespread installation of microgeneration could provide 30 to 40% of our electricity needs by 2050 but that current investment in energy efficiency and microgeneration measures is insufficient to achieve these goals, and calls on the Scottish Government to take steps, as set out in the Energy Efficiency and Microgeneration Bill proposals, such as fiscal incentives for householders and businesses, to improve the energy efficiency of new and existing housing stock and ensure that microgeneration technologies become widely available and used.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with City of Edinburgh Council regarding investment in school infrastructure. (S3O-4595)

Following on from that answer and the previous answer from the cabinet secretary, is the minister aware that, only yesterday, the City of Edinburgh Council announced that it faces a £20 million funding gap due to the credit crunch alone? Given that the council was already unable to fund major investment in schools such as Boroughmuir high school, in my constituency, James Gillespie's high school, to which Mike Pringle referred, and Portobello high school, what help does the Scottish Government intend to offer the council? If the Government's attitude is that school building has nothing to do with it and is a matter for the council, what comfort can it offer to parents of children in the schools that I have mentioned? Which of the 250 projects to which the cabinet secretary referred will happen in Edinburgh?

It is a real pity that Rob Gibson and Alex Neil did not listen to John Swinney when he quoted from Alistair Darling's letter. It is easy to score petty political points in a debate such as this, but if we are really debating the future of the banking system, let us listen to what the bankers have been saying, let us understand the dynamics of the system and let us have a much more critical and honest discussion of why the banks in this country have gone wrong over the past few years. Let us have that discussion; let us not have simple points scoring. Corporate social responsibility should not just be a paragraph at the end of an annual report; the idea should inform the values that all our banks work to uphold. Gordon Brown was right to criticise excessive short-termism, the culture of massive bonuses and the lack of long-term investment, which are not in the interests of ordinary shareholders. As John Park said, those shareholders are the staff of the banks and are among the thousands upon thousands of Scottish consumers who have shares as part of their pensions packages. All our local authorities have pensions tied up in the banks. There are huge issues to be debated. However, as Pauline McNeill said, the debate has been about how much we care for HBOS. That is not what the debate should be about. It should be about what the Scottish Parliament can do to support the people who are currently in charge of the banking system, to work with the UK Government, and to work with the trade unions, so that we can ensure that the maximum number of jobs stay in Edinburgh and Scotland, and so that we can ensure that the maximum amount of headquarters functions stay in Edinburgh. We should also be considering what we can do to support the banking sector in Scotland—not just to stay here, but to attract more jobs and to invest more. We have to be positive about what Edinburgh and Scotland can offer and not simply adopt a defensive posture. These are tough times, but people expect us to do what we can and not just to moan. We have to get on to the front foot. The Scottish banking system is part of our identity—there is a lot to be proud of. The system is linked to our legal and higher education institutions. As an Edinburgh MSP, I completely understand how tough the past few years have been. We have had the Lloyds TSB shake-up, we have had demutualisation of Standard Life and,  most recently, we have had the takeover of Scottish & Newcastle. Times have been tough for our major traditional companies in the city. It is not our job to tell them exactly how they should operate or how they should be structured: our job is to support them and to work with the UK Government to ensure that the framework is right. Parliament has to do what it can in terms of investment, in order to keep Edinburgh attractive and to maintain relations between Glasgow and Edinburgh and the rest of central Scotland. People have to want to invest here.

No, thank you. I have only one minute left. No bank will invest out of sentiment, but they will invest if we have good schools, good public transport and good housing to offer to their staff. They will invest if we have high-class transferable skills, and if we give people the confidence to work in the industry. That is why I want the Scottish Government to do more on investment and it is why we do not want the local income tax, which would set us back. It is why we have been so angry about the lack of progress in investment and about the diversion that has been caused by the Scottish Futures Trust. We need practical investment. It was an irony to hear Mike Rumbles quoting from George Kerevan and posing consumer expenditure and public expenditure as alternatives. Surely we need both. Consumers will be confident if they have jobs and if they can afford to pay their mortgages or rents and their taxes. We need to invest now to make a difference, so I call on the Scottish Government to consider housing in particular. The SNP-Liberal council here in Edinburgh has a new plan to ensure that we can invest in housing, but it will require investment from the Scottish Government. We have to put the £100 million that Alex Salmond launched a couple of months ago in context. We have criticised the announcement for not involving real money. We need huge amounts of money in Edinburgh every year—£83 million in 2009-10 and £95 million in 2010-11. That would give local companies the money to invest. They are not getting the money from the banks now, so we need to play our part in ensuring that the money comes through the public sector. That is what the Scottish Government should focus on.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

For colleagues' information, let me first welcome Rhoda Grant to the Labour rural and environment team. Rhoda Grant will help to provide maternity cover for Karen Gillon, while the latter recovers from the successful arrival last week of Johann Maggie. I am sure that members will want to join me in recording our best wishes to Karen and her family. It is a sobering thought that, although last year's foot-and-mouth outbreak did not reach Scotland, we were heavily affected by its impact. Therefore, the Scudamore report is a welcome review of what lessons we can learn for the future and what priorities the Scottish Government should act on to prepare for, and to avoid, such outbreaks in future. Obviously, last year's outbreak caused major economic damage to our farming industry, our rural communities and the operation of many companies. Clearly, it was a horrendous time for communities financially and it caused much uncertainty for businesses. The after-effects are still being felt by many. As the cabinet secretary observed, the circumstances of last year's outbreak were different from those of the 2001 outbreak, but the impact was still severe. A welcome conclusion that can be drawn from the Scudamore report is that, although it lists 55 recommendations in total, there is clear evidence of lessons having been learned from the 2001 outbreak. I join the cabinet secretary in putting on record our praise for how the many agencies, farmers and communities dealt with the crisis last year. However, it is obvious that improvements could be made in how we gear up to avoid another outbreak. The Labour amendment draws attention to two areas in which we consider that more work is needed to create better options for the future, and it also highlights the need to help the pig industry, which is still suffering from the aftermath of the  outbreak. We deliberately lodged an add amendment because we have taken at face value the Scottish Government's intention to make progress on the recommendations in the report. Although we agree with the two points that are highlighted in the motion—namely, the consideration of regionalisation and of other steps to minimise future disruption to the livestock industry—we have attempted to focus debate on the issues that we believe would help those points to be taken forward. In particular, the issue of abattoirs needs to be addressed. As we have discussed several times in the current parliamentary session, the location of abattoirs goes to the heart of the issue about the long journeys that our animals need to travel to slaughter. We believe that a more localised approach would add value to animal welfare and would be better for local farming communities. I will come on to say what we think needs to be done later in my comments. Secondly, we have highlighted the unique circumstances of our islands, which must be central to any future discussions on regionalisation. The islands are the easiest place to start with that. There is an extremely strong case for allowing a regionalised approach to kick in at the start of any future problem. Thirdly, our amendment highlights the need to support the pig sector. As recently as yesterday, the NFU Scotland made representations to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee on the case for action. As Scudamore acknowledges, regionalisation is not a simple issue. Our view is that we must be careful in considering the implications of such an approach. Clearly, we share an island with England and Wales and our food chains are highly centralised. In addition, the market for much of our livestock—particularly of the sheep industry, as last month's report from the Royal Society of Edinburgh highlighted—is down south. Therefore, there would be challenges in going for a simplistic approach to regionalisation. The most recent outbreak never reached Scotland or the north of England, but the livestock distribution chains, the strategy of containment and the importance of consumer confidence were such that the whole country was deeply affected. More thought needs to be given to the issue. We have consistently argued that the Scottish Government could have done more to support our farming industry last year. Faster action should have been taken. In fact, we believe that last year's outbreak made the case for devolved Government. As the minister has highlighted, our actions must be an integral part of the GB response to dealing with the big picture of the crisis, but we must have flexibility to initiate  support for farmers who are experiencing a harsher climate and may face more problems as any crisis drags on. Recommendation 42 highlights the fact that the Scottish Government should recognise that, especially if foot-and-mouth disease occurs at certain critical times of the year, there should be a trigger point for a welfare scheme. The trigger point should be set out in the Scottish Government's FMD contingency plans. I hope that the minister will accept that recommendation. One lesson that can be learned is that, depending on the time of year, our agriculture industry can be hit particularly badly, as happened last year. We strongly support recommendation 42. Labour MPs and MSPs lobbied the UK Government on the particular issue of relaxing the rules on driver hours. We recognised that when animal movements were allowed again, there would be a huge backlog and swift action would be needed to enable the industry to get back on its feet and start to deal with the backlog as swiftly as possible. Again, the report recommends that trigger points be established jointly with DEFRA and the Department for Transport. We would be interested to know what progress has been made there to ensure that if a derogation is needed, it would be a straightforward issue and could be swiftly secured. We believe that the role of the Scottish Government is crucial in creating a more viable and sustainable industry. That is why, in all the debates on farming over the past few months, such as on LFASS and the rural development programme, we have highlighted the particular issue of local abattoirs. I am glad that the cabinet secretary mentioned them in his speech. The issue of local abattoirs across the country must be considered. The matter commands cross-party support and is part of a joined-up approach to local food procurement. If we are going to get sustainable, viable markets for our livestock industry, we need to complement the existing retail and processing opportunities for our farming communities and have a more localised approach. The matter should not be left up to individual communities; there should be a strategic approach that links agricultural policy more securely with rural development policy and economic development policy more generally. We understand the economic logic of our existing food chains, which is why we think that there needs to be Scottish Government intervention if we are to see new markets and new food supply chains being established. We understand that there are no easy options in debates on regionalisation—that point is highlighted in the Scudamore report—but work must be done on those issues.  We particularly think that our islands need to be protected from the worst impact of foot-and-mouth disease. Because they are not part of the main European epidemiological unit, there should be opportunities for negotiating opt-outs from an early stage. That should just be a given, unless there are arguments that would override that. The presumption needs to be shifted. One of the key sets of recommendations in the Scudamore report concerns the review of the concordats that govern relationships between the UK and Scottish Governments. We have now had two full sessions of the Scottish Parliament and two outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease during that time. We agree that this is an appropriate time to review the effectiveness of the concordats. We welcome the fact that discussions are continuing. I will not spend much time talking about the importance of relationships between the UK Government departments, because the cabinet secretary highlighted that. A fascinating part of the report recommends the drafting of "a guidance paper on relationships with the Devolved Administrations in order to stress the importance of respecting confidentiality and of being as open as possible." I am sure that if we talked to all the ministers around the UK Governments, they would each have examples of areas in which they would have liked to have seen guidance that would have helped to achieve a balanced approach. On the Liberal Democrat amendment, having read the Scudamore report, we believe that a number of options must be considered, and different options are set out in the report. We will not support the Liberal Democrat amendment without consideration of other parts of the equation. It is not that we are hostile to considering devolving a proportion of the animal health budget; we think that now is the right time to discuss the matter. However, what is the answer to recommendations 35, 36, 37 and 49, for example? It seems to us that we must consider all the issues together rather than pick one element. As the cabinet secretary highlighted, there are both complexities and dangers in going down the route that the Liberal Democrats suggest, so we want it to be considered properly. As one of the parties to the Calman commission, we would want the suggestion to be looked at in the round, alongside other devolution issues. We are not against discussing the issue—now is the right time to do so—and the Scudamore report puts it centre stage for this debate, but we think that more work is required and we do not believe in an incremental approach. Every time that somebody suggests that something—either devolved or reserved—needs to be sent one way or the other, we must take a proper, coherent approach.  There are issues in the report that need action. Looking back, it is much easier to see where the actions needed to be taken—that is always the case. However, we welcome the fact that, a year on, we now have an independent report. We would like the Scottish Government to identify which of the recommendations it will implement and what the timetable is for that. Finally, on the fact that there are still industries that are suffering from last year's outbreak, our amendment refers to the need for practical help for our pig industry. Only yesterday, representatives of the pig industry called on the Scottish Government to do more to help out. The minister established a pig task force, but our understanding is that it has not done what the NFUS thinks needs to be done to support farmers who are still struggling. We have not been specific or prescriptive, but we think that it would be a good move if the Parliament as a whole supported action this afternoon and called on the Scottish Government to do more. The NFUS believes that its case is well argued and that there are precedents. I move amendment S3M-2635.3, to leave out from "to minimise" to end and insert: "such as the role that local abattoirs might play and the unique circumstances of Scotland's islands; notes however the continuing difficulties experienced by the pig industry, and calls on the Scottish Government to take urgent action to support the Scottish pig industry and to consider further action to minimise the potential future disruption to the Scottish livestock industry."

Will the cabinet secretary listen to the farmers who tell us that the qualifying criteria for his system mean that many new entrants are simply not eligible to apply?

I thank the Minister for Environment for the courtesy of advance sight of his statement. Labour members very much welcome the minister's change of heart on the abolition of the Crofters Commission, and we welcome his statement about the release of land for more crofting. We welcome, too, the direction to the commission to deal with the worst cases of dereliction. Finally, I welcome the minister's commitment on the completion of a register, although I would be keen to know the completion date. The statement raises many issues. In particular, how will making the Crofters Commission more cumbersome, bureaucratic and time consuming, with lengthier decision making, help crofters? Will the minister confirm that he is pushing the most difficult decisions to new sub-committees, meaning that individual crofters will be required to regulate their neighbours? Will he provide details of how his proposed 80-odd commissioners will be funded, how the appointments will be made and how they will operate in practice? That is not clear in the statement or in the accompanying documentation. Does the minister not recognise that crofters are worried about how they will survive economically, not how many people are in the pie of individual decision making? I ask the minister to think again about his suggestion that we centralise the crofting counties agricultural grant scheme in Edinburgh. Is there not a better argument for integrated practical financial support for crofters? Finally, we want to study the minister's detailed response before we come to a view, particularly on the issue of burdens, and we will want to consult crofters further. I hope that the minister takes on board our request for full consultation before he introduces his proposals in a draft bill. The devil is in the detail, and it is vital that we get the detail right. While we welcome elements of the minister's statement, many big questions remain that need proper discussion and debate before we get to the stage of a draft bill.

It will never happen.

I want to focus on three points this afternoon: the importance of HBOS and Lloyds TSB to the wider Scottish economy and, crucially, to Edinburgh's economy; what MSPs can do not just to support the retention of jobs but to bolster the banking and financial sectors in Edinburgh for the future; and protection for staff and customers now and over the coming weeks.  I cannot be alone in feeling that it was completely surreal how swiftly events unfolded last week as we were in the chamber. We cannot underestimate the massive uncertainty that was created for people who work for HBOS and Lloyds TSB and their customers. I was involved in a radio debate last week in which a financial commentator was critical of MSPs' emotional statements. That was not a fair characterisation of the chamber's response, which I thought was measured. People in the banking industry are anxious and they need coherent, sensible responses from us. They also need to know that we are on their side and that we are lobbying to demand fairness around the future of their jobs. Thousands of staff are at their desks, dealing with uncertainty and worries about their personal situations, but working hard to deliver business as usual for their companies and the many customers who come in and out. That is why, whatever happens in the medium to long term, it was important that immediate action was taken last week to protect the bank. Tough questions need to be asked. We need more transparency and accountability in our banking and finance systems. Alistair Darling was absolutely right to focus on the need for a business and enterprise culture that rewards people for taking the right long-term decisions, not just short-term ones. We need to have a debate about bonuses, not on the basis of envy but on the basis of fairness to customers, investors and the thousands of HBOS shareholders who are ordinary staff who hold shares as part of their pay deal. It is an anxious time for those staff. I well remember the presentation that many of us attended only a few months ago at a business breakfast in the Parliament when Susan Rice of Lloyds TSB shared with us the Lloyds TSB strategy. She observed at the time—she was slightly self-deprecating about this—that people in the City regarded Lloyds TSB as being a bit too cautious and conservative. Her view was that in a time of coming financial crisis and global turbulence in the markets, it was absolutely right to be cautious with her investors' money. How right that sensible banking approach has proven to be. We need to focus on what the Scottish Parliament and our ministers can do now, and our debate must focus on the role of HBOS and Lloyds TSB in not just the Edinburgh economy but the wider Scottish economy. In recent years, we have seen major reorganisations, shake-ups and company changes involving Standard Life and Scottish and Newcastle, and the Scottish Widows-Lloyds TSB deal. It is critical that we support the financial and banking sectors in Edinburgh, which are hugely  important to our local economy and to the economies of Fife, central Scotland and Glasgow. That is why, throughout the first three sessions of Parliament, we have lobbied consistently to support development in Edinburgh. It is now critical that we ensure that Edinburgh remains attractive to the banking and financial sectors. It is not just about rivalling Frankfurt or the City of London; it is about complementing that approach by promoting our city's attractiveness as a banking and financial services area. Headquarters status is important for prestige and for the seniority of the jobs that we can retain in the city. However, a raft of other jobs need to be retained in the legal, advertising and wider services sectors, including the hotel and catering industry. We need to lobby for as many of the HQ functions as possible to be retained in our city. There are areas in which we can deliver practically. I would like to hear more from the SNP ministers in their summing up about skills and training, which are essential for people who are in the industry and critical for attracting more jobs. It is important that we have a highly skilled labour force. We have fantastic universities in the city and throughout Scotland. We need to ensure that there is access to new jobs for the future across the whole of central Scotland. Transport connectivity is crucial, too. That is why the business community was so supportive of transport upgrades over the past few years, such as investment in trams and in public transport to Fife and Glasgow. That investment must continue—in fact, it must be accelerated. This is also about quality of life. That is why investment in new schools and infrastructure is absolutely crucial. I ask the Scottish Government to assist the City of Edinburgh Council, because we need investment in new schools. There is no prospect of revamping or rebuilding Boroughmuir high school, James Gillespie's high school and Portobello high school. They all need major investment and the council simply does not have enough money. Investment in new housing is also needed to enable people to remain in the city, rather than having to leave. Over the past decade, we have seen massive investment in the city in skills, transport, schools and housing. We have built a reputation, which, like the quality of life in the city, must be defended. SNP ministers have to work with our council to give us sustained, long-term public investment and to ensure that we match investment in the private sector. That is what we will be looking for from this Government. We will work with it to deliver, but it needs to make more investment in practical public services now.

I welcome the First Minister's commitment to work to secure the HBOS headquarters, which is in my constituency, and to secure jobs in Edinburgh and the wider Scottish economy. Will the First Minister join me in acknowledging the good work that HBOS carries out outwith its core banking functions? That work is not insignificant. Will he acknowledge that the HBOS Foundation has invested massive amounts in cultural and community organisations in Edinburgh and across Scotland? Consideration of that must be part of the work that is done to secure the HBOS HQ in Edinburgh.

The cabinet secretary is not enthusiastic about the suggestion that there should be any targets or objectives for the delivery of local food procurement. Will he tell us how much local food procurement will be delivered through his new contracts process?

Will the member take an intervention? That is not what I said.

I will draw an analogy with fishing. For eight years, the cabinet secretary lectured the UK Government. The first thing he did when he got into power was welcome the first set of negotiations. This is about constructive working and putting forward one's case positively.

I am delighted to speak to our amendment. I was most interested that, in rejecting it, the cabinet secretary did not address all of it. I will speak first about our proposal to amend the motion from "welcomes the publication on 18 September 2008 of the Scottish Government's consultation on the Less Favoured Area Support Scheme" to "notes the publication" of that consultation. We are not prepared to welcome the consultation document that the cabinet secretary spoke about before we have had time to digest it and to ascertain whether it is going in the right direction. It might not be the cabinet secretary's fault—I know how these things happen—but we received the document as we were lodging our amendment for the debate. I do not think that that is good enough. With a statement, we would at least have had the courtesy of having an hour to cast our eyes over it before formulating a detailed approach. I will return later to the SRDP. We believe that there is an urgent need to fix the problems that have emerged over the summer, which are of the cabinet secretary's making, not that of the previous Scottish Government. We heard not a word from the cabinet secretary on our suggestion that a significant percentage of food should be required to be sourced locally, nor on our reference to fairly traded products. I will return to both those points in detail. We reserve our position on the Liberal Democrat amendment. We very much support the objectives that it is attempting to achieve. We will wait to hear what the Minister for Environment has to say. We have been here before, with a request for urgent action followed by a longer-term framework. I checked my e-mail this morning and my briefing note from the Scottish Government arrived at 11.57 last night. I was not at my computer to check my e-mails that late; I will read the briefing  note during the debate. From what the cabinet secretary said, I did not hear much to reassure me, and I will listen carefully to Mike Russell, who I understand will sum up the debate. We in the Scottish Labour Party believe that proper support is needed for our farming and crofting communities to enable them to survive a really tough economic climate. The decisions on how support should be allocated must be taken on the basis of the public good, and the process must be transparent and fair, not only for regions within Scotland but in relation to the wider global economy. We do not believe that it should be left to market forces to sort out the right levels of food production; getting the intervention right is the challenge, and it is not straightforward, as the cabinet secretary has said. We in Labour believe that there is a role for proper regulation to ensure fair competition and a level playing field for high-quality environmental outcomes. If we do not deliver high-quality environmental outcomes at the start, the state—we as taxpayers—will have to clean up the environment later, and we do not think that that is the way to go. We believe that there is a role for the payment of subsidies to people who are engaged in active land management or farming—but not simply because they once owned their farm, and without any consideration of what they do now. Every farmer who has spoken to me on the matter is frustrated and angry about the fact that people who went out of business some time ago are still receiving money despite not carrying out one jot of farming. That has to be sorted. I agree with the cabinet secretary that a series of interesting and useful reports and analysis has been provided over the past few weeks. That analysis of what has been happening over the past two years on our hills and in the communities that rely on active farming and crofting for a key part of their economic activity presents us with a good backdrop to the debate. The NFUS response to those reports has also been published, and Scottish Environment LINK has produced a paper, "Beyond the CAP". This discussion should be centre stage in the Parliament, as it goes to the heart of the existence of so many communities. We believe that if we are to have vibrant rural communities in our hills and rural areas, we need a joined-up approach. Active land management, farming and crofting are crucial, but we need to integrate those with other areas of policy. That comes out loud and clear from the RSE's report. We agree with the society that we need a land use strategy. However, as an ex-planner, I point out that it is not enough to have a joined-up land use strategy; key policy direction to inform that strategy is also required.  If consideration of climate change must come first, that will drive issues around having more forestry—Mike Russell will perhaps wish to address that at the end of the debate. We need more forestry, but we also need to retain hill farms. That must be a national directive on that point. The current situation is very difficult for farmers. Fuel prices have been all over the place—it has been very difficult to predict them from week to week, never mind from year to year. It has also been difficult to predict what return people will get from planting crops or rearing cattle when prices and the money that producers get from market are so volatile. Almost the only thing that people know this year is that the prices that they will get next year will be completely different. Some people will get higher prices; others will get lower prices. We need to have some intervention and to focus on the lack of certainty over the prices that people get from retailers and processors. Labour believes that we need alternative markets for our local industries through the retailing industry. That is why the second part of our amendment is so crucial. We need an approach to public procurement of food that creates a fair and stable market for local producers. I am disappointed that we did not hear one word from the cabinet secretary on that issue, which is crucial for hill farms as well as for the rest of the agriculture industry in Scotland. The issue is not just better prices for farmers but lower prices for consumers—that is another issue to which the cabinet secretary did not refer. We want nutritious, sustainably produced food and a level playing field for our farmers, so that they are not undercut by producers of poor-quality products who do not respect the local environment or who pay exploitative wages. We understand that there are challenges. I suspect that members of all parties could talk about why this is a difficult time. However, the issue is what comes next, which is where our analysis departs from that of the cabinet secretary. It is clear to us that our approach in future should be underpinned by an acknowledgement of the need for viable rural communities. We need to support farming activity in a way that supports economic and social viability in communities and relies on an integrated approach to economic development. That is why, on my first reading of the consultation document that was published today, I am concerned that it suggests that support for farming and agricultural activity should take no account of the wider social implications of funding. The two issues must be tied together. We have no problem in principle with changing the LFASS and we understand the EU's determination to ensure that money for less favoured areas—a huge proportion of the EU  budget—goes to those areas and not to areas that do not need financial support. However, not one Labour member will support the Scottish National Party member's motion that suggests that the Scottish Government's approach to EU funding and CAP reform is constructive while the UK Government's approach is completely wrong. For the same reason, we cannot support the Tory amendment, which displays no understanding of the fundamental inequality and waste of money that are at the heart of the CAP and which make the system in such urgent need of reform. The underfunding of LFAs in Scotland and the CAP regime go back to negotiations and deals that were struck years ago—indeed, as far back as the previous Tory Government. We need no lectures from colleagues on the Tory benches. I talked to Gavin McCrone, one of the authors of the RSE report, on the day the report was published. It was clear that none of us understands the rationale for why Ireland and Austria receive so much more support than we do.

No, thank you. The starting point in the next round of talks must be what makes the best sense if we are to get the best deal for Scotland. The UK Government makes clear criticisms of the CAP with which we can identify. It is not as much about what happens in this country as it is about what happens throughout Europe. We need to ensure that the financial burden on our taxpayers falls on European taxpayers too. It is not right or fair that our taxpayers must contribute to a system that does not put enough into agri-environment and hill farming in Scotland while supporting other European countries. As I made clear, there is a strong role for public financial support for our hill farmers and agricultural communities, but support must be provided on the basis of public benefit.

I do not accept for a minute that our current Labour Government has failed to fight for Scotland's rural communities. For the past eight years members have endured lectures from Richard Lochhead about what does not happen at UK level, but he is cabinet secretary now and his job is to work constructively with the UK  Government. We have heard a lot of bluster, but Scottish hill farmers are going out of business on his watch. His job is not to lecture other people but to put in place the structures and support that will keep farms in business. The debate is about the long term and the short term. I would have a bit more respect for the cabinet secretary if he had offered more support for the Liberal Democrat amendment and for the comments in the Labour amendment about sustainable procurement. We are happy to support the overall thrust of the Scottish Government's motion, but we want to ensure that the cabinet secretary does what he can do now. All members remember the promises that the SNP made before the election. We know how long it took the cabinet secretary to deal with foot-and-mouth disease. Pig farmers had to wait for a package of support. Farming communities who read the SNP manifesto and thought that they would do well are still waiting for a properly funded new entrants scheme for farmers. The SNP changed the SRDP, which is not the same document as the one that we left for the new Administration to consider. The approach is more restrictive, it requires people to apply on-line, and it lacks transparency. The cabinet secretary is the only member who does not get it; farmers are coming to the rest of us to say, "It's not working and it's not fair." The cabinet secretary could take action now. We do not need a lecture about the UK Government, which is going into bat to ensure that our taxpayers, farmers and producing communities get a good deal. The cabinet secretary's job is to stand up for Scotland, say what is particular about our mountainous regimes and crofting communities and tell the story about why Scottish farmers need support as part of wider public policy. His job is to secure local procurement. We need answers from the cabinet secretary, not the stale arguments that we have heard from him during the past eight years. He is in charge now and things are happening on his watch. We do not want him just to criticise others; we want him to act. I move amendment S3M-2553.2, to leave out from "and welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the publication on 18 September 2008 of the Scottish Government's consultation on the Less Favoured Area Support Scheme; calls on the Scottish Government to simplify and streamline the Rural Development Programme (RDP) application process and to clarify the decision-making process to ensure transparency, effectiveness and fairness in the distribution of RDP allocations; further calls on the Scottish Government to set targets for public sector food procurement that would deliver a significant percentage of locally sourced and fairly traded produce, and encourages stakeholders to work in partnership to consider the range of relevant economic, social and environmental issues with the aim of securing a sustainable  future for agriculture on our hills and in our remote communities."

To ask the Scottish Executive what funding support is available for traditional community-based Scottish arts to ensure that our culture survives into the future. (S3O-4038)

The Scottish Arts Council has refused funding applications for some groups and is carrying out a review of the sector, and traditional community-based arts groups are worried that they may simply disappear. Does the minister acknowledge that what makes community-based Scottish arts groups significant is people's aspiration to participate in our traditional culture and not simply be spectators?

Labour welcomes the proposed legislation on climate change, flooding and the marine environment that will focus on protecting our environment for the long-term benefit of our economy and our people. Labour would also have introduced bills on those matters. The key issue for Labour will be whether the SNP Government gets the principles and the details right. Our support will therefore be conditional. We look forward to the committee debates. I agree with colleagues that we need to reflect on what is not in the programme. A promise to consult on crofting legislation has been made and I noticed Alasdair Allan's nervousness about that. I caution ministers not to get carried away by their own enthusiasm; rather, they should consult crofters before they produce a draft bill. Highland Labour MSPs consulted crofters over the summer and ministers must now listen and act on their concerns. It is not only the legislation that will be crucial. How the Government acts and leads will determine whether we meet the ambitious target that the SNP has set on climate change or whether there will simply be a lot of hot air. Our criticism has been constructive. We have said that the SNP has made bold promises but has failed to make progress in key areas. It has failed to make progress on renewables in every public building, starting with our schools. It has made a timid and slow response to lifting the burden of red tape  from householders who are keen to do their bit and benefit from micropower. Respondents to the Scottish Government's consultation slated the proposals. The Government has also failed to make progress on its own electricity contract. It is not only dumping the commitment in the previous three Labour-Lib Dem contracts to secure 100 per cent of the electricity in question from renewables, but it is not even saying what the lowest threshold is to power companies that are competing for the contract. That is a big step back for renewables. The SNP is still not delivering policies even to begin to meet its ambitious target of 3 per cent year-on-year reductions in carbon emissions, and it has taken transport decisions that are sending us in the wrong direction. That the First Minister did not even mention sustainable transport in his statement was striking. Furthermore, he has given no answer today to the 20,000 people who have made submissions to the Scottish Government's climate change consultation calling for stronger action to be taken in the bill on targets, aviation and on greenhouse gases other than carbon dioxide.

No, thank you. I have just started. The climate change challenge is not to talk boldly about it, but to prepare for it and do everything that we can now to prevent the catastrophic changes that scientists have been warning us about for years through the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. We need joined-up action and partnership in the chamber and outside it. It is important that the SNP resists the temptation to play constitutional games with the marine bill in particular. We need partnership working with the UK Government and a joined-up approach to our environmental obligations. A good precedent has been set with the climate change bill, but that must be followed through in the handling of the marine bill. None of our marine stakeholders, fishing and environmental organisations and business communities want to be pawns in the SNP's game of constitutional chess. On flooding, Labour was critical of the SNP's funding arrangements. We hope that the SNP will listen to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's sensible suggestions on that. Unprecedented flooding hit our road and rail infrastructure this summer. It simply is not good enough for the Scottish Government to tell us again that local authorities are adequately funded through the concordat. For starters, railways are not even run by the local authorities. People across the length and breadth of Scotland have seen journeys disrupted and areas flooded that  are not on the list of vulnerable areas. We do not need an admonition from the Minister for Environment that everything is fine, when it patently is not. I said that we would be constructive, and we welcome the First Minister's agreement that we need to work together across the chamber on climate change. This week, for the first time, the north pole has become an island. We have had years of warnings about it, and now it is in its death spiral. There is graphic evidence of the change in our marine environment. That change might be less dramatic in Scotland, but it is there nonetheless. The challenge is how we make the radical and fast changes that are needed. Marine biologists have reported changes in our seas and we know from our fishing communities that the changes are happening. Farmers and gardeners can see the seasonal changes, and scientists report changes in biodiversity, with some species already under pressure. We need action now. The SNP needs to move beyond monitoring our carbon outputs to making major reductions in them. It is a paradigm shift and we must urgently get rid of the attitude that it is business as usual. Our economy is already under pressure and the challenge is to make the changes by reducing carbon output. As many colleagues have said, families are already feeling the pressure of rising energy prices. Gas and electricity prices are up by 30 per cent. The First Minister was long on blame for the UK Government, but painfully short on what he will do. When I started work on my member's bill on energy efficiency and microgeneration, the one statistic in my mind was that a 5 per cent increase in domestic fuel prices led to 30,000 families being dragged into fuel poverty. However, a 5 per cent increase now drags 40,000 families into fuel poverty. When I met the cabinet secretary last year, he said he would oppose my bill but look favourably on some of its proposals. A year on, a bill has been drafted, but we have not yet had the raft of measures to give every householder and small businessperson the financial support to tackle energy efficiency issues or to put microgeneration technologies on their roofs or in their houses. We need action now. Energy use is the biggest source of CO 2 emissions in our existing building stock and we cannot keep just talking about it—we must do something about it. The Scottish Parliament and Government have the competence to act on the issue, but there is no commitment to deliver the changes in the climate change bill. I would like to see movement. There is cross-party support and support across a wealth of organisations on the environment, fuel poverty and the renewables industry. Let us see strong and bold action now; otherwise we have no prospect of reaching the challenging target that we have all signed up to of  a reduction of 80 per cent in carbon emissions by 2050. We need progress now.

We very much welcome the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's report, which is timely given that the Pitt report, which contains recommendations arising from the experience in England last summer, was published only this week. There are echoes there of Roseanna Cunningham's point about the need for better awareness and flood warning systems, which need to be reviewed and overhauled in Scotland, too. There is now much greater awareness, not just in the Parliament but among the wider public, of the practical implications of climate change, which have been highlighted over the past few years. We can now see evidence that change is taking place. That comes out strongly in the committee's report. There are warmer temperatures and heavier, more concentrated rainfall, particularly in the west of the country. Those things are not just on the way; they are beginning to happen. In addition, the introduction of the Scottish Government's flooding bill is imminent. For Labour members, flooding legislation is unfinished business, although steady progress was made during the previous session, particularly on improving early warning, and expenditure on flooding was significantly increased. Our legislation, however, is now profoundly outdated and is no longer fit for purpose. Anyone with personal experience of flooding and its aftermath will know the human misery and the huge economic costs that major flooding incidents can bring. The financial impact can be severe both for householders and for businesses. The long-term human impact, on health and on community confidence, is much harder to identify, but it clearly exists and is no less important. Therefore, I very much welcome the committee report's recommendation of improved analysis of flooding's social and economic costs. As I am sure members will agree, and as I have said, the starting point is that the current flood  legislation framework is profoundly out of date. We need to identify why it is out of date if we are to get the new legislation right. The current system is bureaucratic and unresponsive, with little support for modern, sustainable flood management methods. There is an almost exclusive focus on hard engineering. Those issues must be addressed. Any critique of the current arrangements must cover the painfully slow planning and approval processes, which involve double handling of flood prevention scheme decisions and a complete lack of transparency for those who are involved in the process. The timing of the committee's report is good. I congratulate the committee, its clerks and the witnesses who gave evidence on helping to get the report right, because I think that it will help to shape both the principles and the detail of the forthcoming bill. There has also been some innovation in how feedback has been given to the Scottish Government. We support all the recommendations in the report. Having seen what the committee has come up with, we put on record the fact that the report is comprehensive and clearly points the way for the future. There is a striking comment at paragraph 52 of the report: "Glasgow City Council told the Committee that SEPA's indicative flood risk maps: 'do not show half the areas in Glasgow that are subject to flooding.'" That is a pretty shocking comment, which reflects what Roseanna Cunningham said: that, although we have some information about flooding on rivers and estuaries and we have some handle on coastal flooding, we do not really have a handle on pluvial flooding. The quotation from Glasgow City Council says it all—it is a call to action. The situation must be remedied. It presents a challenge throughout Scotland, but more action and more expertise are required to address the gaps. One of the most important recommendations is that there should be a 25-year timescale for long-term planning. We are talking about using tree planting as part of the solution. That does not happen in a year or two years; it needs long-term, sustained investment and a proper funding framework. I was disappointed at the minister's initial response, in which he defended the system that the Government has put in place. I sat through the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's discussions on the budget. The lack of thought given to the proposals for changes in flooding investment was almost embarrassing. There was no coherence in the Government's responses to  straightforward questions from committee members—sometimes the responses were even contradictory. We need to ensure that we get a better result. Even now, there are deeply unsatisfactory situations in parts of the country. I am told that Moray Council's director of finance has described the current situation as a period of complete uncertainty. In Edinburgh, we were concerned about whether our flood prevention schemes would get in under the wire for funding or whether we would miss out. Glasgow City Council is in a difficult position, because it has had to review its capital expenditure as a result of the decision to remove ring fencing from funding for flooding. There is a real sense of rough justice, which my colleagues in the Labour Party have noted in the areas that they represent. The authorities with well-advanced plans that were lucky enough to get through the complex approval process got in under the wire, but for those that did not, it is tough luck. They have been told that it is up to them to use the existing money. The reference to flooding in the concordat is opaque. Flooding is mentioned alongside schools, roads, waste management, the police estate and the fire and rescue service. That is not good enough. I hope that the Government will look long and hard at the committee's report, which was unanimous. We are not arguing for the old system; we are saying that we should look for a new system with a three-tier funding process that will meet the challenge of the future. Many difficult issues will have to be addressed. SEPA made a good recommendation. The committee considered carefully the issue of the competent authority. There should be clarity about the role of local authorities and Scottish Water, and a statutory obligation for them to work together, which is crucial. We also need a much more streamlined system of planning approvals. The current system is deeply frustrating for everyone and is no longer fit for purpose. The recommendation about devolving the smaller decisions but maintaining national oversight of major decisions, and following that through with a national pot of funding directed by Government ministers, is absolutely right. We agree that there also needs to be money in the pot for local authorities to use at their discretion. However, that should be for forward planning and working up schemes, not major capital investment. The committee's report is extremely well put together. I hope that the Government will shift its position and will be more enthusiastic about all the  recommendations. We need that for the future and for the new bill.

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that, on the basis of the criteria that she has set out in her statement today, Edinburgh will not benefit from the £25 million that she has allocated to new council housing? Given the current state of the housing market, would it not be better for her to use some of the new £0.25 billion that she is allocating to shared equity schemes to meet the demand for new social rented housing? Is she aware that Edinburgh housing associations are deeply worried about their ability to build new social housing, given the standstill in the budget for housing associations and current inflation pressures? Is she aware that, unless there is a rethink, housing associations will have to increase rents, lose wardens or not build as many houses as they planned? That is what housing  associations are saying. Will she have a rethink on the HAG support that she is offering?

I asked the question because my colleague Karen Gillon and I have been asking a series of questions of both the minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment. In his foreword to his quotas consultation, the cabinet secretary says that "The Scottish Government is seeking to withdraw from the CFP." However, as Ms Fabiani has revealed, that is not something that it can do. Was the minister consulted on the wording used in the quotas document? In the light of her previous answer, does she think that it is appropriate for official Government documents to say that the Government is attempting to do something that it is clearly not competent to do?

To ask the Scottish Executive what resources it will invest in the enforcement of environmental crime legislation. (S3O-3618)

I particularly welcome the new resources for tackling wildlife crime. Does the minister acknowledge that other enforcement agencies, which are not part of the police, are crucial in the identification and pursuit of cases of environmental and wildlife crime? Will he commit to having discussions with the Minister for Environment in particular to ensure that organisations such as the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals are not left out of pocket by doing the job that more mainstream criminal enforcement agencies would be expected to carry out?

To ask the First Minister, on world environment day, whether the Scottish Government remains committed to ensuring that there is a renewable capacity in each public building. (S3F-853)

I welcome the First Minister's commitment to move in the right direction on the issue and his acknowledgement of the importance of having renewables in every public building in order to reduce CO 2 emissions and of the Government leading by example. Will he, therefore, set specific carbon reduction targets and a completion date for those commitments? Given the fact that the Scottish National Party manifesto promised to kick-start the process with the installation of renewables technology in every school in Scotland, will he clarify what specific resources have been made available to deliver on that promise, either by the Government or by local authorities? Will he tell us when that promise will  be delivered on? One of the first acts of the new SNP council in Edinburgh was to remove three renewables projects from the new schools programme that it inherited from Labour.

We have had a good debate on the principles of CAP reform. There is no doubt that the policy needs reform; the problem is that there are many different prescriptions and that, these days, we face myriad challenges that are totally different from those that people faced after the second world war. For example, the recent extension of EU membership means that CAP as it stands is unaffordable. In its call for support for a "dynamic", "competitive" and "sustainable" farming industry in Scotland, the motion sets out most of the issues that we need to focus on. However, our amendment seeks to put the industry into a broader rural context, because we must ensure that our farming and rural communities have a joined-up approach. The rural development plan will be crucial to that process. We also think that the Scottish Government's food policy must play a far more proactive role in this agenda. We have very much welcomed the discussion that the Government has led on the issue, but food procurement will be central to the policy's future success. As we all know, the East Ayrshire local food procurement project was a success and I will be grateful if the Minister for Environment, when he sums up, can give us a date for rolling out the programme. After all, in allowing our schools, hospitals and local authorities to buy fresh local produce, it represents a crucial practical way of supporting Scottish agriculture. It commands the chamber's complete support and should be an essential component of a high-quality food strategy in Scotland that supports our farming industry. We also need to link farming activity to more localised processing and production; indeed, we have discussed the role of abattoirs in that respect. We support the Scottish Government's call for sustainability and its emphasis on the positive part that farmers increasingly play in their stewardship of our environment and landscape. Indeed, the chamber must recognise their significant role in that matter. On that point, I hope that Jamie McGrigor will take another look at sustainable flood management issues. They are actually part of the solution to the problems faced by our farming industry and to the challenge of flood management in Scotland.

No. Any CAP reform must include a range of environmental measures that are of practical use to farmers. They should also receive financial support for implementing them; after all, as all this  activity has public benefit, it requires public investment. The NFUS has said that farmers find the process of meeting our environmental objectives cumbersome and prescriptive, and we believe that the CAP health check will provide opportunities to find ways of simplifying the process. As Rob Gibson made clear, we must also address issues of quality. Consumers want quality from the farming industry, but at a price that they can afford. I am glad to see that consumers are beginning to reject BOGOF—buy one get one free—deals, particularly those on perishable goods. People do not have the time to prepare and eat all the foodstuffs that supermarkets are offering at those very cheap prices. The deals are not good both because they increase waste and because they affect farm income. They may be a loss leader for supermarkets, but they are a bad deal for farmers. We need to question them, and consumers are now asking the right questions. We wanted our amendment also to highlight the fact that Scotland has in place more rigorous systems of animal welfare than exist elsewhere. Our farmers produce high-quality stock and good-quality food to higher welfare standards than those not only in the rest of Europe but in other parts of the world. Our amendment acknowledges that, and I am glad that the Scottish Government has agreed to accept it. We want to see animal welfare being delivered through the CAP health check. Scotland is delivering higher animal welfare standards and public money is being given to farmers for that. We want to ensure that, in taking on those higher standards, our farmers are not disadvantaged and that there is a level playing field across Europe. There is not complete agreement that the single farm payment is completely out of date—the Tory view is different from that of the other parties in the chamber. Over time, the single farm payment will become increasingly out of date: it is an historical payment and it needs to be replaced by area-based payments. Labour has concerns about both the Tory and the Liberal Democrat amendments, neither of which addresses fully the relationship between agricultural support and wider rural development support. I ask the minister for an answer to Karen Gillon's question about voluntary modulation as an efficiency saving. We have read the Scottish Government's efficiency programme and see a contradiction between what is said in the document and what ministers have said in the chamber. Big issues in the debate need to be addressed. The rural development plan is crucial to the wider framework for supporting farmers and our rural  communities, including the public interest aspect. Some superb comments have been made about the need for public support for our rural areas. John Farquhar Munro, Peter Peacock and Dave Thompson focused on the varied and tough issues that face our farming and crofting communities. Those communities need proper support and we need to ensure that that is contained in the CAP health check. Richard Lochhead was very snippy about the UK Government's vision. He made great play of the differences between Scotland and the rest of the UK. We want to be absolutely clear that the whole point of devolution is that the Scottish Parliament stands up for Scotland when its experience is different from that of the rest of the UK and feeds that into negotiations at European level. That is why John Farquhar Munro, Peter Peacock and Dave Thompson were absolutely right to highlight the challenges that our Highlands and Islands areas face. Scotland's perspective is slightly different from that of the rest of the UK, but Labour absolutely defends the position of the UK Government, which has led the debate in saying that the former CAP system is not fit for purpose and needs to be reformed. Karen Gillon was absolutely right to point out that the CAP takes up 42 per cent of the total EU budget. With the new additions to the EU, such a figure is simply not sustainable. Reforming the CAP is a challenge, but it is also an opportunity. Richard Lochhead mentioned climate change, albeit briefly. The issue is one on which the UK is leading the way. Surely we need to join up our thinking on that—it involves a challenge but also an opportunity. Some of the comments and positive ideas that emerged from yesterday's NFUS briefing on climate change were spot on and should form part of the CAP reform debate. We cannot separate out the debate on climate change from that on CAP reform. We need the tools in CAP reform to enable our farmers to do the right things to address climate change. Given that that is in the public interest, farmers should get support for doing that. On the Labour benches, we believe that we have to think about the bigger picture, too. We support the need for a level playing field for our farmers, and the need to think more globally and broadly not only about climate change but about the trading relationships that we enter into as a country. The trading relationships that Europe has set up with the rest of the world are unfair to developing countries. Those countries do not have anything like the level of support that our industries have. We need to develop a public interest strategy that works for our farmers in Scotland, supports  our industries and looks at the challenges. In doing so, we cannot ignore our wider global responsibilities. The Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund is absolutely right in its campaigning on the matter. We need to join up the issues of food support, farming support and our global responsibilities. Thinking globally needs to be part of the debate on the CAP health check. In Europe and around the world, the big challenges are climate change, our environmental responsibilities, high-quality food production and our ability to source food locally. All of that must form part of a common debate. In debating the CAP health check, the responsibility of not only the Scottish Government but the UK Government is to represent us on those issues. We need to look forward to the next decade and not look back to the past. The question must be: where do we want to be in 10 years? Radical change will be involved and that means that it will be difficult. The overall message for our farming and rural communities should be a good one, but only if we seize the opportunities.

Today has demonstrated that a subject debate does not have to be a debate with no bite. This has been a good debate and there have been many interesting exchanges around the chamber. We are all way past the point of agreeing that we need to tackle climate change; the key thing is how we do it. It has been interesting to focus on the process and the policies today. I will not be the first person in the chamber to say that, so far, the SNP has been a big disappointment. As Liam McArthur said, it is not enough to talk the talk on climate change; the Government must also walk the walk. In the briefings that we have all received today, we can see the disappointment that various organisations feel. Most of them are too polite to say that the SNP has dumped its big idea, which was to have a binding annual target of a 3 per cent reduction in emissions, which is what is needed if we are to meet the 80 per cent target. I will deal with Patrick Harvie's point directly. Our criticism is that, in the election campaign just over  a year ago, many of us took part in hustings debates in which the SNP candidates waxed lyrical about the party's twin policies of an 80 per cent reduction and a binding annual target of a 3 per cent reduction in emissions.

No, I am still in the middle of answering Mr Harvie's point. For the SNP to come to the chamber and simply ignore those commitments is not credible, as Gavin Brown said. In an otherwise excellent speech, Rob Gibson let the cat out of the bag. The SNP has not thought through the implications of those policies. A year on, there has been precious little delivery on the targets. On energy, there has been painfully slow progress on household renewables. The SNP ministers' draft proposals on permitted development rights for microgeneration mystified everybody. Where were they coming from? It was not good enough to follow the UK approach—albeit a year later. Instead, they had to invent a process that would mean no automatic planning permission for mini wind vanes and heat pumps if they were within 100m of the next house. That policy is not just an urban problem; it rules out most of Scotland. In its recent report, the Energy Saving Trust said that we need grants. Grants are good, and there is support for them across the chamber.

If Mr Stevenson would like to announce a ministerial U-turn, I would be delighted to do so.

That is an excellent contribution to the debate. I wish that the minister had made that point earlier in the debate, because the Government has created great uncertainty in the microgeneration industry with its distance-based approach. Tax incentives are crucial. The Energy Saving Trust said that we need a co-ordinated approach and a range of initiatives. I hope that the minister might change his mind on this issue as well. If the minister were to think again on local tax reductions, members would be delighted. I share Liam McArthur's disappointment at Jim Mather's speech last week. It was an opportunity to set a high-level agenda on renewables, but  there was hardly even a cursory mention of our existing building stock. We know that 80 per cent of our current buildings will still exist in 2050. That is where we have to start if we are going to tackle the big emissions now, get ordinary people involved in the process and tackle climate change and poverty at the same time. Another SNP manifesto policy was to install renewables capacity in every public building. The manifesto commitment was "to ensure there is a renewable capability in each public building—starting with a commitment to renewable generation in every Scottish school." When I asked the First Minister about that the other week, no reply came forth. We know that the eco-schools programme has been fantastic and that great work is being done by WWF Scotland, but we must examine what has happened to that policy. It appears to have sunk without trace. There is no reference to it in the climate change programme that was published last week and—worse than that—in Edinburgh the SNP has even removed the proposed renewables aspect of the new schools that Labour signed off before the election. That is a kick in the teeth to Mike Russell's excellent attempts to promote biomass throughout Scotland. The Government has to do better. Several members have talked about the SNP going backwards on transport. If we want to enable people to travel while causing lower CO 2 emissions and without having always to use their cars, we need better alternatives. The SNP is still hostile to trams, which are one of the best ways of reducing CO 2 emissions in our growing, economically successful capital city. John Swinney was hostile to them only last week. Incidentally, the SNP's reason for opposing a congestion charge in the city was that we did not have the public transport or trams in place. We need to see more action on transport, including public transport proposals. Des McNulty outlined what has been happening on our buses. We are already seeing services being cut and bus fares increasing under the SNP Government. That will particularly hit people in rural areas who already have limited access to public transport. We are going backwards. Either there has been inaction or the wrong approach has been taken on easy issues that could otherwise start to deliver the big reductions in carbon emissions that we need. I think that the minister has got the message today that, throughout the chamber and from all parties, members will push the Government on the climate change bill and what happens now. A core element of Labour's climate change bill would have been a focus on helping people in their daily lives to reduce their own emissions, whether that  was through household renewables, sustainable travel or reducing waste. The figures show that recycling is going up, but we could have pushed that further with money off council tax for householders who recycle more. Colleagues have referred to the coalition outwith the chamber: the 21,000 people who have taken the time to write to the Government. We need action on climate change, not just in a bill but across the whole of the Scottish Government's work. Des McNulty is right that we cannot focus only on the 80 per cent cut in emissions by 2050 and that we must consider action now. Jim Hume was right to quote from the Stern report. The reductions that we make now in carbon emissions and other climate change gases will be the most valuable because, once we have delivered them, they will kick in for the whole of the period. The reductions over the next decade will determine whether we can slow down climate change sufficiently to avoid the horrendous climate change that many scientists have said is already in train. The UK Climate Change Bill will make the UK the first country to have a legally binding long-term framework. We can also act in Scotland, and I am delighted to hear about the minister's constructive partnership work with the UK Government. Lewis Macdonald was right to focus on carbon capture and storage, which is a crucial part of the process. We will need that ability if our emissions continue to increase—although we need to push them down. Scotland's climate change programme was published last week. It is a hugely important discipline on the Scottish Government to ensure that every part of the system plays its role. I am glad that many of the initiatives that started under the previous Government are being continued and developed, but we need faster action. The SNP budget does not provide an assessment of carbon implications and, although the climate change challenge fund is welcome, at £18 million it is a tiny amount of money compared with the £28 billion that the Government will spend. Patrick Harvie talked about the national planning framework. It does not address carbon emissions at any level of detail, but it will set the framework of infrastructure investment for years to come. We need action, not only with a climate change bill, and we need it now. We will push SNP ministers to ensure that it happens.

If it is so difficult to set such targets, why did they emerge in the SNP manifesto?

We welcome the Tomkins report and we congratulate all those who worked on it. It is a comprehensive report that has clear recommendations and a clear agenda for action, with a call for partnership to ensure that the action is effective. I welcome the general support throughout the Parliament for the report, which provides a sensible set of fine-grained recommendations that were drawn up by people who understand how the police work and what would make sense. David Stewart and Christine Grahame set out most effectively the point that although we have good legislation—let us be in no doubt about that—there is simply too much wildlife crime happening in our country and we need to focus on how to eliminate it and how to enforce the law. An overarching issue is political leadership, which is why we wanted to ensure that the whole Parliament supports the principle of a wildlife crime reduction strategy that is produced by the Scottish Government with a timetable. Our amendment was generated with the aim of getting cross-party support and a commitment from ministers. We all know about the rate of progress, so I welcome the Solicitor General for Scotland's comments that we will get the strategy in, I think, September—it is useful to have that on the record. However, we know that timescales can slip. If we look back to the Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Act 2006, we see that a huge amount of work is still to be done on the regulations, which need to be produced and then implemented. It would be good to find out today how the minister sees snaring fitting into the agenda. I am aware that he intended to establish a group to consider the issue, but its meetings have been cancelled. It would be helpful if the minister would say where he sees that discussion taking place. Will it be in the partnership for action against wildlife crime sub-group or does the minister intend another agency to discuss it? Transparency on the issue is critical. All members are interested and there are many people outwith the Parliament who are keen to know what is happening. There is a strong demand for inclusion, so that everyone can get round the table. I hope that the minister will also consider the definition of wildlife crime. We have several pieces of legislation, so how they join up and are enforced is crucial. The issue of resources is fundamental, which is why I am so pleased that the Tomkins report sets out the case for wildlife crime officer support in every police force, with full-time officers who are properly supported by senior management. From  members across the chamber, we have heard about the need for consistent activity across Scotland and for experience to be shared within the police forces and among the other agencies involved. We have also heard that the prosecution team has to be as well-briefed and as well-trained as possible. The process will have to move effectively from identification of the crime through to prosecution. It can make a huge difference to successful prosecution if the police have secured the evidence and if the prosecution team is knowledgeable too. Therefore, I very much welcomed the opening remarks from the Solicitor General for Scotland. We support the report's recommendations 3 to 7 about better co-ordination and better information. They will be crucial. We also support recommendations 10 and 11. It will be important that legislation be thought through in depth by the sub-group. We want the sub-group to accept the recommendation about looking into criminal vicarious liability. Landowners have to take responsibility for what happens on their estates. The arguments are set out fully and effectively in the report. The issues must be considered properly over a period of time, and people have to be involved in the discussion. Recommendation 11, on implementation, is important. That is why we will not be supporting the Liberal Democrat amendment. We believe that the report gets it right, but the issues require proper consideration before coming back to this Parliament. We should not be making policy on the hoof today. Proper action will be required to ensure proper implementation. Karen Gillon made the case for that extremely well. We need action on several fronts. We need clarity in the legislation; we need resources for every police force; we need leadership and commitment in each police force; we need a parallel commitment in our prosecution service; and, crucially, we need all the other agencies to be involved effectively. We must not ignore organisations such as the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, which have a special role in helping to tackle wildlife crime. I wonder whether the minister will agree to look into the financial support that the SSPCA puts into the system. I understand that it pays for many of the post mortems of animals whose deaths later lead to prosecutions. I question whether that is right; the SSPCA is a charity and we are talking about the implementation of the law. I hope that the minister will reflect on that point and then come back to us—although perhaps not in his final speech—with his thoughts. We will need maximum effort. Recommendation 20 must be supported—the greater use of Crimestoppers by members of the public. That  would send a clear message that wildlife crime is unacceptable and should be treated, and acted on, like any other. As Peter Peacock said, wildlife crime must be treated professionally. There is excellent practice in different police forces, but the practice has to be universal across the whole country. John Lamont spoke about the persecution of birds of prey. We know that that is happening and that it leads to a loss of biodiversity. What will the minister do about it? With support across the chamber, I hope that the Government will get on, get the strategy in place, and then bring it back to us. There is clear support for it. I press the Labour amendment.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many students will be affected by changes to means testing for bursaries. (S3O-3427)

I ask the minister to consider the matter further. As she knows, students have many financial commitments, including tenancies to which they are tied in advance. Their ability to budget effectively is therefore essential. When the means-testing charge was changed for students in England and Wales, it was implemented for new students only. Will the minister say why SNP ministers introduced their changes for all students, including those who are halfway through their courses?

I thank the cabinet secretary for both his replies—it is helpful to get on the record who has responsibility at different levels. I have had a number of such cases, not only in relation to the trams. It is useful to get the cabinet secretary's comments on the record, particularly when council works have led to disruption. I urge the cabinet secretary to look favourably on any request that comes from the council. Members throughout the chamber have lobbied TIE to get as big a contingency fund as possible and to spend it wisely, so that it benefits not only the businesses that front the route but those on the streets behind, because they will be equally impacted on by quite lengthy closures.

In the current parliamentary session, I think that we have the opportunity to go back and look at previous actions of Government. If we feel that they have not delivered the intended outcome, we can state that. In a sense, the former Environment and Rural Development Committee concluded that, if we are to move forward on crofting, we need to ensure that our proposals are  right. That is why we are happy to work with the Government in a constructive manner.

I very much agree with Michael Russell's expression of thanks to the committee of inquiry for the work that it has carried out over the past few months. In its consideration of the Crofting Reform etc Bill in the previous parliamentary session, the Environment and Rural Development Committee came to the conclusion that the bill as introduced was simply too complex. We wanted to ensure that the Parliament got crofting right, but the bill  did not provide for a consolidation of the legal framework. We were not convinced that the measures to sort out the market in crofts would work and we wanted to get the right controls and assignations to ensure that crofting was retained. However, we did not want to jeopardise the chance of a crofting bill being passed at that time because we wanted to ensure that the recommendations on new crofts that Michael Russell is implementing were provided for. We thought that there should be a new set of discussions on crofting and the possibility of new legislation in this parliamentary session. Therefore, I warmly welcome the work that the committee of inquiry on crofting has done—in particular, Mark Shucksmith's work in pulling it together and the excellent analysis in the report. The process has been inclusive and the report is all the stronger for that. However, I admit that, although I enjoyed reading it, I have not yet fully digested all its recommendations. Along with the minister, I certainly want the time to reflect on them all; they are radical and far reaching. We now need to have a positive debate on what we agree with but we must also take the time to consult more before we come back to the Parliament to set out our stalls in detail. I am keen that this debate be the start of the Parliament's consideration of how the vision for crofting in the 21 st century that is set out in the report should be implemented. That is why I welcome the minister's commitment to come back with a response to the debate before we legislate again. It is important to learn the lessons of the previous crofting bill to ensure that we do not address matters only through legislation or pile everything into consideration of proposed legislation but instead examine all the issues. The report's analysis is spot on, but we need to think through the detail of the recommendations and talk to the crofting communities about how we implement it. As the minister says, we must look through the detail, which is where the difficulties will come. We need to ensure that there is widespread consultation and consideration, and I note the NFUS's request for a detailed discussion at a later date. There are two ways in which the report can be implemented. The first is to consider matters that do not require legislation and on which the minister and his colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment can act now; the second is to consider the potential legislative issues that arise from the report. We need to address the urgent housing and agricultural support issues that can be acted on now. The minister should simply set out what he thinks in detail. I welcome his initial response, but I  want to see the Government's response to all those recommendations to determine what can be acted on swiftly. We also need a response on the issues that clearly require legislation. However, we need agreement on the Government's overall policy stance before we get to the detailed drafting, because the significant changes that were made halfway through the previous bill's passage made it difficult for the Environment and Rural Development Committee to do its job. The headline recommendation in the Shucksmith report to abolish the Crofters Commission needs a great deal of thought. The recommendation that regulation would remain at a Scottish level but implementation would rest at a local level needs further debate. The scope is set out for local crofting boards to regulate, but that raises the questions to what extent we would still have a common system of crofting and what level of discretion each board would have. We need to think all that through in detail. Another issue that we must consider in detail is the status of the boards and whether they will be quangos. Given the recent downsizing of Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the budget cuts that it has experienced, it is ironic for the Scottish Government that HIE is the organisation of choice for the location of the proposed crofting community development body. There is a clear message in the report that economic factors must be central if crofting is to survive. We support the objective to bring together economic development and community and social objectives. The report notes that crofting activities account for only a third of crofters' incomes, so support for wider economic activity is crucial, including support for entrepreneurial skills and other skills that are required to run small businesses. Crofters have a host of economic opportunities in construction, renewables, wildlife interpretation, crafts and tourism, and they need skills and support in all those areas. A critical issue is the minister's willingness to fund in full the system that he chooses to recommend to us. His choice requires a lot more thought, and I do not expect him to make it after two days' reflection on the report. Whatever decision is made, however, there is a key challenge for the minister to ensure that he supports the staff of the Crofters Commission. I ask him to make a commitment to think carefully about the rights of the staff. We considered the matter when we considered the Crofting Reform etc Bill. I hope that the minister will meet the staff, listen to their concerns and representations and ensure that he talks through the issues in detail, including the future status of the organisation and where staff will be located in order for them to be  effective. Those issues, and the rights of the staff, must be considered in detail. Where do we go next? I will focus briefly on two areas in which the minister can act now to support crofters: housing and agriculture. Housing grants are urgently needed to enable crofters to build new houses. Our discussions have been dominated by the debate on the market in crofts and the lack of sufficient rural housing for crofters and others who want to remain in our crofting areas. The issues are not easy. Sometimes the problem is the lack of land for development and sometimes it is finance. A key issue that comes out loud and clear in the report is affordability. Rural wages are insufficient to cover the cost of building new houses and the cost of mortgages. The report is clear. It says: "the Crofters Building Grants and Loans Scheme ... was the single most effective means of support for maintaining the population of crofting communities. The current Croft House Grant Scheme ... is pitched at too low a level to assist crofters". That cannot be right. It must be acted on. We know from the Government's paper on housing that in rural areas, particularly the Highlands, house prices are rising rapidly and affordability is worsening. Some 96 per cent of those who were surveyed by the Crofters Commission last year said that young crofters are the most important aspect of a thriving crofting community, but 88 per cent said that housing is unaffordable for young people in crofting areas. We need urgent action to make rural crofts available, to let crofters build and to provide more land for crofters. I hope that the minister will consider the raft of recommendations on the matter. Labour highlights the proposal to enable crofters to obtain loans without having to decroft. The evidence shows that the lack of such an option is a huge pressure that leads to decrofting. I welcome the minister's clear support for the recommendation today, and I hope that he will take the matter forward swiftly. Support is also urgently needed to guide crofters through the new rural development programme, which is overbureaucratic and lacks transparency. We fear that our most fragile rural areas will lose out unless ministers give clear signals now. The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds puts the case for public benefit extremely well, and it is clear that NFU Scotland wants to engage in the debate too. We must support active crofting and ensure that we have appropriate land management. We need to deliver environmental objectives and, crucially, support crofters' ability to manage their land. We also need support for infrastructure to support jobs in marts and slaughterhouses. The Crofters Commission, rightly, lobbied us on that in the past few months.  We believe that we need to refocus agricultural support. We agree with the recommendation that the Scottish Government should change the rural development programme now to bring that about. The report contains many detailed recommendations, but many can be acted on now, including the challenge to encourage new entrants. The report's recommendations focus on the need for new crofters so that existing crofters can retire with income and with dignity. The report contains a fantastic vision of the future, but we need to look at the key things that can be done now. We must then debate the detailed recommendations on the future architecture for the support of crofting. The report contains many good recommendations, and we must take our time to get things right. Funding is crucial. We need to know that, whatever system we support, the Government will fund it fully so that the recommendations can be implemented. We need an inclusive approach that includes the Parliament and all the communities that made recommendations recently and during the previous session. I note the minister's willingness to have that inclusive discussion and I hope that it will happen. We need, first, to consider the recommendations that can be acted on now and, secondly, to have detailed discussions on the major recommendations so that we get things right this time. We need to consolidate the legislation in order to bring our crofters together and ensure that they have a viable and sustainable future. We must support them in those objectives.

In a month during which we have seen the devastation caused by extreme weather, tough action on climate change is vital. Will the First Minister accept that it is not enough to talk green and that he must act to deliver reductions in greenhouse gases urgently? The First Minister said that renewable energy is the cornerstone of his climate change policy. When will the Scottish National Party implement its manifesto commitment for renewable generation in every school? When will the Government act to create a mass market for householder renewables? As yesterday's Energy Saving Trust report highlighted, grants are not enough and we need a scheme whereby householders receive a rebate on their council tax or local tax bill. There is support across the Parliament for such action, so will the First Minister act now?

I would like the minister to address the issue of flexibility with regard to regulations. Clearly, we need a level playing field for the farming industry, and we need to take our environmental obligations seriously. Does the minister have some fresh thoughts on that issue?

At the start of the debate, Duncan McNeil set out calmly and succinctly why the committee became involved in the issue and he then took us through the recommendations extremely effectively. I was deeply disappointed by the minister's aggressive stance, which was unusual for a minister in speaking in a committee debate. It is not up to ministers to decide whether a committee has set itself the right agenda or to dispute whether it can legitimately engage in ministers' activities. That is parliamentary accountability. Anyone who has been a minister will have had tough questions put to them—it goes with the job. We must deal with the hard facts. The committee members signed up to the evidence that was before them, although they disputed the conclusions that could be drawn. I would have liked the minister to engage seriously with the committee's conclusions, but he did not and does not seem to have taken on board any of the committee's points. That is an outstanding issue. I would like Mike Russell to confirm in his summing-up speech that the response to the report that John Swinney wrote on 27 March is the Scottish Government's full response to the committee. It is patronising and it fails to give the committee credit for understanding the planning system. We expected a more detailed and considered response to such a lengthy inquiry report from a committee. Such reports should not be disregarded just because they are inconvenient to ministers. The core issue is about the perceptions of how ministers acted—Patricia Ferguson made that point extremely effectively and other members made it time and again. That is a tough test, but there are major issues at stake, including the fundamental integrity of our planning system and Parliament's ability to scrutinise ministers' work. It is vital that, in any planning decision, all parties can be confident that due process has been observed. They may not like the outcome—anyone who has been a minister or been involved in a planning decision will know that unanimity is never reached on the outcome of a planning decision, but people must know that their views were listened to and considered and that the system is fair. When planning decisions and issues come to ministers' desks, they will by definition never be easy, which is why we must ensure that the process is robust and taken seriously. Local councillors and the Scottish ministers must be politically accountable, because the decisions that are taken affect our communities. The entire planning system is based on the principle that the outcomes, mediated by development plans and  guided by national planning guidance, must be in the public interest. The crucial point is that the planning system works on the basis of trust that evidence that members of the public and developers give is considered properly against the policy framework. People must have confidence in the system.

I agree that there have been a number of unfortunate consequences. Local councillors should have the right to take decisions. If their constituents do not like those decisions, they know precisely what to do with those representatives. The key thing is that decisions should not be taken on party-political grounds. It is entirely appropriate for ministers to take political decisions once they have considered all the evidence from their officials—there is a lengthy process for that in the Scottish Government. It is important that the recommendations of officials are considered. Ministers do not have to agree with them, but they must consider them and be responsible and accountable for their decisions. All parties have to know that the evidence has been properly considered and that the process is robust. I found Mary Scanlon's analysis and insight into the Aviemore planning application process fascinating and disturbing in equal measure. We would all agree that there are issues about the speed of the process, and that there is always scope for improving the performance of local authorities and statutory consultees—and indeed the Scottish Government. However, the rules and process exist and people have to know that the rules are being abided by at every stage of the process. Ministers cannot cut corners. The checks and balances exist to protect the process. The ministerial code exists not just to protect the integrity of the planning process but to protect ministers from universal criticism such as they are experiencing today. If they ignore the ministerial code, they do so at their peril. I do not believe that ministers deliberately set out to undermine the planning system, but I urge them to reflect on the unanimity of criticism in the chamber. When Patrick Harvie is on board in respect of a criticism, it is not a unionist plot. I ask ministers to take the criticisms and consider them in more depth. Alex Salmond's plea that he was acting as a local member and not the First Minister would have had more credibility if he had done what the  ministerial code suggests and not got a special adviser involved to fix up his meetings. The code is clear: it is subjective—that is the point of it. If there is any interpretation that the Government has failed the code, it is that it has failed it in planning terms. I am not expecting Mike Russell to eat humble pie—the mood from the SNP will not let us go there—but I ask ministers to reflect on the criticisms and ensure that their future decisions cannot be challenged by members and by thousands of people throughout Scotland. That is the core issue today.

Will the member give way?

My understanding is that the letter of 27 March to the committee convener is indeed the Scottish Government's response to the report. That is what it says in the letter, which I have with me.

Does the minister share the concerns of around 1,000 of my constituents who have contacted me in the past 10 days or so to say that they are worried about the way that the draft planning guidance might be interpreted by local authorities and that it is vital that he rules out reductions in HMO properties? The minister is absolutely right to state that it is not just students who use such properties; a range of other people relies on rented accommodation. In the minister's discussions with the universities, will he consider putting on the table cash to enable them to build the new accommodation that they need urgently, given that there are more than 60,000 students in Edinburgh alone and that the house-building rates have not kept up with the demand for affordable housing? My question is partly about sensitivity towards HMOs, but will the minister please look at the housing supply issue, too?

I add my congratulations to Mary Mulligan on securing the debate and introducing the subject in an expert manner. It is excellent that she also managed to introduce some humour into such a difficult concept. I join Mary Mulligan in welcoming the success of the Bathgate business improvement district. It is no mean outcome. Having considered the issue in the context of the essential Edinburgh BID, I think that it was an absolute triumph to reach the level of endorsement that Bathgate managed to achieve. It is a real endorsement of the hard graft that clearly went in over months in support of the proposal. The achievement lay not just in winning the final vote, but in ensuring that the contents of the proposal hit the issues that local businesses wanted to be acted upon. That is a crucial lesson. If we are to get the proposals right, they need to be worked up. The businesses that will be affected all need to be brought to the table. People's views need to be taken on board and acted upon. I very much welcome the experience that we have gained thanks to the success of the Bathgate vote. It will be very good to see how the project rolls out in practice. I hope that, over the coming months and years, Mary Mulligan will be able to talk about the lessons that have been learned as the project beds down and begins to deliver results.  Mary Mulligan's motion is clever in many ways. In particular, its last sentence suggests that "other Scottish towns may follow in Bathgate's footsteps." I am sure that, in using the word "towns", Mary means cities as well—including Edinburgh. I support the mood around the chamber on the key issue of urban regeneration in towns that have been left behind in the fantastic economic progress that we have experienced over the past few years, but there are challenges in our cities, too. Even in Edinburgh, there is a real danger in our being complacent about the quality of the infrastructure of the city centre. Businesses in Edinburgh feel strongly that we need a high-quality public environment and high-quality service delivery. That is a key driver behind the essential Edinburgh project. It involves some of the best-known major companies and retailers in the city, as well as many independent supporters. We, too, have an ambition like the ambition that Mary Mulligan outlined for Bathgate: to ensure that the city centre meets its full potential as a workplace, as a place to shop and as a place to do business. That requires high-quality services that meet businesses' needs. That is where the consultation process—and the fact that it is business led—is so crucial. I very much welcome the City of Edinburgh Council's commitment to essential Edinburgh and to continuing to provide baseline services at similar or higher levels. That is a very good message—I refer to the fears that Gavin Brown expressed. The context is one in which current services will be continued or developed, and the BID process will bring additional quality and services on top of that. According to the estimates that I have been given, the project is to last five years, and the levy alone should raise just under £1 million a year. That is not an insignificant amount of money. If it is targeted properly, it could deliver real improvements for business in our city. I strongly agree with the comments that Mary Mulligan and Kenny Gibson made about getting the level of support right at the start. The successful project in Bathgate has drawn such a high level of support only through people taking their time, talking to businesses and ensuring that the proposal is right. I hope that, in his winding-up speech—or, if not, at a future date—the minister will think about upping the £15,000 ceiling. The message that I have received from people in Edinburgh is that it is not enough to get the right sort of high-quality bids; it is a matter of levering in substantial additional private sector investment. That can be achieved only if projects are put together properly and if they can engage all the key players.  I very much welcome Mary Mulligan's motion. I hope that we will hear more from the Scottish Government on the subject in the future, and that it has been listening to the tone of the debate and to the range of speeches this evening. There is a lot more mileage in the BID process, but it needs to be funded properly.

When will the outcome agreements with local authorities on the targets be published? Does the cabinet secretary accept that his decisions have created great uncertainty and serious concern among local authorities about their ability to meet the European Union's waste targets? In the light of his decision to cancel the solution that was developed by local authorities in the Lothians in line with the previous Government's guidelines, will he reimburse those authorities their wasted investment of £2 million, and will he commit to paying the £1.5 million of monthly fines that the Evening News  predicted will result from his decision?

Is there something we should know?

There is quite a range of UK bodies that have clear accountability to the Scottish Parliament. There are different models that we can use. Is Mike Rumbles suggesting that oil and gas responsibilities should be devolved to Scotland?

I was absolutely clear that we fully support all the AGMACS recommendations. We did not have to put that into the amendment because there are a lot of recommendations. I was absolutely clear about that point.

The bottom line, which came across strongly in the cabinet secretary's speech, is that we have had a lot of discussions to date. There has been a huge amount of stakeholder involvement over the years, before last year's election and since, about how we can better protect and manage our marine environment. I strongly agree with the cabinet secretary that, with the UK marine bill being imminent, we need to ensure that Scotland does not fall behind the overall UK debate. We assumed that today's debate would coincide with an announcement on moving forward with the Scottish marine bill. However, instead it deals with a consultation on a possible consultation. Therefore, we will give our views on how we should move forward collectively. "Seas the Opportunity: A Strategy for the Long Term Sustainability of Scotland's Coasts and Seas" was published in 2005. It established a good starting point for the discussion on where we might go with a marine bill. The report by the advisory group on marine and coastal strategy, which was published two years later, focused on the need for better policy leadership and good governance for Scotland's seas. I am sure that we  can all agree that that has to be the starting point for Parliament. AGMACS was an inclusive group. It included the national industry bodies, national stakeholder organisations across a range of interests, environmental non-governmental organisations, fishing groups, regulatory agencies and experts on key aspects of marine science. The Environment and Rural Development Committee's marine inquiry also took place before the election. I was involved at the start of one and the end of the other. I was struck by how much consensus there was on the overarching principles that we could all sign up to. That is a powerful inheritance for the new ministers. I therefore push for speedy progress on the bill, because I think that the principles of the bill will not be the difficult issue. The difficulties relate to how the legislation will work in practice. We must think through how marine spatial planning works in practice and how we get on board all the stakeholders who were happy to sign up to the AGMACS report when we move to either a national planning framework approach or a more localised planning approach. I am keen that we get to that stage. When we were in office, the Labour Party signed up to AGMACS's recommendations and our enthusiasm for them has not dimmed in opposition. We want to get to the stage of debating how the recommendations are delivered in the bill and how they can be implemented. That is why we lodged our amendment which, on this occasion, is not critical of the Government; it is more of an encouragement to the Government to keep the process driving forward and not to lose the momentum that the AGMACS report established. There is a huge appetite for progress. We want to give parliamentary support to the minister to accelerate the process but, crucially, we also believe that the Scottish Government should work constructively with the UK Government and other Administrations in the UK. As well as working with the UK Government directly, it has to work with the Northern Ireland Executive and possibly the Welsh Assembly Government to ensure that a system is produced that is driven from the top but is also bottom-up and deals with the bit in the middle effectively. It is not only about the drafting of the legislation. If there is to be coherence in marine legislation, implementation, too, is important. I remember that, before the election, we all used to say that there were 85 marine acts. We need more coherence and we need a more joined-up approach. There will be three marine bills, but that will not be the end of legislation on marine matters. There will still be issues to do with oil and gas and maritime transport. We must get the marine bills that are  before us moving together and we must ensure that they link in with all the other legislation.

The marine management organisation is where we should sort that out. That is why I would like to get on to debating the bill, because the MMO will need to have a UK level but it should also have a Scottish level. There are different models that we could use; the AGMACS recommendations accepted that there is more than one way to make the system work. I hope that the MMO will be accountable to us in the Parliament, so that there will be a Scottish MMO as well as a UK MMO. That is entirely possible and it is what we should look to achieve. We have taken our marine environment for granted. The marine bill gives us an opportunity to examine how we manage the potential conflicts and the potential opportunities that come from better and more intelligent strategic planning. We need to find better ways of protecting and managing our marine life, because we must protect species and the habitats that maintain them. That is why the recommendation from AGMACS that we should base our marine nature conservation on scientific advice, with specific measures for species conservation, policy and site protection is crucial. We need to meet our biodiversity commitments, both at the Scottish level and at UK level. It is crucial that we also take into account socioeconomic considerations, so that we get sustainability in our seas. We must draw together a Scottish set of marine ecosystem objectives. I would like the minister, when he sums up, to talk about the progress that has been made. AGMACS hoped for progress to be made in 2007—it will be interesting to see how that has gone. That needs to work in both the regional seas round Scotland and the wider UK waters. We need to ensure that we have the right vehicle for marine spatial planning. We support the AGMACS suggestion that the Scottish marine management organisation should have responsibility for marine nature conservation and fisheries to 200 nautical miles and that it should be nested in a UK system or framework. We think that that would ensure the benefits of both worlds under devolution. We would be part of the wider UK system but could also play to our strengths. In our most recent debate on fisheries, it was clear that when we link sustainable development to  fisheries and marine conservation, we achieve sensible outcomes. That is the way we should go. There is more than one way to deliver that outcome, which is why we are not specific in our amendment—I hope that Mike Rumbles will not be overly specific at this stage either. We need to give the minister breathing space to negotiate the best way to make it all happen in practice. We should be looking to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs to work in partnership with the Scottish Government and to devolve the responsibilities to us without a big constitutional stand-off. That would make sense. We need to consider the statutory basis of marine spatial planning as recommended by AGMACS. It suggested a three-tier approach involving a top level led by the UK MMO, with a connection to Scotland so that we are involved in the discussions. The pilot involving the UK Government, Wales, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Ireland is the right model to examine—we need co-operation among the devolved and other Administrations. We also need a bottom tier that is genuinely local. I hope that we can build on the partnerships that already exist in Scotland and ensure that local stakeholders' expertise is brought to the fore in the priority areas. We need a joined-up approach because, whatever we put in our marine bill and whatever is in the UK and Northern Ireland bills, that is unlikely to be the end of the story. We should ensure at least that those three bills join up. The work done on the proposed climate change legislation gives us a model for making progress. The UK bill is ahead of ours. A climate change consultation paper is out in Scotland, but the two bills are not progressing in sync through the Parliaments. However, it is possible to ensure that they link together. That is the model that we are looking for with the marine bill as well. We are dealing with a complex situation, but the bill needs to signpost how the process will work. It does not need to be overly detailed because some of the detail will come in secondary legislation after the main bill is passed. We need to reach the point of testing it among stakeholders and through the parliamentary process. We are keen to get on with the work because, until we get the bill, we will not get our national network of marine protected sites or the delivery of the governance structures to ensure that our marine environment is properly protected and able to enjoy the sustainable development that we all want. We will not get a marine and coastal national park until we get the marine bill—that was one condition that ministers put on developing a marine national park. It was evident last week that ministers are now thinking about where we go next  on national parks. I hope that the marine element is not missed out. We need to have a bit more urgency and to reach the point at which we can debate the powers in the bill. We support ministers in doing that work and will engage constructively in the process. We think that AGMACS provided a good framework, and we look forward to seeing the consultation on the bill. However, we stress that we need an intelligent, joined-up and mature discussion throughout the UK. Although our waters are special, they are part of wider waters as well. There are unique aspects of the Scottish environment that we need to protect, but we must also join up with our colleagues throughout the rest of the UK and Europe, because the seas are a wider resource for Europe's environment as a whole. I move amendment S3M-1602.2, to insert at end: "calls on the Scottish Government to accelerate the timetable for the Marine Bill, and further calls on Scottish Ministers to work constructively with the UK Government and other administrations to ensure that an integrated and joined-up approach to new legislation and its implementation are achieved."

Thank you. Why does that always happen when I do not have a gigantic speech to deliver? The debate has been good and timely. The quinquennial review is the opportunity for the Government to examine how the national parks have been operating. I welcome our opportunity as parliamentarians to give our views to the minister as he commissions that review. Our amendment is written in a spirit of encouragement to the minister to examine how the parks have operated. We want him to consider not just the structures—important though they are—but the effectiveness of the parks' operation and the extent to which communities have been involved in them. The ministers can take some key messages from the debate. The first is that our two national parks have been successful—that message has come from all parties. The second point is that although there are areas of consensus about where we want to go in the future, particularly on retaining local involvement, it is only fair to acknowledge that there are issues to consider around how the parks operate. There is a need for some history in this debate. Colleagues have said that I was initially the responsible minister. The park boards now are not the size that we intended when we started the process. We have gone from enthusiasm in the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs area, where people had been desperate for a national park for years, to a huge amount of scepticism and doubt in the Cairngorms area about whether a national park was appropriate for the area. The bottom-up process to which Alison McInnes referred was crucial. People needed to be part of that process. That is why we did not just have an enabling act to set up the national parks—we had the act first, then the orders, so that we could consider the different characteristics of both areas. It is testament to the work of colleagues in the chamber and, crucially, to the work of people on the boards, local representatives, businesses and communities that have been involved in the process, that eight years on we are having a debate in which there is universal agreement that it was right to set up the two national parks. The comments that Rhoda Grant made about the transformation of attitudes in the business community are testament to that inclusive approach.  The two parks have different histories and have ended up with different powers. The Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park has full planning powers and the Cairngorms national park has the opportunity to call in planning applications, although they both have park plans. They have both been successful in delivering the model that was wanted locally. I laud national parks as being one of devolution's successes. Jamie Hepburn is not in the chamber now, but he commented earlier that we could not have had the national parks legislation before devolution, partly because the House of Lords would not have enabled us to have national parks on its land, and partly because there would not have been the time. That is absolutely right—we spent a lot of time discussing national parks. That does not mean, however, that we all agree on everything. Colleagues have talked about the need to ensure that planning remains local. We have a robust process: national park plans are drawn up by the park authorities, the process enables consultation and changes to be made to the plans, and then the decisions are made. We will never have agreement on individual planning decisions—it is just not in our nature, and it is impossible to achieve. I congratulate Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority on winning one of the prestigious Scottish planning quality awards today, which is a testament to the fact that very good work is going on in our parks. I welcome the minister's confirmation that he does not intend to centralise the national parks—I will not invite him to stand up and say that again for members' pleasure, even though I have a lot of minutes to use up today. It would, however, be a huge mistake to lose accountability and local focus just for the benefit of cutting a couple of quangos and changing the numbers. Members keep asking the minister about that because we have read the report in its entirety and are unhappy not just with the recommendation, but with the content of the report. There is a history to the creation of the national park boards. We wanted to ensure that we had national appointees to reflect the national status of the parks. The national parks are hugely significant: Mike Russell read out the criteria, which include that they be of outstanding national importance—on that basis not every area in Scotland can qualify. We need to have national stewardship, but we also wanted local involvement, and local appointees who would be part of that process. Mike Rumbles and I had many conversations about that—which I did not seek—but the process gave us better national parks. That is why I  caution the minister against expecting that it will be simple to reduce the size of the national park boards. There were particular issues in establishing the boards with regard to bringing people in, but the challenge now is to retain local support. If the size of the park boards is automatically reduced, that support will potentially be put at risk.

It was clear at the start that there were two areas in which there was a broad consensus in terms of national priority and the national criteria that Mike Russell set out. The decision was taken that we would first make those two parks successful, and then focus on the location of more national parks. I will move on to that in my closing remarks—there are issues in respect of where the next national parks might be situated. The national park boards are not the same as other quangos, in that they have a very intimate relationship with local people. The four aims of the national parks are unique to Scotland and were developed because we wanted local people not just to benefit from the parks, but to feel that they were part of the process. That has been crucial to the parks' success. There was also an issue with regard to involving local councils. When local councils, locally elected people and national representatives are involved, it is difficult to get the number of people down to eight. There is an important issue about balancing expertise and interest, and if we are to meet the four key principles that were set out in the 2000 act we need, as I said, more than just a structural review. We took a radical approach by having a slightly different set of aims and purposes and we departed from the traditional Sandford principle. We need to reflect on the extent to which that has been successful—drawing on the experience of both national parks would be a good part of the quinquennial review. I hope that the review is not  just about structures. We should learn lessons about—

I will take an intervention from Robin Harper, who has not been in the debate.

That would be helpful, and I am more than happy to agree with Robin Harper's suggestion that the cabinet secretary should outline the new Government's position on the Sandford principle. The legislation was about implementing the four aims in a co-ordinated and collective way. That is why it would be useful to reflect on the success of the national parks. We did something radical and innovative—it would be good to examine how that has worked in practice. Almost every member has commented on the Kay report, and I strongly agree with Jamie McGrigor that we should treat it with some caution. However, it was revealed from reading the report that we should be grateful to Professor Kay for persuading ministers to dump the idea of merging SNH and SEPA. I would therefore not want to dismiss the entire report out of hand or suggest that it is not worth reading. I can sense from the content of colleagues' speeches that we have all read the briefings that have been sent to us by the national park authorities. If there is a core agreement among members, it is that people are interested in the range of challenges that the national parks address. Nigel Don was right to consider the positive achievements of the parks and to warn ministers to be careful not to unpick their work. Those who are responsible for managing our national parks should take some pride in the consensus in Parliament on their achievements. Getting us all to agree on something is no mean achievement. When we consider the range of issues, it makes us think about the challenges that are faced by the boards: publicity; the imaginative and effective work that colleagues have talked about; economic development; the massive opportunities for  tourism; the new facilities that have been built; the new housing that has been worked through with the rural housing associations; and, crucially, the investment in nature conservation and environmental protection. A huge amount of innovative work is being carried out. I note the work with young people in Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park and the community and culture work in the Cairngorms.

Are you telling me that I have one minute to go, Presiding Officer?

Fantastic. Thank you. It has been a timely debate, and there has been a clear message to ministers that our national parks have been successful. The last point to focus on is the question of new national parks. Richard Lochhead asked Claire Baker the tantalising question of whether we would agree a new national park if it was promoted by a community organisation. A little more thinking through and clarification is needed—perhaps not in the cabinet secretary's closing speech but in the future. National parks have a national priority and receive national funding. As Mike Russell correctly pointed out, they must be of outstanding national importance. I would like a marine and coastal national park to be established and some good arguments have been made by NGOs for other land-based national parks—Mike Russell mentioned north Harris. There will be competing opportunities in the future, and one subject for a debate is how that process works in practice so that we do not have every regional park in Scotland saying, "We want to be a national park, and we'll get to be one tomorrow." In the spirit of a little constructive criticism, I suggest that more work should be done on that and that members and the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee should be involved. There needs to be more thought on that issue, because the next stage in the national parks process is to ask about new national parks. What will the criteria be? Will they all be land based? I hope that we can consider a coastal marine park with some enthusiasm and involve all members in that debate. That will mean that we have a constructive discussion in which we may not necessarily all agree but in which we all at least know the ground rules and principles. It is fantastic that at the beginning of the third session of the Scottish Parliament we are looking at how we build on the success of the first two  national parks. That is a good message for the future.

Will the member take an intervention?

If Rob Gibson thinks that the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006 is so bad, why did he support it and why has the Scottish National Party not come up with one suggestion for changing it? The matter is Highland Council's responsibility.

I agree with the cabinet secretary that the OECD report is timely. The Scottish Parliament is in the early years of its third session, so now is a good time to review its first few years. The report provides strong affirmation of the Scottish Parliament's success as part of the wider United Kingdom framework. Due to the policies and investment of the Labour-Lib Dem coalition, strong economic performance and a stable investment framework at UK Government level, there has been sustained investment throughout Scotland. Successful policies have grown the economy and there has been record investment in rural health services and schools. There has been investment in broadband, which is crucial to teleworking, and the development of a thriving service sector is also identified in the OECD report. There has been major investment in Highlands and Islands Enterprise in order to boost our economic performance and to enable companies to develop and grow in some of our most fragile areas. The thriving economy around Inverness is a testament to the success of that focused approach. Work on local energy has been another  fantastic success. As a result of HIE's energy company work, loads of schemes have been set up in rural Scotland. We have also had eight years of sustained investment in transport infrastructure. There are new airports at Stornoway and Kirkwall. There has been massive new investment in ferries and there has been sustained roads investment—the investment in the road to the isles is most notable. Tolls on the Skye bridge were frozen and then removed. Our national parks have been established. Communities have been empowered through land reform, and crofting has been revitalised. The OECD makes it clear that there have been major successes in our rural economies and in our quality of life. Health and education indicators show that rural areas are performing well compared with the rest of Scotland. Scotland's rural regions have the highest level of tertiary education attainment among predominantly rural regions in the OECD. The UHI Millennium Institute has played a crucial role in opening up new opportunities. We should not focus just on work at Scottish Government level; there is a good story about local councils' investment on the ground and work on service delivery. People in the health service throughout rural Scotland have also played their part, as have thousands of others in rural areas—entrepreneurs, land managers, farmers and foresters. However, some of the country's most fragile and remote areas have fared less well, and I very much agree with the cabinet secretary that we need to focus on the serious challenges of much lower levels of employment, lack of economic progress, rural poverty and low wages in those areas that the OECD report puts centre stage. Therefore, I strongly agree with the report that we must avoid a one-size-fits-all approach to our rural areas. We can certainly learn from the coherent and very successful approach that has been taken in the Highlands and Islands, where there has been partnership involving key agencies, local authorities, Highlands and Islands Enterprise—which has become a powerful and really successful organisation—and the Government's big service departments in major investment programmes. I suspect that the area that could learn the most from considering that kind of successful approach and putting in place new structures and partnerships is the south of Scotland, and I agree with the report that we need to focus more on that part of the country. I have attended a couple of meetings at which stakeholders in the area have made it clear that they need more focused and up- front support from the Scottish Government, and I hope that this afternoon the Government will commit to putting this issue on the agenda and working with those stakeholders to identify structures that will maximise the economic opportunities that clearly exist. The report identifies four key challenges for the Scottish Government. Our amendment would add a fifth: the particular vulnerability of rural areas to the changes in funding and reduction in investment that will come from the Scottish Government's new budget. On land, property and housing, we agree that the crucial issues are effective land use planning, maximising the opportunities that are presented by our land, and ensuring that throughout the country we have sufficient stock to provide properties for sale and for rent. Ironically, a side effect of the success of accessible rural areas is increased competition for land, which has led to rising house prices. Many people who move into new housing developments in those areas are commuters who earn higher salaries in our major towns and cities; indeed, I know of people from my constituency who have moved out of the city to accessible parts of Midlothian and Fife. Because they earn more than the people who have traditionally lived in those areas, local residents who work locally and earn rural incomes cannot afford to get on the housing ladder. Moreover, because of the long-term impact of right to buy and the low level of housing association starts in rural areas, local people also have insufficient opportunities to rent. That must be part of the agenda. Labour members also agree with the OECD report that economic diversification in sectors such as tourism and energy production is crucial, and believe that the rural development programme must be part of the solution in that regard. The question is whether the substantial investment that is being made in rural areas is having the maximum impact, so we need to work with traditional rural industries such as farming, forestry and crofting to identify not only opportunities for diversification but other new economic opportunities that will ensure the most effective use of our land resource. However, as the report makes clear, we need co-ordination. All those developments must be linked into wildlife tourism, recreation opportunities, the development of renewables opportunities and the creation of sustainable economic performance. One thing that the Minister for Environment could do is to support the renewables industry, which is working with the farming industry on more small-scale and medium-scale renewables developments, particularly in wind power. It is a big mistake simply to take the  biofuels route; we have to consider existing technologies. As for forestry, which is one of the success stories that were identified by the OECD, I hope that, when he winds up, the minister will give us some good news about the biomass fund, about which there is some uncertainty. In fact, I have been told that it is due to run out in March. A key issue is to link our rural and urban areas to spread success from urban to rural Scotland and ensure inclusion. We are not starting with a blank sheet of paper—although agencies must think about, and plan more effectively for, the future. There are good examples of strategic planning in local authorities, which is partly why Labour strongly supported the development of the national planning framework. I should point out that the outcry over the Borders rail link announcement was caused by the fact that it did not set out a start date, never mind a finish date, for the project. The irony is that it exemplifies the kind of project we need to link rural and urban Scotland. The disappointment throughout the chamber yesterday was palpable and genuine, although the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change thought that we were making it up. That vital project was kicked off by Gus Macdonald before the Parliament was established with an economic development paper that examined options, and I developed that into a full-blown analysis to let us progress the project, to enable people in rural communities to access economic opportunities in the capital and—crucially—to enable communities and companies in the Borders to develop the economic opportunities that could come from better connections. The Scottish Government's budget could undermine such success. The voluntary sector is now finding that it is a victim of budget decisions and the price of the budget is undermining progress and new opportunities that we have created. Nicola Sturgeon's revised formula for health boards will reduce funding for rural health boards in the Borders, Dumfries, the Highlands and the Western Isles. Cuts are being passed on to rural communities from the budget. East Lothian Council faces a cut in its home-help budget and Highland Council is cutting teachers as well as its clothing grant, which helps the poorest families. Argyll and Bute Council has a £1 million shortfall thanks to the settlement that the Scottish National Party Government has handed down. Highlands and Islands Enterprise faces more than £50 million of cuts in the next three years: HIE is another success story that the SNP budget could undermine. I hope that we will have a constructive debate and that the SNP will reflect on all our comments.  Progress has been sustained and we must not jeopardise it. We cannot turn our backs on Scotland's rural areas. We must move forward. I am happy to support the Tory and Lib Dem amendments, which would add references to issues that the Parliament needs to debate. I move amendment S3M-1489.2, to insert at end: "however is concerned that recent Scottish Government budget decisions have the capacity to set back progress made."

Will the minister still make a direct contribution to the project up front? In June 2007, he set a figure of £115 million. Is he capping his contribution at that level and leaving the rest to be paid over time by way of the business model that he suggested? Alternatively, is he taking the capping approach that he took with the City of Edinburgh Council on the tram project, whereby he set a cap up front and left all the rest of the money to be delivered by somebody else? The statement did not clarify exactly how the funding regime will operate. What will the minister spend up front? Did he not let the cat out of the bag by using 2012 costings? Is he not admitting that the project will not be completed in his term of office and that there is a question mark over whether it will even start in his term of office, given the complex, novel approach that he is taking, which we have not seen before in relation to Scottish railways?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it remains committed to the sure start programme to bring together early education, child care, health and family support for disadvantaged families. (S3O-2399)

Is the minister aware that, months ago, even before the recent council budget decisions in Edinburgh, sure start projects were identified for cuts of nearly £1 million? That is not scaremongering—the figures are the council's. Will the minister acknowledge the importance of sure start to the poorest children in our society and investigate how the outcomes she mentioned will be met? It was put to me that for every parent who benefits from sure start, an average of two children, as well as other members of the family, benefit. The cuts are described as devastating by local project leaders. The minister's aspirations will clearly not be met, so will she investigate what is happening on the ground?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it next plans to meet NHS Lothian and what topics will be discussed. (S3O-2299)

I note the cabinet secretary's picture in today's Evening News . Would she like to go further than she did in the rather brief quotation that she gave to the newspaper today and reveal her current thinking about children's cancer services? Will she give a commitment that such services will stay in the Lothians? Can people take assurance from the appearance of her picture in the newspaper that she is committed to retaining those services?

As one of the members who were privileged to visit Malawi last week, I was struck by something to do with the point on which Jack McConnell just finished: as citizens, as members of Parliament and as members of the Government, we are able to make a real difference. Other members of the delegation were able to identify positive changes that had taken place since their previous visit two years ago. It is important for us to be able to tell our constituents, civic Scotland and those who are raising funds for and have built links with Malawi that they are making a difference to one of the poorest countries in the world. We met far too many people and saw far too many projects for me to mention them all now, but other members have referred to the core issues of health and education. I would add fair trade and business development to that list. We were incredibly impressed by some of the local health projects that are tackling the poverty, malnutrition and poor water quality that Malawians experience. A particular issue is the status of women, who still die routinely during childbirth. That is unthinkable to us, with our modern standards of health care. A huge amount of positive work is under way. We met people in villages in Chikwawa, where the incidence of cholera has been reduced; in those villages, people have not died of the disease in the past year. That project is also reducing the number of people who die from malaria and improving the survival rate of women giving birth. People appreciate and strongly support such projects. The volunteer health workers whom the projects fund are trying to work with the Malawian health system, which is crucial. We saw the work that is being done at Mulanje mission hospital to support nurses' training. To attract nurses to work at the hospital and to retain them there, the hospital has ensured that they have somewhere to stay. We were struck by the fact that 15 per cent of Malawi's adult population  have HIV. The impact of that is devastating. Work with orphans, to get them into schools, is crucial. I refer to the twinning links that exist between Malawi and schools in my constituency such as Stenhouse primary, Dalry primary and Tynecastle high school. It was exciting to see the benefits of those links on the ground. A girls hostel has been built in Embangweni, and a huge amount of work has been done to support the links between our schools and Malawian schools. The benefits are tangible and are appreciated by teachers, parents and pupils. However, there is much more that we need to do. More books are required, so that children do not have to share 10 to a book. Basic facilities such as seats in classrooms are also needed, to enable kids to concentrate. There is a lack of dining facilities and there is poor sanitation—a lack of clean water and toilet facilities. I hope that the minister will look at how we can build on our educational programmes. Government support for fair trade—the work that DFID is doing in Malawi—is crucial, but there is much that we can do as individuals. We need to tell our constituents that the people whom we met in Malawi—the Kasinthula cane growers—have had their lives improved already. Much more can be done if we think about buying fair trade goods. We need a relationship that is built on trade justice, fair wages and investment in local communities. That is a really practical way in which we as parliamentarians and, crucially, as citizens and leaders in our communities can help to ensure that the improvements that are taking place in Malawi and that need to happen in the future continue.

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. I express our great disappointment that he has not listened to the overwhelming majority of those who responded in favour of a ban on snaring, not just in the representations that he has received, but in the previous consultation by the Scottish Executive and in the public campaign to end the unnecessary suffering of animals that, as the minister well knows, are not restricted to wildlife that is intended to be caught by snares. Government is about tough choices, and on this occasion we believe that the minister has not risen to the challenge. I make it clear to the minister that we do not believe that his statement will end the debate. How can he possibly believe that his proposals for an incredibly complex, very detailed set of provisions can work? He has not given us a timetable for implementation; he has made virtually no reference to the alternative approaches that are used by some land managers; he admits that he has no plans to consider the animal welfare implications of the continued use of snaring throughout Scotland; and, crucially, he has left us with a total lack of clarity on enforcement.

It seems like a long time ago, but I remember that when I was the transport minister, I was very interested in Edinburgh Park station because, as Margaret Smith rightly said, tens of thousands of people do not have an easy option to get to that area from across the central belt. The potential number of passengers that could access Edinburgh Park needs to be considered urgently. Therefore, I congratulate Margaret Smith on securing the debate. The area has South Gyle station, so it is not without a railway station with routes, but there is a fundamental need to consider the options and how we can increase the capacity of railway access to the whole area around Edinburgh Park, including the Gogar area. The new trams will come along soon, so there will be opportunities to do that. Now is a good time for the minister to sit down and take a comprehensive look at the opportunities in the area. We face challenges if we are to tackle congestion not only in Edinburgh and the Lothians but in the whole central belt. The points that Robin Harper made are crucial to the debate. It is not only about congestion on our roads; it is also about congestion on our rail network. I know from travelling between Edinburgh and Glasgow and down from Stirling that the tricky point is getting access to Haymarket and Waverley stations. The limits to capacity there raise a fundamental problem that is worthy of examination. If there is any delay, the trains all tend to back up. The Glasgow to Edinburgh connection is the flagship connection in Scotland; it is vital for connectivity across the country. David Whitton's point is valid in the context of the debate. Whether a stop causes a delay of one minute, two minutes or 30 seconds, we already have a line that has not sped up for years. The challenge is to re-evaluate connections across the central belt as the basis of the whole rail network. Now is a good time for the Scottish Government to go back to first principles. We need a Glasgow to Edinburgh express option, which will be challenging to achieve—even getting four trains an hour to fit the current timetable is challenging for the rail network. There is a great need for an express service between the two cities, but there is also the issue of connecting all the commuter towns in between. David Whitton is right to say that we cannot afford to do one at the expense of the other. The challenge is that the line does not currently have the capacity easily to deliver on those requirements.  There is also the minister's commitment to electrify the Glasgow to Edinburgh railway route. Although we would welcome that, it should be part of the mix in this discussion. Also relevant to strategic railway network access is the other key Edinburgh to Glasgow railway route: the long-distance trains that run from London through to Glasgow Central station. That line is underutilised. It is a very fast route and a pleasant one, because the trains are longer and nowhere near as busy as they are on the Edinburgh to Glasgow line, but there are hardly any trains on it, so it does not meet commuter demand. Trains on that line could give different connectivity on the other side of Glasgow, from Glasgow Central down to Ayrshire. That issue should be examined. I am less concerned on this occasion to take pot shots at the minister, although I will be happy to do so on another occasion. The key point this evening is that there is agreement across the chamber that the issue needs to be looked at urgently. There is no quick fix but, to come back to Margaret Smith's point, the station was built to enable the maximum possible access to Edinburgh Park, which it does not currently deliver. That is the context in which we should debate the issue.

Let me make it clear that Labour members will support amendment 6, which will increase the climate change fund. Having read John Swinney's explanation to the convener of the Finance Committee, we hope that his approach will be genuinely sustainable and that that means that social justice will be included as an element of sustainable development. A crucial part of our response to climate change must be to ensure that the people who are already most vulnerable do not lose out further when climate change really begins to kick in. We know that climate change is already with us—that is why Labour Rural Affairs and Development Committee members expressed disappointment about the flooding and strategic waste issue. We believe fundamentally that the budget as a whole does not do enough on climate change. The SNP dumped its manifesto commitment to year-on-year targets for reductions in carbon emissions. Amendment 6 must be about ensuring not just that the climate change fund is provided with £4 million of spare cash but that it can drive change across the budget. I ask the cabinet secretary to consider carefully how he will spend that money. We must ensure that all proposed Government expenditure not only does as much as possible to reduce our carbon emissions but takes into account the other greenhouse gases as well. We raised the issue of supported bus services last week, so I ask the cabinet secretary to clarify whether today's press reports are right in  suggesting that he is considering acting on fuel costs for the bus industry. The bus industry is environmentally friendly. Buses are part of how we can ensure that we get about our business more energy-efficiently and they are part of the response to tackling climate change. In supporting amendment 6 today, we want to see more being done in the rest of the £30 billion. That is the crucial point. The budget will increase money for microgeneration, but more must be made available for that—the SNP promised a lot in its manifesto—than is currently provided in the budget. On energy efficiency, we support the climate change fund, but the cabinet secretary must sign up to ensuring that energy efficiency is a priority across the Scottish Executive's budget so that we save Government money while reducing carbon emissions. That must be a win-win. We want to ensure that the budget is spent more wisely so that it helps to tackle climate change and does not make it worse. We have raised those concerns in committee debates on the budget process thus far. We hope that, as part of the climate change fund, the cabinet secretary will look at the budget as a whole rather than just tinker around the edges. He must ensure that the new money can drive change right across the Executive so that we have targets in carbon reduction. This is not about just a small amount of money but about making a change across the whole budget. We are prepared to work constructively with the Government on that. That is the context in which we will support amendment 6.

To ask the Scottish Executive what further discussions it plans to have with City of Edinburgh Council regarding capital funding. (S3O-2114)

Is the minister aware that the Scottish National Party-Liberal Democrat council believes that it now faces a £20 million increase in the cost of the third wave of the schools programme for Edinburgh, which the SNP promised during the election campaign that it would match brick by brick? In his review, will he commit to looking seriously at what the council's education leader has called a "last ditch" attempt to persuade the Government that the situation in Edinburgh is desperate? Will he accept that, without Scottish Government help, Edinburgh simply will not get the new schools that we desperately need?

I welcome the First Minister's comment at the weekend that he will do all he can to safeguard the jobs of the 1,000 highly skilled Scottish & Newcastle plc staff in Edinburgh and the Lothians. Will he do everything he can to ensure that the positions of the many other staff in the city who depend on work with Scottish & Newcastle, such as those who work in our marketing agencies and our legal and accountancy firms, are also considered by the Scottish Government? Will he join me in calling on the potential new owners of Scottish & Newcastle to be aware of the significant support that the firm has offered to the development of the city's culture, as well as its economy, through the provision of long-standing financial support for organisations such as the national museum of Scotland, the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh, and the Edinburgh international festival, which has been an important part of the company's reputation and its relationship with the capital?

There is currently a lot of good practice, and Margo MacDonald's motion has brought to the chamber a sense that it would be good to pull it together. In my constituency, for example, many workers get off the airport bus and cross the road to the employment service, where many leaflets in Polish are available. Good things are happening, but we need to build on the momentum.

I am sure that Malcolm Chisholm is aware, as I am, of the role of the community education service in Edinburgh. It has had some fantastic open days at which migrant workers from across Europe and further afield have been able to access council services. A range of welcoming events has also been held. Does Malcolm Chisholm share my concern that potential cuts in the City of Edinburgh Council budget could undermine the welcoming process if no alternative is put in place by the Scottish Government?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. I welcome his efforts to build on the progress that has been made during the past eight years, with revised and ambitious targets. However, I say up front that Labour has strong concerns about the practicalities and delivery of some of his proposals. In the Scottish National Party budget, it is clear that less money is available for local authorities. Audit Scotland is clear that a more radical approach to reducing waste and significantly increasing recycling will be more expensive. There are also fears that Scotland will not meet the EU's targets on diversion from landfill. If the minister is not fully funding local authorities and is not approving their existing plans, will he accept liability should the targets not be met? The cabinet secretary made great play of his new cap on energy from waste—no more than 25 per cent of waste will be used for that. In his interview with Radio Scotland this morning, he did not rule out incinerators, but he will have to clarify his intentions. His statement this afternoon accepted the philosophy of waste reduction in the Sustainable Development Commission's report, which recommends that 60 per cent efficiency targets be imposed on energy-from-waste plants. Will he ensure that those targets are in place in the operation of the plants from day one? There are strong concerns that targets might never be achieved if they remain simply an aspiration. I want to ask the cabinet secretary about his support for the proximity principle. He said that he will not support large amounts of incineration in any part of the country, but what will a 25 per cent cap at a regional level mean for individual local authorities? Will some areas have to import waste from other parts of the country?

I warmly welcome a motion that gives us the chance to celebrate some of the fantastic work that is being done on campuses across Scotland, and I congratulate Patrick Harvie on getting it on our agenda. I agree, in particular, with the motion's reference to the importance of leadership in the student movement on the issue. Throughout Scotland and the United Kingdom, groups such as People & Planet are pushing environmental policies and pushing universities to go further in incorporating environmental principles in their daily activities. We know that if every other country had the same carbon footprint as Scotland, we would need three planets to sustain us. That situation cannot continue, and our universities and colleges are leading the way in setting out a different path.  Our educational institutions have begun to act in several key ways. They are looking at their estates, their buildings, their use of energy and how their campuses are accessed by public transport. They are considering whether the amount of waste that they produce can be reduced and whether more of it can be recycled. Some fantastically innovative research is being done on campuses on the new economic opportunities that tackling climate change will create for us. The purchasing and investment policies of our universities and our student associations are another crucial area. As MSPs, we have a role to play in celebrating what has been achieved and in supporting and encouraging campuses to go further. I am particularly proud of the leadership that has been shown in Edinburgh. Patrick Harvie mentioned the University of Edinburgh, which has done fantastically well, thanks to the actions of not only individual students and university staff, but the academic leaders, who are signed up to making progress. A big change is happening in key areas, including energy, transport and waste. In their own way, the four universities in Edinburgh are all beginning to be leaders and innovators. The University of Edinburgh has begun to do fantastic work on energy issues. Last year, it gained a national energy efficiency award. Its fantastic trigeneration scheme, through which it saves £500,000 year, is worth going to see. It uses a combined heat and power system, which was retrofitted to make an existing campus more energy efficient. At its Merchiston campus, Napier University is leading the way in the retrofitting of photovoltaic panels, and the new Craiglockhart building has a highly visible set of solar panels. The university is taking day-to-day measures, for example to minimise heat loss, use natural daylight more effectively and make better use of natural means such as shading and window operation that prevent energy from being wasted and flying out through the windows. At its new campus, where it uses biomass heating, Queen Margaret University has a huge focus on reducing its carbon emissions. It has sought to achieve a 75 per cent reduction on the carbon emissions that would have been generated through the use of traditional methods. Significant gains are being made on our campuses. Students and universities can also use their purchasing power to make a difference. At the University of Edinburgh, fantastic progress is being made on Fairtrade products, which are now offered as the default option in all bars, cafeterias and campus outlets. People at the university drink an awful lot of coffee, but nowadays they drink Fairtrade coffee, which makes a difference not  only by raising awareness but through better terms and conditions for people who produce coffee and better environmental conditions in coffee-producing countries. There is a huge amount of best practice out there. I hope that, in her summing-up, the cabinet secretary will commit to taking on board the best practice across Scotland and making it everyday practice. On the procurement guidelines for new investment in our institutions across Scotland, all institutions need to hit the best targets that they can achieve. They need to be leaders and champions in tackling climate change and promoting high energy efficiency and low consumption standards. There is a huge opportunity. I hope that the cabinet secretary will seize the day.

I agree with the other winding-up speakers that this has been a very good debate, in which we have managed to explore our differences. More of that would be good for the Parliament, as would more  debates of the tone of this morning's discussion. The debate has also been good in identifying some of the areas in which there is a strong basis, across all parties, for determining the future direction in which we should take our country. We have come an incredibly long way since the early days of the Scottish Parliament. In year one, if I had told Donald Dewar that, eight years on, his legacy would be agreement pretty much across the chamber that we could deliver 50 per cent of our electricity from renewables by 2020, I am not sure that he would have appointed me—I am not sure that that would have been a believable position just eight years ago. Let us remember how far we have come and use that to move forward. As members will know—a couple of speakers observed it today—I am not a member of the nuclear fan club. Nuclear power is not cheap; it is rather expensive. It requires very secure waste management, regardless of whether that is deep disposal or disposal above ground, and it needs it for a long time. Furthermore, such facilities cannot be built quickly. I stand by the views that I have expressed previously in the Parliament. Nevertheless, as my Labour colleagues have made clear, the future of our energy policy is regularly and seriously debated within our party, along with our trade union colleagues and our local communities. Therefore, we come to the debate not parading soundbites, but with a background of serious consideration and the range of views that Parliament has heard this morning. We are a mature political party that understands the challenge of addressing the issues that have been raised by the IPCC and in the Stern report. There are core principles on which we all agree, which we made clear in our election manifesto, and we have signed up to them in our amendment today. We need a Scottish energy policy that is crafted to meet Scotland's needs and that maximises our opportunities, and we must start from the principle that we need to use energy more efficiently. Regardless of members' preferred energy mix for Scotland, we need to accept that the more energy that we consume and waste, the more difficult are the choices that we set for ourselves and for future generations. With our commitment to social justice, we are passionate about tackling fuel poverty, hence our commitment to the free central heating programme for pensioners and the warm deal. I ask, therefore, when the SNP will be in a position to give us its plans on energy efficiency in detail and when it will move to extend the provision to include the retro-fitting of systems such as solar panels for heating water. I acknowledge Joe FitzPatrick's enthusiasm for solar-powered water heating. He is correct in  saying that it makes economic sense, taking into account of the life cycle of such energy systems. I have seen them operating in people's homes throughout the country. They save money for people who are on low incomes and they reduce people's carbon emissions. James Kelly was right to point out the difference that such systems make to people's comfort and quality of life—and their fuel bills plummet. The Labour Party believes that we need to act. We believe that we could be the renewables powerhouse of Europe. We are proud of our achievements in the first eight years of the Parliament through working in partnership to deliver 20 per cent of our electricity from renewables by 2010, a target that will be upped to 40 per cent by 2020. Given the rate of progress over the past eight years, our election manifesto committed us to working to raise that figure to 50 per cent by 2020. We do not regard that as a given, but we believe that with hard work and support for the renewables industry such a figure is absolutely deliverable. That is why the planning guidelines that we issued last March promoted the use of CHP and onsite renewables and increased the pressure on developers to deliver throughout Scotland with a level playing field. Those planning guidelines must be promoted by the SNP Government. We set in place the building blocks for the mass expansion of biomass. David Stewart talked about the progress that has been made in the Highlands and Islands, where the Highlands and Islands Community Energy Company is leading developments. He also rightly highlighted our support for future hydropower developments, with the major opportunities being for small-scale hydropower facilities. In addition, our manifesto focused on the need for more community-owned and community-developed renewables, seeing a role for the co-operative movement in benefiting communities. We have left a strong legacy that we believe the SNP must build on now. We recognise the need for action to reduce the carbon footprint of the rest of our energy supply. In particular, we support the move to cleaner coal. We have technology in Scotland that we should be exporting to the rest of the world. That would be good for all our economies and for the planet. We must ensure that the debate is about more than just picking a fight with the UK Government, either on principles or on practical politics. The debate on Scotland's future energy cannot be reduced to a bun fight on nuclear power. There is hypocrisy at the heart of the SNP motion. The Government's principled position does not rule out using nuclear power now, and it does not rule out extending the life of existing nuclear plant—we note its pragmatic welcome for the extension of  the life of Hunterston B. However, most hypocritical of all—we heard this from Jim Mather this morning—the Government does not rule out using energy from existing or new nuclear power stations in England through the UK grid. We live in an increasingly interconnected world, and the agreement throughout Europe is that we need a Europe-wide grid to which all our countries would input energy and from we would all benefit through the security of supply. As if that was not enough, I do not think that we are exactly being knocked over in the rush of companies wanting to build new nuclear power stations in Scotland. They are not encouraged by the transmission charges and, as we said before the election, there is absolutely no question of the UK Labour Government wanting to force Scotland into building new nuclear power stations. The SNP knows well that the devolution settlement gives the Scottish Government control over planning decisions. It is not good enough for the SNP to create a false fight over nuclear energy, and it is not good enough for it just to talk the talk on energy efficiency and renewables; it must do more to meet the target, for which there is broad support, of producing 50 per cent of our energy from renewables by 2020. I am keen to hear from Mike Russell in his summing up what target the SNP intends to set for renewable heat, which is one of the big opportunities that must be grasped. We cannot just talk about electricity; we have to move the agenda on to renewable heat and I know that Mike Russell is keen on biomass. Liam McArthur also made the point forcibly that we have to move on from electricity to renewable heat. The Labour Party is committed to making it possible for people to heat and power their homes with renewables. One of the first things that we would have done would have been to take money off people's council tax if they installed microgeneration or energy efficiency measures. Until we change the law in Scotland, we will be the only part of the UK where people do not get financial benefit for doing their bit to tackle climate change in their homes, which is one of the fastest ways to drive down CO 2  emissions and tackle fuel poverty. Is there a date yet for the consultation on permitted development rights for microgeneration? We are falling behind England and Wales—last year's elections have not delayed Rhodri Morgan's Government in Wales. Where is the Scottish Government's energy efficiency strategy? We left it to progress that strategy. What new, radical measures will it include? We desperately need to make our existing housing stock more energy efficient. Some 80 per cent of current housing stock will be in existence in  2050. Improving its energy efficiency has to be a radical priority. It is not just housing, either; public sector buildings must lead the way in driving down our CO 2  emissions and producing renewable energy. A commitment to procure buildings from the top quartile of energy efficiency would instantly drive up standards in the property market. In the previous parliamentary session, we lobbied across the chamber for faster action to make sure that public procurement included microgeneration and biomass boilers as standard. Time and again, John Swinney argued that the Executive should act, so that Perth and Kinross Council could include biomass boilers that use wood fuel in the Breadalbane academy project in Aberfeldy. Imagine my disappointment—disbelief actually—that one of the first acts of the new SNP-Liberal Democrat council in Edinburgh was to cancel the biomass boilers for the five new high schools and two primaries approved by the outgoing Labour council after a lot of work. New care homes in our city have benefited from carbon-neutral heating systems. The wood fuel for the schools was to come from Dalkeith—there could not be a more sustainable or better local energy synergy. I hope that the SNP Government will go back to the City of Edinburgh Council and have more discussions with it.

That is a smokescreen, if I can use that term. Biomass boilers have been used safely across the globe. We in this chamber have spent years demanding that the highest possible standards are implemented in urban as well as rural areas. There has been cross-party support for that, so it is not good enough to come to the chamber with such a view today. We need a little less hot air from the nationalists, a little less of the "nuclear war of words", as the Daily Mail put it on Friday. The SNP Government has talked the talk on renewables; it now has to deliver. Alison McInnes made that point and I agree with her absolutely, although it will be a bit of a challenge for a party that has demanded more renewables as long as they are not wind farms in its constituencies. Before the elections, the SNP campaigned for a statutory annual 3 per cent reduction in carbon emissions, but that was quickly dumped. All of us in this chamber must ensure that the SNP's commitment to renewables and energy efficiency does not also get sidelined.  We need progress; we need the SNP to produce a strategy for energy in Scotland and to work co-operatively with the UK Government to deliver it. We must ensure that if opportunities arise from the new UK Energy Bill, we seize them and do not miss the boat. There is appetite from environmental groups, communities, local authorities, trade unions and business communities to play their part. Ministers just need to get on with it.

I very much welcome the cabinet secretary's statement. I also welcome the presence of Jonathan Shaw, the UK fisheries minister, and Bertie Armstrong, who are in the public gallery today. The chamber will be struck by the transformation of the cabinet secretary who, during his eight years of doom and gloom, opposed every one of the tough measures that we on the Labour benches supported, which have delivered the beginnings of a recovery in the North Sea and enabled Jonathan Shaw to negotiate an outcome that the fishing industry could not have dreamed of a few years ago. I echo the cabinet secretary's tribute to the fishing industry, the environmental NGOs and the scientists for their sterling work in helping to deliver more sustainable fishing stocks. However, at the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, the cabinet secretary was unable to identify the specific differences in his negotiating position from the UK line. Given his boast in the chamber today that he could have achieved so much more, will the cabinet secretary now outline to us precisely what those differences would have been and how he would have ensured a better outcome in practice than we had in December?

To ask the Scottish Executive how its funding settlement for universities will contribute to its ambition to grow the economy. (S3O-1800)

How can the minister remain so positive when the universities are deeply worried about their future competitiveness, given the £20 million shortfall in university funding next year and the longer-term impact of the 5 per cent structural gap between universities in Scotland and those in the rest of the UK that David Caldwell from Universities Scotland identified in evidence to the Enterprise, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee? How does the cabinet secretary see Edinburgh University—one of the top 100 universities in the world—remaining competitive, given the immense pressure to which it will be subject next year, which will damage the university's capacity to maintain competitive pay for academics? Will she ensure that her joint future thinking task force includes both the University and College Union and the National Union of Students, given their crucial perspectives on university funding and competition issues?

Today's debate has demonstrated that the budget settlement is a bad deal not just for Scotland but for individual communities. There is a dishonesty at the heart of the budget, because there is not enough money to pay for what the SNP's manifesto promised. If the SNP has national priorities that it expects to be delivered throughout Scotland, it needs to be explicit and up-front about the funding that will be available. Tavish Scott was absolutely right to say that never has less detail been available to the Parliament at this stage. Tom McCabe was also right to ask for greater transparency. In his response tonight, will the cabinet secretary agree to publish what existing capital funds are transferring to local government during each of the years of the spending review period, what new capital grant is being added to the overall capital block, and the details of the distribution methods and calculations that underlie how the allocation to each local authority has been arrived at? There is agreement throughout the chamber that we need a partnership between the Scottish Government and local authorities. The Government should not be setting up the local authorities for a blame game. As Andy Kerr and Rhona Brankin made clear in their speeches, it is increasingly apparent to everyone that there is simply not enough money to meet the SNP's manifesto commitment to reduce class sizes. It is absolutely clear that the SNP manifesto commitment on the expansion of nursery provision will not be delivered either. George Foulkes used the example of Edinburgh where, when the SNP is calling for class size reductions at a national level, the future of existing schools is on the line and there is a lack of commitment to new schools. Ministers have also been rumbled over nursery provision. There is no point in ministers telling Edinburgh parents that there will be more access to nursery education if they are scrapping 300 free places that would have gone to the most vulnerable parents who are trying to return to education or are on low incomes. I welcome the cabinet secretary's commitment to recognise the capital city status for which we have been calling. He will find that there is cross-party support for that in Edinburgh. However, I am disappointed at the lengthy timescale. Our SNP-Liberal Democrat council—already known as the council in crisis—faces a severe housing crisis and increasing policing challenges, so I hope for early action from the minister. I will move on to waste recycling, which has not been mentioned today. The strategic waste fund is  a classic example of a fund that was created by the previous coalition Government. It was set up to speed up Scotland's ability to meet the European Union's landfill targets and to ramp up our recycling rates. That investment was successful. It provided new money and made a real difference. I simply do not accept Keith Brown's rewriting of history. Only last week, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment admitted that local authorities will face really hard choices. He admitted that he will not make it easy for them. Throughout Scotland, there are fears that the progress on recycling that has been made will be unpicked as the money disappears into local authority budgets to compete with schools and roads investment. To say that the SNP Government has not thought through its proposals on flooding does not begin to describe the mess and confusion that have been created. Every time an SNP minister or Scottish Government official has answered questions in writing or at committee, it has become apparent that the implications of de-ring fencing flood and coastal protection investment have simply not been thought through. We have received a different story and a different explanation of the detail every time—just read the Official Report . As a demonstration of how unclear the Scottish Government's position is, MSPs from all parties in the Parliament—including those on the SNP benches—have had to ask some pretty fundamental questions. The Scottish ministers have given no justification for why the formula for investment in flooding protection—whereby central Government provides 80 per cent of the funding and 20 per cent is matched at local level—is no longer appropriate. We have yet to receive a clear explanation. The cabinet secretary's statement today gave us yet another formulation: "previously ring-fenced grants that are now rolled up, such as for flooding, will still be allocated to the same councils in the same way and according to the same practice as before." I inform members that the current practice involves a bidding system. However, there is no reference to flood protection in the national outcomes, the national indicators or the targets. So what is the policy? We need to know now. The awkward truth for SNP ministers is that, even though we all agree that the creaking, dysfunctional consent and planning processes need to be radically changed, the money that the SNP is putting into the system for future local government spending is simply nowhere near enough. On the Government's own figures, it is clear that significant increases will be required if flood protection schemes that are in development are to be delivered. The £42 million that is being  spent this year will not pay for the £65 million of investment that it is predicted will be needed in 2008-09. A freeze in council tax will be of little comfort to people who experience flooding in years to come. Some people in my constituency worry when we get severe and prolonged rainfall. However, as I have pointed out before, I am still waiting for an answer from the Scottish Government on whether the Water of Leith scheme will be funded in full. We need to know the principles of distribution that have been agreed with COSLA, the precise formula by which money has been allocated and what will happen to those schemes that are being worked up—there is a huge list of them—but which were not submitted as completed schemes by 14 November. Similar questions are waiting to be answered across the Government. The debate has shown that the SNP Government stands ready to ditch its manifesto commitments on class sizes, the provision of nursery facilities, urban and rural public transport, and support for children with disabilities and their families. The SNP promised more in its manifesto than it could deliver, and it knew it. SNP ministers already have their excuse made up. Their argument will be that it is not their fault, as money was given to local authorities. They will say that it is the fault of local authorities if SNP priorities are not delivered. That is simply not good enough. People in our communities are already beginning to bear the brunt of this dishonest budget. In Fife and Edinburgh, vulnerable people are first in line to see their services being squeezed and chopped. Labour members will defend the capacity of local government to provide high-quality public services that people need. In his opening speech, John Swinney made great play of the ability to hold the Scottish Government and local government to account. However, as Gavin Brown demonstrated, the indicators that are in front of us today are utterly vague and totally meaningless. We on the Labour benches want to make it clear that our objective is not to object to the removal of ring fencing per se, but to object when we see that not enough money is going into local government for national priorities that everyone agrees need to be delivered. The SNP has not said where the money will go or how much it will be. We need a clear commitment and clear funding for national priorities. The SNP has provided increases for inflation and to deliver the council tax freeze; they are not about new resources or meeting new national policy priorities. We will not let the SNP off the hook. The real test of the settlement will come into play when local authorities throughout Scotland set their budgets. That is when this settlement will truly fall apart.

I welcome the minister's commitment at least to consider the project in the context of the strategic transport projects review. What he said about capacity constraints actually makes the case for the project being included in the review. Many of us believe that a further upgrade at Waverley station is essential. Will he commit to consider that in the context not just of a south suburban railway but of improving rail services across south-east Scotland generally? Will he consider that as an urgent priority? It is something that Scottish National Party candidates talked about during the election campaign and that we in the Labour Party have been committed to for some time.

What a contrast in tone between the SNP speeches and those of the rest of us in the chamber. Home rule has given us the best of both worlds: issues such as health, education, the legal system, developing our environmental policies, economic development and transport are controlled by the Scottish Parliament; foreign affairs, pensions and social security are dealt with at the UK level. We have delivered on the principles that underpinned decades of campaigning for home rule by providing better Government that is closer to home, more responsive and more in tune with the majority of Scottish opinion. We have also made time to listen to the minorities in Scottish opinion and to ensure that they are part of the picture. We have provided time to focus on Scottish issues while remaining  part of the UK. Our Scottish Parliament has delivered on people's aspirations. The Scottish Constitutional Convention drew up our Parliament's operating principles, which were built on by the consultative steering group. Who would argue that we have not dramatically transformed the access that individuals and organisations have to our committee discussions, to shaping our laws and to influencing our policy discussions? We have a family-friendly Parliament in which equal opportunities are part of our ethos. Look at the debates that we have had on domestic violence as part of the focus on the 16 days of activism against gender violence campaign. Equal opportunities are not a side issue but are central to the politics and work of the Parliament. Scotland has a voting system on which the Labour Party compromised because we agreed that people throughout Scotland—whether from urban or rural constituencies—must be part of the Parliament's decision making. People's views now direct how we operate. People in Scotland voted on devolution and have given it legitimacy. Contrast that with the idea of leaving the debate on our future to one party. Even in their first two speeches this morning, SNP members have demonstrated that the issue cannot be left just to them. We cannot leave our constitutional future to be directed by a party that has only one answer waiting, whatever submissions are made to its review. The tone and substance of Nicola Sturgeon's speech demonstrated eloquently that we cannot leave this important issue to a party with a narrow agenda. That is why I welcome today's debate and Wendy Alexander's initiative. Eight years into our new Scottish Parliament, surely this is a good time for us to reflect on the success of devolution and to have a constructive, cross-party, across-the-country discussion on how we improve our constitutional settlement. That discussion needs to involve a range of views and must not predetermine the answer. It must be directed by our Parliament, with the legitimacy of our Parliament. Twenty years ago, it was not possible to have that range of cross-party discussion in Scotland and it was certainly not possible to have such a debate with the UK Government. I welcome Annabel Goldie's speech today. It is testament to the success of devolution that our principal opponents then are now in favour of being whole-heartedly involved in building on and improving our devolution settlement. A UK Labour Government gives us the chance to broaden that dialogue so that we can have a discussion across the UK that is led by our debate in Scotland. Eight years on, we can feel and see that our Parliament is maturing. It is worth feeding into that debate. Over the past decade, we have  had other significant constitutional changes across the UK that should also be plugged into our discussions. We have the new Greater London Assembly, the National Assembly for Wales—which has also gained powers and grown in stature—and the Northern Ireland Assembly.

I put the question straight back to Bruce Crawford. Why cannot the SNP accept a debate that builds on the views of Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives? Why cannot the SNP, which is a minority in the Parliament, join us? A degree of humility from SNP members would be welcome. Over the past few years, we have seen different policy approaches across the UK. Our Parliament was put in place to ensure that we decide on Scottish solutions for Scottish priorities. We can see that the debate on sustainable development has developed a different tone and flavour in each legislature in the UK. On higher education, transport and renewables, others are catching up with us, and we must not lose our advantage. On health, we have the ability to set different policies, which is matched by the ability to set our own funding priorities. Much has been achieved in the past eight years and we need to move the debate forward. SNP members complain about the debate. They have the choice to join in the discussion with the majority of public opinion. If they wanted to be a part of that debate, that would be a step forward, but they should not stand aside and attempt to hold the debate on their own. We need to review our success in Scotland and to look to the future. It cannot be right to leave the discussion to be driven by a nationalist, separatist Government. We can see our Parliament maturing. The challenge is to support the motion and to develop the debate on our constitutional future—to vote to strengthen home rule, to work with the grain of Scottish opinion, to build on the legacy of the work that was done by our first First Minister, Donald Dewar, and to ensure that that progress involves people from across political divides and UK colleagues. I hope that the whole Parliament will vote for the motion in Wendy Alexander's name.

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing the debate and on having done her research. She has managed to shed new light on the properties of sweet gale. I thought that I knew about it, but she has added more information to the debate. This is a perfect topic for a members' business debate. It is something that we can get our heads round and it is of interest to members across the chamber. There is clear cross-party support for the product. At the end of these debates, having raised awareness of a topic, a minister sits in the hot seat waiting to reply and to reflect on the comments that we have made. I congratulate Mary Scanlon on picking bog myrtle for her topic. It is an excellent choice for a debate. One of my most enjoyable engagements as a minister came in the latter days of the previous Executive. Members might not think that that was an exciting time, but there were a lot of exciting times in the last year of that Executive. The  engagement was to do with sweet gale. I was vastly impressed by the huge amount of work that Boots and the other partners put in. That work has enabled us to reach the point that we are at today. I congratulate people outwith the Parliament on the work that they have done. The sweet gale industry is undergoing precisely the sort of development that we should support in Scotland, as colleagues have said. In that industry there is local research, which does not get raised often enough in the Parliament. We tend to think about research in the big universities, rather than the bottom-up research that the bog myrtle or sweet gale plant has brought. The commercial partnership and links between, for example, the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew, academics and Highlands and Islands Enterprise are classic connections that we should foster and encourage more widely. In addition, the industry involves local agricultural production and the transition from a wild crop to a farmed crop. We do not hear about many examples of that. The sweet gale industry is an interesting development to which we should give consideration. Roseanna Cunningham was absolutely right to say that, although Mary Scanlon has raised the subject in the context of the Highlands and Islands, we should not view sweet gale as being appropriate only for the Highlands and Islands. The list that we received from Boots today demonstrates the breadth of work that is already being done throughout Scotland. With new planting taking place, the industry will, I hope, spread further. We cannot overestimate the importance of even one or two jobs in communities in economically fragile areas, because even two jobs can make a difference, as they add to the economic development in an area. Having local processing facilities is also very useful. Sweet gale has gone from being a niche market and a niche idea—if I can put it that way—to having the potential to grow into a mass market, which is what has stimulated our interest tonight. The idea is exciting, and it could go further. That is why the NFUS is so keen. I am glad that Mary Scanlon suggested that there is an opportunity for crofters to get involved in the industry. The scale on which the industry is developing lends itself to such an approach. It has been suggested that the rural development programme is ideal for providing funding for the sweet gale project. From looking through the budget, I know that a lot of aspirations rest on the rural development plan. It would be good if the minister considered the matter. It would be even better if he gave us a positive response tonight. The proposals on sweet gale are not new; they have been kicking around for a while— Highlands and Islands Enterprise did some work on them previously. It would be good to get to the stage where more research could be done and we could make the transfer to production. That is the next challenge. We have read the briefings, and we know that that could work. Companies are interested, but we need to achieve a bigger scale. Moving from the niche market and niche production to a mass market and mass production is the challenge. I am glad that Mary Scanlon has raised the subject tonight. We should seize the opportunity—the industry is a great idea. I end by asking, where is the next sweet gale going to come from? What other natural plants in Scotland could be developed? Roseanna Cunningham was absolutely right—if the plant came from somewhere in South America, say, we would probably be hugely excited about it. We need to look to our own back yard and get our scientists in Scotland to identify the next option. That would be a really exciting development from tonight's debate.

I found Richard Lochhead's speech interesting and refreshing, until the last few minutes. Some of us had been wondering whether there would be a dramatic transformation this morning, and for the first eight minutes of his speech the cabinet secretary certainly talked like a minister. However, I am afraid to say that he lapsed in the last few  minutes into his old habit of recycled speeches, and I found it pretty disappointing that he regarded talking with his UK, Welsh and Northern Irish colleagues as a distraction when he is selling Scotland's case to the UK. He went on to talk about the need to build allies across Europe—we need to do that in the UK as much as we do with the rest of Europe. I welcome the fact that today's debate is taking place. The change of timing, to June, for the next advice from the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea will mean that we all have much more time to explore that advice in a bit more depth. It is unusual for us to have this debate before the negotiations, and the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee is conducting detailed discussions, but it gives us the chance in year to have a slightly wider background discussion on our fisheries and how we protect and manage them. I say "our fisheries" quite deliberately. I know that we share our fisheries with others, and the challenge, as the minister said, is to ensure that the outcome of the negotiations is good for everybody. Our starting point and our bottom line must be that the negotiations are good for the sustainability of our stock. Labour members want to support the cabinet secretary in his work as part of the UK team, and we wish members of that team the best for the upcoming negotiations. We are happy to support the Conservative amendment, which simply sets out the reality that we are part of a UK team, that we need to get a good deal for the whole of the UK, and that we need effective partnership working. We had no great difficulty with the Scottish National Party motion, as far as it went, but we felt that it needed to be amended. We agree with the minister that there have been some excellent initiatives with the industry. There is certainly much more accurate information now than there was when the Parliament started out on how our fish stocks are faring and how new techniques that might help future stocks could be employed. However, Labour members start from the first principle that our overarching objective should be to retain a sustainable fishery. The fishery must be sustainable in two senses—we must ensure that the stock recovers and that fisheries reduction efforts, of which the cabinet secretary has been critical over the past few years, can be made. Those efforts have begun to deliver and to pay off, and some of the stocks that were most vulnerable are beginning to recover. That is why the minister is able to talk about examining the possibility of increasing some quotas. As well as considering the sustainability of our fishing stocks, we must focus on what the Government can do in Scotland, working with the  industry, to ensure that our fishing communities get a long-term economic benefit as a result of that stewardship. It is a pity that the minister did not focus more on that; he mentioned it only in the first sentence of his speech. The timing of the debate puts the focus on the next round of fisheries negotiations, which are well under way. However, we also need to focus on some of the principles and longer-term issues that will probably go beyond December and into next year's discussions. In the short term, we must welcome the progress that has been made, but some fish stocks will clearly need more time to recover. In particular, the emergence of a new class of cod is to be strongly welcomed, but we need to take note of the ICES advice that that 2005 year class has the potential to recover but that it must be carefully harvested and allowed to spawn. We cannot forget that other sectors have seen less progress. The minister spent most of his time talking about the areas in which there has been some strong progress, but we know from the Scottish Parliament information centre briefing and from the ICES information that parts of the stock—in haddock, whiting, herring and mackerel, in key areas around Scotland—are still not showing strong enough recovery. There is some good information and some evidence of stock recovery, but it is not uniform. By looking at all the different stocks and not simply taking a blanket approach, the minister seems to be taking the right approach. Underpinning that, however, must be the precautionary principle. That does not mean that we will not consider increasing quotas anywhere, or that there will not be potential opportunities for fishermen, but we must steward the stocks and work with the fishing industry to deliver that recovery. That is the starting point of Labour's amendment. We must ensure that the precautionary principle underlines everything that we do. We should not forget that the ICES advice was that the stock had declined over a period of 30 years to the point at which we needed dramatic action if it was ever to recover. Although the science will never be exact, we ignore at our peril the trends and messages that the scientists give us. We must look at the science, but we must also do more to ensure that the science that we have is as accurate and up to date as possible. The pilot schemes and the innovative work that our fishing communities have been doing can be useful in giving us more accurate and up-to-date information. That is why the second focus of sustainable fisheries must relate to the industry. We have had a tough few years. Richard Lochhead described the measures as draconian, but they were needed to ensure that Ross Finnie  was able to negotiate a deal for Scotland and to enable some of our fish stocks to recover as they have done. It has been tough for the fishing fleet to have a reduced effort and to be more sustainable but, in the view of Bertie Armstrong of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, the fleet is probably broadly at around the right size. We need to ensure that the fleet can access fish in a sustainable way. There were bound to be areas in which it was difficult to secure agreement, but the Labour amendment highlights the importance of bringing together the wealth of experience that there is. The fishing industry has participated in pilot projects and changed long-established practices. It has worked with complex new recording measures, so that we can have a more accurate understanding of what is happening to stocks. I welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement that another part of our fishing community will join the Marine Stewardship Council scheme, which is important in demonstrating to consumers that the fishing industry is leading the way in becoming more sustainable. The scientific community must be part of the discussion. We should not consider its advice just once a year; we must tap into scientists' expertise and embed their work in everything that happens. We need to do more to understand the science that underpins stock levels and assessments of stock levels. There are key questions about climate change, which will have an impact on the state of our seas, spawning grounds and the fishing community's ability to catch fish. We need to be plugged into that agenda and I hope that the cabinet secretary will add climate change to the scientific issues that he considers. We must include conservationists and people who focus on our marine environment, whose perspectives will add immense value to the development of solutions that we urgently need. It is crucial that the cabinet secretary should facilitate more dialogue between the sectors that I have mentioned. We cannot consider advice independently and then take an assessment; we must get sectors round the table, working together to debate the best options and suggest ideas that will enable the minister to propose a convincing and workable package. The message from the Parliament is that much has been achieved during the past eight years, but much more needs to be done. We must continue to take a co-operative approach in which we take account of the science and work with the fishing community. The BBC did us a good service by highlighting discards in an accessible way and pushing the issue to the top of the agenda. That was useful.

We need to take a step back and ask why so many fish are still being caught and discarded. Interesting work is being done on different types of net. We have mixed fisheries and it must be incredibly frustrating for fishermen to catch a whole lot of fish above their quota, which they cannot use and must simply drop back into the sea. I think we all agree that that is crazy. Some members know more than I do about fishing patterns for different species, but I understand that a range of nets can be used, some of which are quite cheap and some of which are much more expensive. In co-operation with the industry the minister could develop incentives to make accessible to fishermen nets that could reduce the number of discards. In that regard, an approach in which conservationists, the fishing industry and the scientists get round the table will help in the development of solutions. Discards are a difficult problem and we need more pilots to tackle the issue. We should consider what experiments could be carried out. I would like the minister to incentivise the industry to consider the gear selectivity measures that different sectors of the fishing community can use—for example, to bring down cod removals, given that there was no take-up of such measures this year. What more could be done to persuade communities to take up such opportunities? If slashing discards is an objective to which the cabinet secretary has signed up, he must consider bycatch quotas, which he did not mention, as part of the overall cod recovery plan. Some issues are difficult for us to consider in a parliamentary debate and lend themselves much more to consideration whereby the key people sit round the table and have a discussion. We cannot just declare an amnesty on discards, as Ted Brocklebank suggested, because we must still get the message across that we need good management of existing stocks. Inadvertent catches can be significant and can damage our efforts. We need the right quotas and we need to help our fishing communities to use the nets that I mentioned.

Such detail is not for a parliamentary debate, Tavish. The key point is—

I am registered as Sarah Boyack, not Ms Boyack. We need to get into the detail of issues such as the one that Tavish Scott raised. I hope that the Minister for Environment will address that in his winding-up speech. I did not expect the cabinet secretary to unveil his entire negotiating stance in UK or EU negotiations. We should consider the broad impact of policy and use the expertise of colleagues who have particular knowledge of the fishing industry. We need more action on incentives for the fleet. We are asking our fishermen to change practices and we need to support them in that. It is tough to change practice while trying to find fish where there are fewer and fewer fish to find. Issues such as the one that Tavish Scott raised need to be on the cabinet secretary's agenda. In opposition, the cabinet secretary was highly critical of Government initiatives that had majority support in the chamber. I hope that when the minister winds up we will hear much more about incentives, to give the fleet the opportunity to change practice in a way that makes sense for long-term stewardship. We should consider the use of observers. I hope that the minister will address the issue, in particular in the context of finance and the number of observers that is required to ensure a robust system. WWF-UK has published an interesting report on observers; I hope that the cabinet secretary will consider that report and tell us whether he agrees with its conclusions. I expect that members will focus on a range of measures and issues during the debate—I hope that we get more detail. In the longer term, we need a much more regional approach, and I hope that members will talk about that. I very much welcome the debate and I hope that there will be a degree of consensus among members, even if we disagree on some of the detail. I move amendment S3M-893.2, to insert at end: "agrees that the precautionary principle should prevail in setting levels of permissible fishing activity; acknowledges that much more work needs to be done to create a truly sustainable fishery in the North Sea, including measures to reduce dramatically if not eliminate discards, recognising that one good year class does not of itself create a sustainable fishery stock, and further agrees that there needs to be dialogue between the fishing industry, scientists and conservation interests to ensure continuous improvement in stocks and a long-term sustainable future for the industry."

When the cabinet secretary referred to tough choices, did he mean choices about investment in flood prevention and coastal protection? How can he justify leaving 100,000 households at risk of flooding without the guarantee of investment? Will he confirm that investment in flood schemes will no longer be ring fenced but will, in every local authority in Scotland, compete against schools, roads and a host of other vital services? How much does he expect to be spent by local authorities on flooding in each of the next three years? Will it include the extra £20 million that  should come from the Barnett formula? Will the sum take into account specific needs, which vary substantially across urban and rural Scotland?

We on the Labour benches welcome the debate. We believe that we can all agree on a great deal. The very fact that the cabinet secretary began his speech by saying that he will accept all three amendments indicates how much broad agreement there is on the issue in the Parliament. The amendments all push in the same direction. That is because there has been an awful lot of debate on the subject in the Parliament in the past  eight years. We must use the debate and the forthcoming consultation to get action on the matters on which we all agree. The debates that we have had on organic food, farmers markets and the need to promote local food have shown not only the broad agreement throughout the Parliament, but the high level of cross-party recognition of the importance of the issues. There is also agreement that we must have a public health policy that focuses on healthy eating and exercise. The minute that we start drawing together a food policy, it begins to stretch out into those other matters. One challenge for the cabinet secretary is to create a coherent food policy. He must ensure that the thinking of all his Cabinet colleagues is joined up and that the entire system is joined up in its actions. We need more joined-up thinking but, crucially, we need joined-up action. As a starting point, we should put the links between health and food at the heart of our agenda. Far too many households in Scotland live in areas with no easy access to decent affordable food. We all know of estates in our constituencies where the only local shops are the newsagent and the chippy. Too many Scottish households are without access to a car and simply do not have access to local shops or supermarkets that sell affordable fresh fruit and vegetables. Food co-operatives can be an important part of the answer, but there is no substitute for local shops that are near housing. Access to fresh food must be one of our priorities. A great deal happened in the first two sessions of Parliament to promote the issues. I draw attention to Labour's hungry for success initiative, which has made a real difference through promoting healthier school meals. In the schools that I have visited, one can see that a change is beginning to take place. The measures on free fruit in the early years of primary school, fresh water and breakfast clubs are all about promoting access to healthy food for kids who otherwise would simply not have access to those choices. The minister mentioned the need to ensure that urban Scotland is part of the picture. Urban schools are a particular challenge. That is why city farms are important, because they introduce school kids to how their food is grown and where it comes from. I know from visiting local farmers that they enjoy bringing schoolchildren out from the city to see their farms—that makes the connection effectively. There are also visits to allotments. We should build such visits into the eco-schools programme so that they are part of the curriculum, to allow kids to understand where foods come from. I stress the importance of the design of new schools. There is a contrast between two schools in my constituency—St Thomas of Aquin's high  school and Tynecastle high school. St Thomas's is a brand-new school with kitchen and dining-room facilities. The school has taken on the agenda of promoting healthy eating. It has smart cards to make buying meals easier and so that there is less of an issue for kids who are on free school meals. The school has discovered that pupils use the dining-room in the new school much more than they used the dining-room in the old school, simply because the room and the meals are more attractive. The school is trying to get kids into eating fruit. By comparison, the dining-room in Tynecastle high school dates back to the second world war. It is gloomy and looks unattractive. Despite the staff's best efforts, many of the school's students vote with their feet and are more likely to be found eating chips and junk food off-site and outwith the school during their lunch hour. We want to make kids want to have healthy lunches in their schools—not by forcing them but by giving them a better choice. That is why the joined-up approach advocated by the cabinet secretary is so important. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning needs to feel ownership and that this is part of her agenda. As part of the cabinet secretary's local sourcing agenda, I ask him to give particular consideration to the Soil Association's proposals on fresh and organic food in schools and to ensure that such issues are discussed with the education secretary. The East Ayrshire pilot shows the way forward and should be developed further, with the lessons rolled out throughout every local authority in Scotland. That is one of the key challenges for the cabinet secretary in the development of the food policy. I very much agree with the cabinet secretary's comments about childhood obesity—that is why the food policy needs to link into public health and physical activity. The debate is not just about food for our schools, as more action is needed for our hospitals, too. Although the emphasis in hospitals is on shorter stays for patients, food is still important in providing patients with energy and aiding the recovery process. We should not forget care homes and other places where older people will live for much longer in future—those places should also be covered by our food policy. The trade union Unison has a done a huge amount of work on promoting a food policy that incorporates our public health sector, particularly our hospitals and care homes. The Labour Party is very much signed up to a new public sector food policy, which we hope will have at its heart the higher standards of nutrition that the cabinet secretary talked about.  We believe that protecting our environment and tackling climate change should be central to our food policy. Carbon footprint pilots carried out by WWF and local authorities have demonstrated that food is a major contributor to the carbon footprint of local authorities. We can tackle that area in Scotland: if we build it into the food policy—the approach should not be a by-product or an extra—we can bring about serious reductions in our CO 2 emissions. The Labour Party accepts that we live in a global world and that the food chain has become longer and more complex in the past decade. Nonetheless, there is much that we can do in Scotland to address issues such as how our food is grown; our reliance on pesticides; our animal welfare standards; local processing; the impact of local food production on our landscapes; and the sustainability of our biodiversity. All those issues need to be factored into our food policy. Last week, we debated landscapes and the contribution that farming and crofting communities make to Scotland's wonderful landscapes. However, our agri-environment schemes need to be properly recognised and resourced. In the previous session, the Environment and Rural Development Committee—of which the cabinet secretary was a member—carried out an inquiry into the food chain. I invite the cabinet secretary to go back to the recommendations, around which there was unanimity and which included more transparency in the food chain, and tick them off as he develops his food policy. We also campaigned for a supermarket ombudsman. That issue arose as a provisional recommendation from the Competition Commission last week, and we would warmly welcome such a recommendation. We need to push on and get action. Our inquiry uncovered poor practices, such as short-notice or verbal contracts between supermarkets and farmers that can be broken in a phone call. We heard of farmers putting in investment, only to be told at the last minute that the food would come from elsewhere. We heard about buy-one-get-one-free offers, with the expectation that the packaging would be funded by producers—this in a country in which we rack up food waste routinely. We need a joined-up approach on the waste issue. I suggest that the cabinet secretary should consider the following issue. During the recent foot-and-mouth outbreak, sheep reared for food were simply slaughtered without entering the food chain. It breaks the hearts of farmers and crofters to have to do that, and it is in nobody's interests. Supermarkets routinely produce huge amounts of waste—they need to be plugged into the waste  campaign. There should be some joined-up thinking involving them, too. Lots of good things are happening in supermarkets—I do not want to be absolutely negative. There has been a lot of work on local food sourcing, but more is needed. That is an area in which we need to act. I direct the cabinet secretary's attention to the fact that a lot more action needs to take place on local food procurement and food sourcing and on issues such as farmers co-operatives. The Scottish Government could act on the structural issues within farming and crofting, such as the promotion of affordable food and the capacity of farmers to work together to secure contracts. I hope that the cabinet secretary will meet the Scottish Agricultural Organisation Society to ensure that we get the details right. There are now fair trade towns and cities throughout Scotland—fair trade also needs to be part of our food agenda. Fair trade makes a difference, and consumers want us to act on the fair trade agenda. Those of us who met Malawian farmers in the Parliament earlier this year know the difference that fair trade is making to their lives. We are not able to grow produce such as coffee, bananas or nuts in Scotland, but we can use our purchasing power in government and as consumers to ensure that we address that agenda. Our amendment focuses on access and affordability, environmental sustainability and sustainability of our local economies. We are not starting from scratch and there is a lot of agreement. The challenge for the cabinet secretary is not only to get the policy in place but to get action from that policy. That is what we want. I move amendment S3M-784.3, to leave out from "that takes into account" to end and insert: ", building on work done by the previous administrations, and believes that policy priorities should include local procurement, affordability, sustainability and reducing Scotland's climate footprint, taking into account the views of the Parliament, industry and wider society."

Is the minister aware that a number of chemicals in the Possession of Pesticides (Scotland) Order 2005 (SSI 2005/66)—including carbofuran, mevinphos and strychnine—are classified as highly or extremely hazardous by the World Health Organization, and that some such chemicals can be absorbed through the skin? Is he aware that poisoned baits and their victims, which include wildlife, cats and dogs, have been found by members of the public, including children? The illegal use of such poisons to target wildlife poses a serious risk to people. Does the minister agree that, in cases in which accused people were ultimately convicted of placing poisoned baits or of storing such chemicals in unsafe circumstances, the serious risk to public safety was not adequately reflected in the decision by prosecutors to accept pleas of not guilty to charges of culpably and recklessly endangering public safety?

I ask the cabinet secretary to comment in detail on the tiering and structure of the headage payment scheme for ewes that he announced yesterday. I raised the matter in my speech in the agriculture debate yesterday. When I met crofters yesterday, they were most concerned that, without tiering in the scheme, crofters and farmers in our most fragile rural areas might lose out. Will the cabinet secretary take the time to outline his thoughts on that to the Parliament today?

Will you take an intervention?

I very much welcome this debate, although given the seriousness of the issue, the gravity of the crisis facing our livestock industry and the negative impact across fragile rural Scotland, more time for debate would have been appropriate. I lodged an amendment to Richard Lochhead's motion because the motion was simply not good enough. At the outset of this crisis, Labour members and colleagues from across the political parties represented in the chamber agreed that we needed to work together to support the Scottish Government in ensuring that the crisis was tackled in Scotland and that we did whatever could be done to help out. I thank the Scottish and UK Governments, and their officials, for their handling of disease management and for playing their part in ensuring that the disease did not reach us and was effectively contained. I pay tribute, too, to those in the industry who played their part in incredibly difficult circumstances. Lessons have been learned from 2001. We have not had the horrendous slaughter, the scenes of animal pyres and the bitter clouds of smoke covering our rural communities. However, because of the timing of the outbreak and the shutdown that resulted, markets have been closed, animals trapped on hills have been running out of grass, and feed prices have been escalating. Farmers have still had to pay the bills while facing the tragedy of watching their sheep die as the weather deteriorated. That is why we on the Labour benches supported a sheep welfare scheme that would enable a cull, preventing thousands of sheep from starving to death. NFU Scotland and the Scottish Government estimated that the scheme would cost around £6 million, which would pay for the 250,000 sheep that were stuck on the hills. I was therefore shocked to hear from the NFUS yesterday that it expects that only in the region of £2 million to £3 million will be paid out. The NFUS  estimates that 28,000 sheep have been dealt with and expects a further 20,000 sheep to be booked in. In his closing speech, I ask the minister to confirm the figures. Is it his understanding that the scheme will be underspent and that only around £3 million will be spent on it? The scheme came too late in the day for some farmers, who, I am told, will never be compensated. They simply could not wait because of the awful condition of their sheep. What is more shocking is that, to date, that is all that Scottish farmers and crofters have had in assistance. That is why I regret the time that it has taken for the Scottish Government to act. Alex Salmond is not here now, but the spectacle of his running a press conference in London on the sheep welfare scheme, which even his Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment estimated would cost in the order of £6 million, was reprehensible. I remind members that that press conference took place just a day after Alistair Darling's budget announcement. That was serious grandstanding, in the week when the Treasury agreed to release £900 million from reserves to the Scottish Government over three years as part of an overall package that will give the Scottish Government a budget of £30 billion. The fundamental question that I put, which I would like answered, is at what point the cabinet secretary put in a detailed submission to the UK Government in support of the scheme that he has announced today. Can he clarify that it is only today that he has made a detailed representation? I would love to hear the answer.

I do not doubt that the minister has had meetings and has been on the phone. My question is whether he has put before the UK Government not this issue but this package. UK ministers Hilary Benn and Des Browne have made it clear in the UK Parliament that it remains open to the Scottish Government to seek assistance from the UK Treasury. Why did the Scottish Government therefore leave it to the NFUS to go directly to the UK Government to ask for economic compensation? Why was the Scottish cabinet secretary prepared to leave farmers and crofters  swinging in the wind as the Scottish National Party issued its customary "It's all London's fault and we was robbed" speech? That is not good enough. What a contrast with Ross Finnie's handling of the 2001 crisis. Within a month of that outbreak, the welfare cull had started and Ross Finnie had accelerated the less favoured area support scheme and mainstream agriculture support payments. He accepted the urgent need to keep farmers in business and satisfying the banks, so he lobbied the banks and the Inland Revenue.

No, thank you. There will always be tensions between Government departments. I remember that we had similar discussions during the previous crisis but, within five weeks of the outbreak, a comprehensive package of measures had been announced while the funeral pyres burned and disinfection campaigns were still running. Fast, effective and decisive action was taken. It did not matter that Ross Finnie was a Liberal Democrat; he put the case for the action that was the right action to take. He persuaded the then Labour Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Wendy Alexander, to support a package for our rural communities, with support for businesses, agri-environment and tourism, to get rural Scotland back on its feet. What a contrast with the SNP's approach. Farmers, crofters and associated businesses have been briefing ministers for months, not weeks, on their financial problems, but it is only today, when we happen to be having an agriculture debate, that a package has been introduced. Politicians can debate endlessly who is responsible.

No; I have let the member in already. The SNP puts the blame firmly at the UK Government's feet. The SNP motion states that the outbreak started in England and that therefore it is the UK Government's responsibility to fund economic compensation throughout the UK. The logical conclusion of the motion as it is worded is that should, God forbid, an outbreak start in Scotland and be contained in Scotland but impact on the rest of the UK, responsibility would lie here. Would we for a minute accept that the Scottish Government was automatically responsible for that? I do not think so. It is simply not good enough for the motion to talk about a "financial and moral responsibility".  Richard Lochhead was quoted in yesterday's Herald as saying that the UK Government had a legal responsibility to pay, but he did not answer Karen Gillon's question. Given that the outbreak was confirmed in August, will he say when he sought that legal advice, and will he publish it for us after today's debate? It is one thing for the NFUS to threaten legal action, but that is not an excuse for the cabinet secretary to delay action and wash his hands of the impact of the crisis. Under the devolution settlement, the responsibility for economic compensation lies with the Scottish Government. That was accepted during the previous outbreak by the Scottish Executive, to the tune of £30 million. I have read the debates and statements that were made in the Parliament during the previous crisis. It is striking how members from all parties worked to be constructive. They asked tough questions, tried to be helpful, suggested ideas and ensured that the impacts were described in the Parliament. That is how the cabinet secretary started off on 6 September, but what a contrast today. There was no attempt to play politics in 2001 when Ross Finnie was negotiating with the UK ministers, when the industry, as today, needed immediate support just to survive and especially when he announced £30 million of long-term support to get rural Scotland back on its feet. I met representatives of the NFUS yesterday. I totally understand their argument that we must ensure that farmers can afford to sustain the flocks on our hills and throughout Scotland into next year. The ewe headage payment that the cabinet secretary has offered to keep the industry in business seems extremely sensible. I note the difference between what the NFUS asked for and what the minister has offered, but I welcome that part of the package. I ask the cabinet secretary to construct the scheme carefully to ensure that the money reaches the farmers who bred the sheep, that third parties do not benefit from the money and that sheep are not exchanged in the process. I hope that he will accept that. I also hope that he will tier the scheme so that those in our most fragile areas do not lose out. I would like to hear a little more in the winding-up speech about why we will not have enhanced LFASS payments or a modest sum for pig farmers, which the NFUS asked for yesterday. We support the inclusion of welfare charities and cash for marketing lamb. I welcome the fact that we have had action today, but I regret that, given the rhetoric, it has taken so long to happen. Perhaps the lesson is that government is about responsibility and action, not just rhetoric. It is a real shame that we do not have time for a lengthy debate today, because the impact goes far beyond that on farmers and crofters. Haulage  firms, marts and processing companies are all affected. Bluetongue disease is now on the agenda and people are concerned about its impact next year. I hope that our cold winter will keep it out of Scotland, but we must work with DEFRA on that. We also want a debate about regionalisation. I call on the cabinet secretary to address head on the issue of abattoirs and processing facilities in rural Scotland. The more we can do to capture the economic benefit of primary produce in Scotland, the better—the better for our economy, our jobs and our animal welfare. Today our farming and crofting communities are fighting for their survival. The Labour benches fully support the emergency package for our farming and rural communities, and we want the Scottish Government to get on and deliver it—and not waste time picking fights with the UK Government to serve a narrow agenda. Our rural communities deserve better. I move amendment S3M-667.2, to leave out from "concern" to "communities" and insert: "great concern the recent foot and mouth outbreak and its impact on our livestock industry, particularly the sheep sector; urges Scottish ministers to implement immediately a Scottish emergency scheme for Scottish farmers and crofters and use the powers and budget available to them such as supplementing Less Favoured Areas Support Scheme payments and introducing headage payments to provide additional support to our livestock industries at this difficult time; further recognises that it is the responsibility of the Scottish Government to provide funding to address the wider economic implications of the outbreak, as was the case in 2001; regrets the time it has taken to develop practical support for Scottish farming and crofting communities, and calls on the Scottish Government to develop constructive relations with the UK Government in order to address the future challenges in our agriculture and rural industries".

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister ensure that the inquiry will consider all the comments that members have made on different aspects of wildlife crime but which he may not get to in his concluding remarks?

Will the member take an intervention?

My intervention is simply to direct the member to the answer to parliamentary question S3W-3373, which gives a detailed breakdown of poisonings including the bait that was used and where they took place. I urge all members to read that reply—it makes fascinating reading—as it answers Jamie McGrigor's question.

Presiding Officer, I am sure that your reassurance to the member will be much more valuable than mine could be—I see that she is leaving the chamber. The change to the amendment was made entirely to ensure that the wording could not trip us up on a matter on which we all agree. The  Minister for Environment and I discussed the matter a few minutes ago. Labour members welcome the tone and content of the motion, which acknowledges that wildlife crime in Scotland is unacceptable and that we need to do more to tackle it effectively. We welcome the involvement of the Solicitor General for Scotland, which signals that passing laws is not in itself sufficient and that there must also be enforcement. If the law is not leading to successful prosecutions and convictions, despite evidence being presented by the police and taken on board by fiscals, we need to consider why that is happening. Therefore, we very much welcome the review. The intention behind the amendment is to add to the debate and to suggest action that we think the minister can take before the review is completed. The Parliament has a proud record on tackling wildlife crime. We need to support a range of species in Scotland and we need to support and promote biodiversity. Biodiversity is good for our environment and our tourism industry and it is part of what defines our country—it is part of our culture. For those reasons, it is disappointing and upsetting that so many wildlife crimes are committed throughout Scotland. A map showing the incidence of wildlife crime would confirm that crimes of all sorts are committed throughout the country. We must stamp out wildlife crime. There are some disturbing facts and figures in the briefings that we have received. The one that struck me most forcibly concerned the reintroduction of red kites. I visited a red kite trail in Dumfries and Galloway—I found it to be a fantastic tourism experience, and I was interested in the local partnership that had put the trail together. The statistics show that, where red kites have been reintroduced south of the border, the number of birds has risen from something like 90 to four or five times that figure, whereas, in the Black Isle, there are now half the number of red kites that were initially released. We need to focus on that issue, because it is not right. We have passed three main acts that are relevant to wildlife crime. The Criminal Justice Act (Scotland) 2003 toughened penalties and custodial sentences and introduced specific powers of arrest. The Nature Conservation Act (Scotland) 2004 strengthened the legal protection for threatened species—including protection for the nests of certain bird species—and extended protection to dolphins, whales and basking sharks. It also extended controls on the use of snares and introduced the offence of possession of pesticides without reasonable excuse, as well as new provisions setting out the powers of Government wildlife inspectors. The Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Act 2006 modernised our animal  welfare legislation and included tough action on animal fights. Wildlife crime is an issue that we have come back to over the years. We passed those laws because the Parliament agreed that there needed to be clear protection for animal welfare and that there must be lines drawn to clarify what is not now acceptable. It is right that, as a society, we debate these issues, as what might have been regarded by some as acceptable practice in past years is no longer allowed. Views change over time, and those changes have been reflected in the laws that we have passed. Today's debate reflects the fact that laws alone are not enough. People need to understand them and act on them and, when they are broken, we need effective enforcement at every level. That means that the police must have resources to investigate wildlife crimes that are reported, and the prosecution service must have expertise available in every case where that is possible. As the Solicitor General pointed out, wildlife crimes can be complex and difficult crimes to prosecute, so specialist knowledge hugely assists in the securing of successful prosecutions. We need to ensure that the effectiveness of the system is monitored. Our amendment is intended to provide support for action against wildlife crime and to support the implementation of the partnership for action against wildlife crime's agenda and the work that has been carried out throughout Scotland to try to stamp out these crimes. We do not intend to cut across the inquiry—we think that those are the issues that the minister can act on now. We have deliberately focused on the areas in which we think there will be greatest consensus in the chamber. I will raise a set of issues shortly that we think the inquiry needs to examine carefully and take evidence on. For that reason, we have not put those issues in the amendment. Throughout the summer, we have been asking ministers a raft of questions about the extent of wildlife crime and the effectiveness of the action that has been taken against it. It is clear that, although we have tough laws in place, wildlife crime has rocketed. I do not know whether members have read The Scotsman today, but it draws our attention to the fact that all categories of crimes against wildlife are on the increase: offences against birds, badgers and deer; cruelty to wild animals; hare coursing; illegal snaring; poaching; and the use of pesticides. That might be due partly to increased awareness among members of the public and partly to the increased determination of organisations such as the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and the RSPB to see the wildlife crimes that they have identified stamped out. Increased  reporting, however, has not led to a significant increase in the number of successful prosecutions. We do not believe that that is because of poor-quality police work or lack of evidence, which is why we welcome the review that the Solicitor General outlined today. One of the key messages is that we need dedicated police officers in every force to co-ordinate the effort across Scotland, to build up expertise and to ensure that crimes are pursued effectively. There are a lot of police officers working on these issues, but many of them are dealing with other important issues as well. We need to ensure that there is a focus on wildlife crime. The Solicitor General mentioned the training of fiscals; we want trained fiscals to be able to take on wildlife crime cases routinely. From talking to the SSPCA and a range of organisations that have given evidence to committees over the year, it is clear to me that we need to ensure that there is appropriate knowledge on the prosecution side so that we get appropriate convictions. I warmly welcome the initiative at Langholm, which many members will have been notified about. It takes exactly the right approach to get those on our estates involved in working together to make a success of our laws. I wholly agree with the statement from the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association, the Countryside Alliance, the Scottish Estates Business Group, the Scottish Gamekeepers Association and the British Association for Shooting and Conservation. Their support is vital in the fight against wildlife crime and I hope that it will send a powerful message to all estate owners, their managers and staff. The statement's focus on poisoning offences is to be welcomed. Clear guidance would be helpful. Nobody should have the excuse that they had not had time to read the law.

We do not envisage the guidance as being prescriptive, but we would like the minister to explore the issue further and I am glad that he is keen to do so. I want to put some key issues on the record today. I hope that the inquiry will look into them. The first is the accurate reporting of wildlife crime incidents. At the moment, if a crime is not the main crime, it is not recorded. The SSPCA view is that the crimes that are recorded represent only the tip of the iceberg.  A second issue is plea bargaining. If a series of crimes has taken place, the wildlife crime element is often plea-bargained away. It is simply not good enough if people are given just a slap on the wrist and a paltry fine. The message must be put across that wildlife crimes are crimes and there will be consequences for people who commit them. Another issue is accountability in farming and estate management. Rhona Brankin asked a parliamentary question on 16 August and, from the answer on 10 September, it is clear that the locations of incidents relating to wildlife crime—and in particular to the use of poison baits, which have affected red kites, buzzards, golden eagles and other birds—are known and recorded. Some estates pop up more than others. That will have to be examined. Where patterns emerge, action will have to be focused. If someone has committed a crime, it is right that they should be prosecuted. However, I would be keen to see whether some crimes are committed in particular areas and whether series of incidents happen on particular estates. We will have to find out how we can achieve better buy-in to the legislation. That should be done across the whole of Scotland. The Solicitor General mentioned admissibility. The issue has been raised by the RSPB, which has experience of evidence not being accepted because of the way in which it was collected. I would like the issue to be examined in detail. Another issue is who can report crimes. The SSPCA was given powers when we considered legislation in the Parliament. That has made a real difference in highlighting criminal activity so that it can be tackled. Are there other changes that could be made to help to tackle wildlife crime? Could Crimestoppers be used better to raise public awareness and engagement? The initial reporting of wildlife crimes may take place in relatively remote places. How can the information be spread? There is huge public support for tough action, but people need to know how they can help. Will the minister outline his intentions regarding snaring? Snares catch protected species such as otters and badgers. Does the minister have a timetable to announce in light of his consultation? I understand that 172 of the 247 responses were in favour of an all-out ban. I also understand that many comments suggested how a ban could be made more acceptable. I am keen to hear the minister's views. It has been pointed out to me that the Conservation of Seals Act 1970 is virtually impossible to implement. That is a piece of outstanding business to which I hope the minister will turn his attention.  A robust series of acts is in place, but more will have to be done to make them effective. I believe that all of us in the chamber want to stamp out wildlife crime. The legislation is in place, but we have to raise awareness. There is excellent police work across Scotland, and an increasing number of trained fiscals. We have to support the range of officers who are working to ensure that wildlife crime is stamped out. Parliamentarians will have a role in taking up the issue in their own areas and in supporting people who bring problems to our attention. I urge everyone to raise issues directly with the minister, so that they can be incorporated into the inquiry. It would be useful for us to see the terms of the inquiry. The inquiry will build on the work that has been done, and it will be able to consider the issues in depth. I look forward to seeing its conclusions, and I look forward to debating the issue again in Parliament. Let us all agree on the action that is required to implement the laws that we passed after endless—as it sometimes felt—debate in committees. We have debated the issues at length, and there is tremendous support for the laws from people across Scotland. Let us see the laws being implemented properly in a way that we can support. I move amendment S3M-609.1, to insert at end: "and urges ministers to ensure that each Scottish police force appoint at least one full-time police wildlife crime co-ordinator, that wildlife crime cases are prosecuted wherever possible by fiscals with specialist training and that guidance is produced which pulls together all legislation relevant to wildlife crime for use by landowners, managers and their staff, and further urges ministers to monitor the effectiveness of such guidance and report back to the Parliament."

I, too, congratulate Kenny Gibson not only on securing the debate but on the text of his motion, which itself helps to begin the process of awareness raising that we need. It is crucial that we learn lessons from practical action that has been taken elsewhere in the United Kingdom and that we think about whether such examples are applicable to Scotland. As a result, I very much support Mr Gibson's attempt to raise awareness, and I support other members' comments about the current range of initiatives, including the warm deal and the central heating programme. We must raise awareness of the concept in the context of the climate change agenda—which, in any case, has to be based on reducing carbon dioxide emissions not only through using energy more wisely but, as Robin Harper pointed out, through using more sustainable forms of energy—and we must tie that agenda to our agenda for tackling fuel poverty. In that respect, the energy efficiency measures that are set out in Kenny Gibson's motion make sense. As a constituency MSP, I am aware of the excellent pilot project that has been established by Changeworks, an energy action organisation, and the local authority to encourage people to get advice on how best to insulate their houses and make more use of available grants. The fact is that the people who are the most fuel poor have least knowledge about the available opportunities. One interesting approach that came out of my background work for the debate was that, instead of looking at individual households, we should engage with communities and build their support for these schemes. A staggering fact is that 700,000 households in Scotland could get—but do not have—cavity-wall insulation, although I realise that people face financial barriers and that there is a lack of access  to information. People might not know, for example, that there is a two-year payback scheme for putting in loft or cavity-wall insulation. Many people do not, however, have the cash up front to take advantage of that. The Scottish Parliament can certainly help to progress the fuel poverty agenda in that respect. Grants are also important, and I know that many energy companies make small grants available. Moreover, my local Citizens Advice Scotland office, which carries out a lot of debt work, has been able to access help from power utilities. I very much welcome the implication in Kenny Gibson's motion that, instead of seeing the work as being the job of a single agency, we should involve a range of people. In that regard, I urge the minister to examine the current network of energy advice centres; I receive regular complaints that the system is neither as efficient nor as effective as it could be. If he cannot respond to me in his summing-up, I will find a letter more than acceptable. We also need to ensure that there is a readily accessible market for installations and that there are people who are able to do the work. We can learn other lessons from down south on how to address energy efficiency issues. For example, 57 local authorities in England are working with British Gas to give council tax rebates to people who install accredited energy efficiency measures. I ask the minister to examine that really good way of boosting the number of people who have energy efficient houses. I realise that his Cabinet colleague John Swinney has, for the moment, rejected the idea in principle, but a cross-party coalition of members is keen to push the agenda with all ministers, which is why I am raising it today. I also agree with Robin Harper that sustainable community energy has to form part of any energy efficiency approach to the construction of new houses and retrofitting of old homes. The Department of Trade and Industry estimates that we could get 30 to 40 per cent of our energy from microgeneration combined heat and power programmes. That is a real challenge not just for the minister, but for the whole Executive. I hope that it will take that agenda on. There is a potentially big win for fuel-poor households if we can tackle their energy consumption, give them lower energy bills and enable them to create their own energy in their houses. That could be through, for example, heating of water by solar panels on the roof. I have seen some fantastic projects in the Western Isles—I hope that Alasdair Allan will be able to go and look at some of those housing association projects during his time as a member here. Bills are going down from £500 a year to £200 a year, which is a huge saving for fuel-poor households.  Let us tie up the agendas of energy efficiency and microgeneration, which will create a win-win situation for fuel-poor households. I urge the minister to consider that seriously.

Will the minister clarify whether there will be any requirement for new land to implement the options that he suggests; where the land is; whether it is in the ownership of Scottish ministers; and whether there will be a requirement for any demolition of buildings along the routes? Secondly, will he clarify what the capacity implications will be for Edinburgh Waverley and Haymarket stations? Will extra investment be required and will that be the same investment as was supported in the SNP's manifesto?

Will the member take an intervention now?

Will the member not take one now?

We on the Labour side welcome the SNP's commitment to introducing a bill on flooding. We would have done that, too, as it was a clear manifesto commitment. I also welcome today's debate because it is clear that current legislation on flooding prevention is out of date and not fit for purpose. I agree with the cabinet secretary on that. That is not to say, though, that there were no legislative changes during the first eight years of the Scottish Parliament. During consideration of the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Bill, we persuaded ministers to add references to flooding. It was important that we had a much more joined-up approach to river basin management—that is now happening across Scotland. That has been important, as were the annual reports to the previous Environment and Rural Development Committee, which enabled us to ensure accountability for implementation of the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003. The reports have also enabled stakeholders to review progress. I, too, congratulate the members of FIAC for their excellent work in identifying the challenges and some of the tough solutions that we need to debate. There are now improved warnings for householders and businesses to ensure that they get adequate notice of potential flooding incidents. There is also the new planning guidance on  flooding, although I am concerned about whether that is being fully implemented. I would like ministers to address monitoring of implementation of the flooding guidance. I believe that there have been instances in which the precautionary principle has not been fully applied. We must ensure that that happens in every planning decision in Scotland. At the end of the day, it is householders who suffer. They are left with the devastation that flooding causes and they have increased difficulties in getting insurance cover. That issue will not go away, because climate change is happening and instances of heavy rainfall will increase. There are big issues for the new SNP ministers to address. For example, there is the critical issue of the speed of decision making, to which the cabinet secretary referred in his speech. Speaking from my experience as an MSP, one of the first difficult issues that I had to deal with in my constituency of Edinburgh Central was the Water of Leith flooding incident in the spring of 2000—we still do not have full flood protection measures in place. We do not, however, lack expertise or engaged communities: the Water of Leith flood action group and Murrayfield community council in my constituency alone, never mind groups in the rest of the city, have had to engage with potential solutions for seven years now. It will be controversial to speed up decision making because individual rights must be dealt with. However, we currently have a tortuously long process and double handling from the local authorities and the Scottish Executive. The technical process and the planning process must be brought together. We will work with the new ministers to ensure that we get something to which Parliament can agree—that is critical for managing flood risks in the future. Flooding events have a tremendous human cost, with people sometimes being out of their houses for the best part of a year. However, the problem is not just loss of money: when we get bad rainfall, some of my constituents phone me to ask what is happening because they now have a fear of being in their own houses at such times. We must never accept that. On a more basic level, individual householders can make changes that make their area more prone to flooding. In my constituency during the election campaign, I saw that several people in one street had concreted what had previously been their gardens. They now experience flooding in that street. We need to get basic information out to people because they do not think about the cumulative impact of what they do in their own gardens. We need to develop communication of such information.  Scottish ministers and Parliament face a big challenge, so it is vital that the bill consultation engage fully with those who have experienced flooding incidents because their perspective is crucial. There is the issue of the responsiveness of the emergency services: how well equipped is each service in the country? There is also the basic issue of funding for flood management, not just for the building of schemes. The longer they take to build, the more they cost. That has been the case in Edinburgh and elsewhere in the country. I want to add to the debate coastal inundation, on which we have not, in the context of long-term management of flood risks, engaged sufficiently. It may not be possible to save our entire coastline, so we will have to deal with tough questions. We must consider managed-retreat strategies for some places and protection strategies for others. We must ensure that communities and local authorities in such areas are brought to the table for the debates. We need to undertake the critical analysis, discussion and information sharing now. There are particular problems for smaller and island authorities that have extensive coastlines that will be exposed to stormier weather. They are unable to employ the range of staff in-house to address the technical and management issues that flooding and coastal erosion generate. Ministers will need to talk to such authorities. I know that there were issues in the past and that changes were made, but we need to ensure that those authorities have the resources—the people as well as the money—for the bigger challenges in the future.

All our estuaries will have similar problems in the future. Work that was done 20 years ago at the University of Strathclyde identified areas that were at risk of flood. There are major flood risk problems across Scotland in our river estuaries, but particularly in the Clyde, the Forth and further up the Tay. I want to flag up the issue of rural communities because there is an issue about our coastline, but I agree that flood risk is also a huge issue for urban communities in Scotland. I know that my colleagues will focus on that point. It is critical that SEPA be not regarded as being just a rural agency. We must continue to support its excellent work in identifying flood risk and we must keep a weather eye on its staffing levels and expertise, especially for planning applications and development plans.  Resources are a major issue, which Mike Rumbles was absolutely right to raise. Flood expenditure has increased significantly since Parliament was established, but we need to go much further. I note that last week the First Minister said about flooding that "We cannot address the seriousness of the issue without additional funds being provided."— [ Official Report , 13 September 2007; c 1746.]  I suspect that Scottish National Party members say that to everyone. However, we face a significant challenge and choices will have to be made in the spending review. Local authorities will be strapped for cash if the SNP's council tax freeze backs them into a corner and they will need extra support if they are to begin to cope with the challenges that they face. I ask ministers to consider the spending review and to give greater priority to the issue. They should also keep an eye on what is happening down south. Given the recent floods, Barnett consequentials are likely to deliver more resources to tackle flooding—if we in Scotland choose to take them. Sustainable flood defences must be part of the solution, but they will not always be the cheapest option. If we are to pay to retain flood plains that are not used for economic activity, and if compensation is required, tough issues will need to be considered. I call on ministers to continue the work that is being done, to consider the issue on a cross-party basis and to ensure that money is available, not just centrally but in SEPA and in local authorities. The debate on flooding must not take place only in Parliament; it must include a range of key players. I urge everyone to contribute to the work that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee will carry out this year on flooding. Such input will be vital if we are to raise awareness about the risks of flooding.

Does the Lord Advocate acknowledge that local people feel a deep sense of injustice about this case, which has been raised with me from time to time in the eight years that I have been an MSP, and that many members of the public were prepared to give evidence and statements to the police, who, as she has pointed out, worked for many years to bring the case to trial? Given that many local people feel very let down by the decision, what does she intend to do to restore confidence in the justice system?

I thank the member for letting me make a brief intervention. I should point out that I avoided going into the details of the case because I did not think it appropriate to do so in Parliament. Does the member accept that the implication of the judgment is not only that people  will not be able to appeal these cases but that they will not even be able to get them to court because of financial concerns? We might not see a flurry of cases because people will not able to afford to take them to court. Surely we can all agree that we need to find a solution to that worrying situation.

No; I said that it was written in "the ... aftermath" and not "in haste".

I thank all my colleagues who signed the motion. The motion was written in the immediate aftermath of the Kinfauns judgment and it reflects the concern, among people who are committed to campaigning for improved access, that the implementation of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 could be undermined. I wanted to lay down a marker, in these early days since the judgment, to enable those of us who remain strong supporters of the principles of the act to put our views on record in the Scottish Parliament. The Kinfauns judgment has inspired this debate, but I want to focus on the principles of the judgment rather than on the specifics—even though I have concerns and questions about them. The Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 was one of the most important acts to be passed by our new Parliament. It was a symbolic act: it reflected the importance of access to our land in our culture and in our identity. For Labour members in particular, it was one of the founding principles of our party in Scotland. The act delivered public access to the countryside and the right to roam; it delivered the right for communities to buy the land around them when it comes up for sale; and it delivered the right for crofters to buy their croft land at any time. For those who were on the case, the bill that led to the act was a marathon. It took up a huge amount  of parliamentary debate: there were heated debates in committee on the details, and there was lengthy debate in the chamber. It was important that we got it right then and it is important that we defend its principles now. The act has transformed communities. It has brought practical benefits to crofting communities, and the right to buy has transformed fragile communities and offered the chance to revitalise and develop sustainable communities. Crucially, the third part of the act has brought access to Scotland. It has already boosted tourism and enabled people to access our wonderful, beautiful countryside. Wild camping, rambling, walking, cycling, canoeing, horse-riding—a host of activities is now much easier. Access to our forests is getting people on to paths. Mountain biking is flourishing, with areas such as Glentress near Peebles and Laggan in the Cairngorms benefiting from the economic development that has come from the act. However, there are tensions across Scotland that Scottish ministers have to be aware of. The status of the access code is critical. The code was developed because it was simply not possible to put all the details into the act, but, more than that, there was a desire to ensure that the code had wide buy-in and commitment from all who would be affected. It was not a normal statutory instrument. There was lengthy consultation, with a wide range of views being debated over time and discussed in the Justice 1 Committee and the Environment and Rural Development Committee. We knew then that the code would be critical to the successful implementation of the act. It was clear to us that it was intended to be used as the main source of evidence in determining whether access rights were to apply to land or water in any declarator sought in a sheriff court under section 28 of the act. It was intended to guide not only responsible access, but the areas of land that the act covers. I ask the minister to address the code's status in his closing speech.

I would really like to get on. There is also the issue of consistency across local authorities; the relationship between access and planning legislation; and the question whether local authorities have allocated sufficient resources to implement their duties under the act, in particular the establishment of the core path network. I would like the minister to address those issues in his closing speech. I ask the minister to consider the cost of access to justice under the act, because that is clearly  now an issue arising from the Kinfauns case. A charity has tested the application of law in the public interest and has lost. In the process, it has had costs awarded against it. In a rather personalised briefing, the crisis managers Media House note that the Ramblers Association Scotland has not appealed the case. To be frank, I am not surprised. It is a charity, it took £20,000 for it just to get to court and it faces costs of up to £144,000 being claimed against it. The cost of justice is now an issue. Does the minister agree that that is likely to put off charities, communities, individuals and, importantly, local authorities from testing the legislation if community access is being restricted? Surely the Parliament cannot accept that. Will the minister agree to consider the concept of protective costs orders? Their introduction would require an amendment to the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003, but it would protect those who act in the public interest to test access laws from being subject to excessive costs. A case would have to be tested first to determine whether it was in the public interest, but at least such orders would allow people to bring cases to the table and test the act. PCOs are in place in England and Wales. Surely they offer the minister one remedy to investigate. We cannot allow the implementation of our access legislation to be determined solely by those who have access to the money to get to court. I stress to the minister that the Kinfauns case is not the only dispute of which I am aware. I visited a number of areas throughout Scotland during the summer with the Ramblers Association and I know from talking to colleagues that there are other disputes in other constituencies. I can understand it if the minister, as a new minister, does not want to give instant commitments. However, I wrote to him earlier this summer and, as time goes on, we need to reflect on the impact of the Kinfauns judgment, how it will be viewed and how it will influence decisions throughout Scotland. It will certainly influence the implementation of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 and, therefore, I ask the minister to consider its implications carefully. In a cross-party spirit, I ask him to consider reporting back to us by the end of the year. What issues does he feel need to be considered? I accept that he does not want to interrupt his legislative programme, but more than one committee is ready and willing to examine his comments. I thank colleagues for taking the time to be present at the debate. I sincerely hope that it will be followed by action from the Scottish ministers and that we will have proper post-legislative scrutiny from the Scottish Parliament. The Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 was an iconic and symbolic act, but it exists to make a difference and  I would hate for the many organisations that worked with the Scottish Parliament and previous ministers to get the act right to feel that their efforts were being undermined.

As the cabinet secretary said, the new outbreak will be a tremendous blow to everyone who is involved in the industry. People were just getting back to business as usual after the most recent outbreak. Will the cabinet secretary keep the Parliament fully informed on all developments and his work with UK ministers to prevent further spread of the disease, as he did during the summer outbreak? In the light of the situation in Lanark, will the cabinet secretary also agree to meet me and the local member, Karen Gillon, tomorrow, to update us on the information that he has and to tell us  what action he intends to take? I realise that there is a developing situation in that regard. I welcome the cabinet secretary's commissioning of research into restrictions on cattle movements. Will he share the findings with the Parliament as soon as they are available? Precautionary action needs to be taken, but it must be taken on the basis of good evidence.

During the Environment and Rural Development Committee's scrutiny of the Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Bill in session 2, we had detailed discussions on the contingency plan and the biosecurity measures, during which Richard Lochhead was highly critical of the approach of former ministers. In the light of the cabinet secretary's criticisms, what changes did he adopt in the Scottish Executive's response to the recent outbreak? Are there any specific issues that he intends to put on Professor Scudamore's agenda that he feels the previous Scottish Executive did not address properly?

Like colleagues, I am disappointed by the SNP's programme. Many of my constituents will be equally disappointed. They will be looking for action on issues that matter to them. I am particularly disappointed that tackling antisocial behaviour seems to have totally disappeared as a Government priority. Ignoring such behaviour will not make it go away. I simply do not agree with Roseanna Cunningham's portrayal of the past eight years of our work in the Parliament. Eight years ago, my constituents' top priority was their worry about being able to get a job. That is not their worry now, because in the past eight years, through Government partnerships across the UK, we have created 50,000 jobs in Edinburgh. My constituents' problems now are the impacts of economic success and affordable housing. It is not enough for Nicola Sturgeon simply to say that we need another review: we need action. That means building more houses—particularly more affordable houses—rather than giving people £2,000 to waste on an already overheated housing market. We need facilities so that families can live in the city, particularly in the city centre. Like George Foulkes, I welcome the withdrawal of the proposed cuts in Edinburgh. Three vital nurseries would have been lost in the city centre alone. Such actions force parents to move out of the city centre. I am therefore glad that the proposals have been withdrawn. They made a mockery of the SNP's manifesto commitments on access to nurseries. My constituents are concerned about action to reduce our carbon footprint, both individually and through what we do in the Parliament. They will not be impressed by the news that it will take another year for a climate change bill to be introduced in the Parliament. During the summer, the SNP was also not prepared to make a clear commitment to include explicitly carbon emission reductions as a cross-cutting issue in this year's budget review. Those two facts will disappoint a lot of environmental activists. If the SNP calculates that we need to reduce our CO 2 emissions by 3  per cent plus, year on year, we must start now, not next year. We will support the Government if it makes this budget a carbon reduction budget. It is a huge opportunity that the Government must not miss. For Alex Salmond to blame the fact that we have no climate change bill on the fact that a regulatory impact assessment and a strategic environmental assessment must be produced is just not good enough. He must come up with a better answer than that. It is a complex issue, and that was just not good enough. The low-carbon building project and the work that the SNP has announced on energy efficiency in buildings is something that we will support. It builds on previous work that was undertaken by Labour ministers, and we support the idea of progressively raising the level of energy efficiency in our buildings. We want to go further, though. I had a very pleasant conversation with John Swinney this morning. He politely informed me that, although the Government would oppose my bill on energy efficiency and microgeneration, he had a lot of sympathy with its objectives and would seek to include some of them in the proposed climate change bill. My bill is supported by 51 MSPs, and a lot of people outwith the Parliament are keen to see it passed. Unfortunately, John Swinney, who is not in the chamber, was unable to give me any assurances or detailed commitments on the incorporation of the proposals in my bill into the proposed climate change bill. I am not prepared to withdraw my bill without commitments on the detail of the SNP's proposals, particularly the fiscal incentives that will transform people's attitudes towards energy efficiency measures such as cavity wall and roof insulation—which we know make sense—and business rate incentives for businesses. I seek assurances from John Swinney on those issues and a commitment to require all new housing to include microgeneration as standard. I will not withdraw my bill until John Swinney makes those detailed commitments, although I welcomed his phone call this morning. There will be lots of things on which the Labour Party will work constructively over the next four years in the Parliament. However, we will not support ill-worked-out, unspecific proposals, nor rhetoric about what flag is flown above this building instead of debate about the laws that are passed here.

Will the minister give way?

I was not criticising the move to sweep other organisations into the scope of the legislation; indeed, I welcomed it. I simply thought that it might helpful if the minister could clarify how that would be done.

I warmly welcome the Executive's amending regulations. As Richard Lochhead and John Scott said, the proposal to have ship-to-ship oil transfer in the Forth has generated petitions and campaigns on both sides of the Forth, by MSPs, councillors and local communities. It is clearly something that worries people.  John Scott made some uncharacteristically ungracious remarks. One of the first things I did when I became Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development in January this year was ask officials to work up plans to amend the existing regulations in light of representations we had received from the Environment and Rural Development Committee.

No—I want to get into my speech. I congratulate the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment on following through on his commitment immediately after the election to make regulations on ship-to-ship transfer. I thank the civil servants who have been working behind the scenes on this complex issue. The minister acknowledged that when he first spoke about his intention to bring proposals to the Parliament. Members of the public were worried by the idea that whereas, like other bodies, private companies must abide by the habitats directive, unlike other bodies they were effectively judge and jury on their own proposals. I hope that the regulations will override that. I welcome the wider implications of the regulations, and I would be interested to hear the minister reflect on them in his winding-up speech. My understanding is that they cover private organisations—for example former public utilities that are now private companies—that carry out their own assessments. I understand that there are wider implications that my party would welcome. I would be interested to have a detailed briefing on those points later, if the minister is not able to answer them in his closing speech. I am told that Scottish Power and Scottish Coal, for example, are also covered by the regulations. I particularly welcome the strengthening of ministers' ability to require decisions to be taken in the public interest. There is no specific power to stop any project, as the minister said, but my reading of the regulations is that he may delay projects endlessly if the assessments do not meet the test of not damaging nature conservation interests, as set out in the habitats directive. We therefore very much welcome the regulations. I understand that, once the regulations become law, a ministerial direction may be delivered to Forth Ports. Will the minister be ready to call the project in straight after today's vote? Is he ready to serve that direction so that firm action can be taken immediately? Scottish Natural Heritage has been in discussion with Forth Ports on its assessment for months. It would be helpful to know what SNH's current view is. Are there still concerns about cetaceans? Are there other habitats  interests? Are there specific concerns that we should know about? One thing the regulations do not do is ban ship-to-ship transfer directly. We did not lodge an amendment to the motion because we believe that the minister's next job is to move on to a marine bill. That is where all the complexities could be ironed out. We would much rather the minister focused his energies on such a proposal, which will go to the newly appointed ministers—Hilary Benn and Ruth Kelly—rather than concentrated on the one side issue of ship-to-ship transfer. We need to bring all the issues together, although the matter is complex. The recommendations of the advisory group on marine and coastal strategy—AGMACS—came out in March, as did the former Environment and Rural Development Committee's recommendations on marine issues. The UK white paper for a marine bill was also published in March. The UK consultation closed on 8 June. There is a real danger that this Parliament will get left behind in drafting its own marine bill. Labour members urge the minister to get his act together on the Scottish marine bill. He did not give us a timetable yesterday at the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. We welcome the amendments to the 1994 regulations, but the number 1 issue to which the minister should now be turning his attention is the need to ensure that we do not fall behind. The groundwork has been done. The challenge is to translate that into proposals.

The minister's predecessor, Ross Finnie, instructed the Scottish Enterprise network to talk to all the key stakeholders. The minister will be aware that, when the Cairngorms national park was being established, the business community had concerns similar to those that have been expressed about a marine national park, but that those concerns were addressed when the Cairngorms national park was set up. Has he cancelled the work that was going on or does he intend to make progress with work on a coastal and marine national park, in parallel with his work on the marine bill?

rose—

It has taken us some time to reach this point, but I want to state my support for the Labour, Liberal Democrat and Conservative amendment to the SNP motion. The projects are absolutely vital to the sustainable economic progress that is encapsulated in the cabinet secretary's portfolio. They reflect years of consultation and development and are vital to the capital's future development—which is, in turn, vital to the future of Scotland. In the early days of the Parliament, those of us who were in the Executive were criticised for our lack of ambition because, at that time, we were not proposing trams. Over recent years, a revolution has taken place in transport funding but, for all that, John Swinney will still face challenges in managing his responsibilities. He inherits a budget that has increased massively since the Parliament's early days. His challenge is to retain that level of expenditure through the spending review. The three projects that are mentioned in today's motion are all crucial for Scotland. Although they are at different stages, have different management structures and stakeholders and face different financial challenges, the Government cannot run away from managing and delivering them. That it takes years to develop major transport infrastructure does not fit easily with the four-year term of office that we have as members of the Parliament, or with the recycling of transport ministers that takes place.

Not just now, thank you. I hope that the SNP will listen to the voices of members from all round the chamber on the trams project and EARL. Transport connections in the east of Scotland have been improved, with crossrail and phase 1 of the Waverley project. Plans are progressing for an interchange at Haymarket and there are park and rides around the city, but they and all the developments that Stewart Stevenson mentioned are simply not enough. An excellent bus service is not enough for the capital's future—more strategic investment in capacity on the key corridors in the city is needed. Our roads in the city and across central Scotland's motorway network are grinding  to a halt, so the trams project and EARL are vital if we are to achieve modal shift. Over the past decade, we have created 50,000 jobs in Edinburgh. The future development of the city region will require mass transit, which means trams. The Auditor General's report highlights the robustness of the approach that has been taken to management of the trams project. The explanation for the enthusiasm of business for trams in Edinburgh is that businesspeople know that if we want to create 35,000 new jobs in our capital, we will need the infrastructure to service them and to get people from their houses to those employment opportunities. We must do that by delivering reliable, high-quality services that connect with other types of public transport. Parliament has discussed the National Audit Office's report on several occasions and the lessons from it have been learned and built into the trams project. The proposals that we are discussing seek to integrate bus, rail and car. More can be done on cycling. The business case has yet to be produced, but we cannot stop the trams project now. Are the ministers seriously suggesting that we should stop it and wait until we have the business case, which would mean losing months of progress? I ask the ministers to reflect on the fact that we are at a critical point in the process. In his statement, Stewart Stevenson expressed regret that a great deal of money has been spent on trams without a metre of track being laid, but no one would build an office block without putting in secure foundations. The whole point of the money that is being spent is that it is needed for the preparatory work for the laying of the tracks. Today's debate is a useful reality check for ministers. If they think that the trams project is a difficult scheme, they should wait until they manage the Commonwealth games project, if Glasgow's bid is successful. Managing the trams project will be good practice for that. The key questions are whether it stacks up and whether it is well managed. The Auditor General gave it a clean bill of health. I ask John Swinney to listen to what members who have debated the topic for years, and people outside Parliament, are saying. He should listen to the business community, to the further and higher education institutions that need to be connected to the tram system and to residents and environmental groups in Edinburgh, who are all asking us to proceed with the trams project. Stewart Stevenson was wrong to say that if we proceed with the Edinburgh projects, he will be in charge of "boom and bust" in transport. He has the opportunity to manage for the long term. That is his inheritance—it reflects the fact that the Scottish  Parliament has worked with the UK Labour Government, with the result that our spending on public services has more than doubled. That represents a massive opportunity, which Parliament must seize. It is not acceptable for the Government to exercise prejudice by selecting two from a raft of projects and to condemn Edinburgh to years of congestion then grinding to a halt by putting a stop to new developments that are crucial to the city's development. We must tackle congestion and provide improved connectivity and increased capacity in our rail infrastructure: the trams will link in with those objectives. The Edinburgh projects are ambitious, but they are achievable and they represent value for money. In other words, they perform the very tasks that Stewart Stevenson set out in his statement. We cannot allow the new Government to condemn our capital city to grinding to a halt, nor can we allow it to condemn Scotland's sustainable economic future by cancelling the EARL and Edinburgh tram projects. They are vital if our city region is to remain competitive with the rest of Europe, which is why I urge every member to think seriously about voting for the amendment, which commands support not only across the chamber but outside it.

Will the minister clarify whether the new Forth road crossing will be a replacement bridge or additional to the existing bridge? Has he considered the public transport component of the new bridge? What modal split does he envisage? In the light of last week's statement and debate on climate change and carbon offsetting, has he factored in the carbon emissions of the various options that are before him? I would have looked up the answer but, although the minister said in his statement that the information was published on Transport Scotland's website today, it was not available before we came into the chamber.

We know that we are importing much more organic produce, but a key issue is the capacity of organic producers in Scotland to meet the consumer demand that now exists. Will the minister deal with that point? There has been much cross-party agreement on the need to do more and to develop the existing organic action plan in that respect.

I draw members' attention to my entry in the register of members' interests. I welcome the overall thrust of the minister's statement. I recognise much of it from my party's manifesto, so I can see that he is taking a cross-party approach. I particularly welcome his commitment to introduce flooding legislation, which is urgent, and his offer to listen to ideas to help the Executive meet its carbon emissions reduction targets. Is the cabinet secretary aware  that housing accounts for 17.8 million tonnes of carbon emissions a year and that 80 per cent of the housing that will be standing in 2050 has already been built? Will he, therefore, agree to support legislation to provide fiscal incentives, which are entirely within his legislative competence, for householders and small businesses to improve the energy efficiency of their buildings and to incorporate microgeneration technologies? The Energy Saving Trust highlights the fact that we could make significant reductions in our carbon emissions in that way and that, if we need to move quickly in relation to deep carbon emissions, that is a good place to start.

Will the minister give a commitment to ensure that the proposals for the new Forth crossing include options for public transport? Does he accept that the new crossing gives us the chance not just to maintain vital road access across the Forth but to increase capacity for public transport, particularly given the pressure on the Forth rail bridge and the need to reduce congestion and carbon emissions?

We welcome the debate and hope that it will lead to further detailed discussions about the issues that are involved. Yesterday we debated how to achieve a greener Scotland. Putting targets in place to drive action and ensuring that Scotland plays its part in meeting our United Kingdom and global commitments are crucial, but we need to ensure that we put transport at the core of our policies. Reducing our need to travel must be part of that challenge. That is why Labour in government was so committed to vastly increasing our public transport expenditure, moving freight off our roads, improving communications technology and using videoconferencing and phone calls—I strongly recommend that. Although we can never eliminate the need to travel, we have to look at travel reduction as well as new infrastructure. We must develop joined-up thinking to deliver what are sometimes minor incremental changes. Can one park a bike anywhere in a new development? Can one store a bike safely in a new housing development? Although those seemingly minor ideas would not count as part of  a transport policy, failing to implement them could make it impossible for people to make low-carbon travel choices. That is why the debate cannot just be about transport infrastructure; it must be about wider transport policy linkages. We must focus on how people access new infrastructure and how they use it—whether that is through improved public transport information, park and ride facilities or transport hubs. It is also about improving subsidies and the quality of bus subsidies, ensuring, for example, that older people retain the ability to travel on buses without being excluded because of cost. There are genuine carbon benefits in that policy. Of course, the debate is also about major transport infrastructure projects. That is why we continue to support projects such as the Edinburgh trams; the Airdrie to Bathgate, Stirling to Alloa and Borders rail lines; the upgrading of Waverley station; and Glasgow crossrail. Also crucial are the airport rail links, which would cut road traffic on some of our congested road networks. Reducing our emissions has to come first. While making sure that we are not looking only at building transport infrastructure, we must look at travel and use of the infrastructure. I welcome the fact that the new minister will continue with the example that was set by previous ministers. It is crucial that not only ministers but the whole Executive and all Executive agencies should be required to travel more sustainably. The Executive should make it more desirable as well as the default option wherever possible. It will then be able to manage down some of the carbon emissions and set a lead. We are not talking about banning people from using cars—far from it. There will always be circumstances in which the car is the only available choice, but the Executive has to lead the way. We need to ensure that it manages down its own emissions so that others can be persuaded to follow. We have heard much talk from the new SNP minority Government in the past few weeks about the need to review transport projects to ensure value for money. It will not have escaped many people that the two projects over which Alex Salmond has chosen to hold an axe are those that offer the greatest opportunities to get people out of their cars and on to public transport and to reduce emissions. The most recent Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report, which was published during the election campaign, reinforced the need for us to redouble our efforts to get going on carbon emissions reduction. We will not support the SNP amendment, because it deletes the reference to transport. We  need to ensure that air transport is included in the emissions schemes. That would be a big step forward. What will replace Kyoto will be important, but we must start acting now. As a constructive Opposition, we want to concentrate minds and scrutinise budget proposals not just for the financial but for the carbon implications—that must be standard. Robin Harper is absolutely right that we need properly accredited carbon offsetting schemes, but they should be at the bottom of the policy hierarchy, after we have done everything else. We agree with the principles behind the Tory amendment. We should raise with people just how much carbon offsetting costs. It will get us thinking about doing the right thing first rather than last. We need to reduce our travel and make it more sustainable and make sure that carbon offsetting is the last choice, rather than something that the Government crows about. I move amendment S3M-173.1, to leave out from "and that any role" to end and insert: "or indirectly; notes the crucial role that transport policy must play in meeting carbon reduction targets and therefore calls on the Scottish Executive to ensure that potential carbon reduction is a central consideration in the evaluation and prioritisation of transport infrastructure projects; reaffirms support for a balanced and sustainable transport policy with the bulk of investment being targeted towards reducing unnecessary journeys and congestion, widening transport choices by providing high-quality and affordable public transport options and support for walking and cycling; further notes the Executive's intention to introduce carbon offsetting, and calls on ministers to consult widely on the applicability and robustness of such schemes, demonstrating that carbon offsetting is additional to rather than a substitute for the direct or indirect planned reduction of carbon emissions."

Why does the member not answer the question?

Surely we are talking about an important point, politically. Many of us do not consider the motion's use of the words "at this time" to be appropriate. There is a distinct difference between not supporting the replacement of Trident now and not supporting it at any time. The arguments against Trident rest whether we are talking about it being replaced this year, next year or in four years' time. If someone does not support the system, they do not support it—full stop. Surely we should have the right to have that debate in the Parliament.

In the previous session, the Scottish Parliament focused on climate change and the various  committees will be able to return again and again to the climate change programme that is in front of us. A particular challenge for the delivery of our climate change objectives that was set out by Rhona Brankin today—as well as a couple of weeks ago, when we spoke about environmental issues in the chamber—is the role and capacity of SEPA and SNH. Those are vital Government organisations, which raise the standards of our environmental performance and provide best-practice information and scientific information that is key in assessing potential climate change impacts and how we mitigate climate change. Although both organisations often make life very difficult for decision makers, that is part of their job. Given the challenges that we face in tackling climate change, we need their expertise as well as that of NGOs. I noticed that in its manifesto the SNP set a target of an 80 per cent reduction in CO 2 emissions by 2050. That is extremely ambitious, which is why I question the SNP's wisdom in distracting our key organisations from their work on pollution, tackling climate change and promoting biodiversity and green space—in fact, on all the five key areas that the minister set out in his opening remarks. I know that SEPA and SNH staff are already nervous and uncertain about their future. Given the direct questions from Rhona Brankin this week and previously, it would be helpful if the minister could set some of those fears to rest in his closing speech and give a clear commitment on his intentions in relation to SNH and SEPA. There are other ways to make energy efficiency savings than by ripping up both organisations and merging them. That is a challenge for this Executive. We need to be rigorous and systematic in reducing our carbon emissions. We have to do it in ways that complement our targets on social justice and tackling poverty. That is why I was pleased to hear the range of comments by MSPs around the chamber in support of higher energy efficiency standards in buildings, an expansion of microgeneration and, crucially, an expansion of decentralised energy networks. There are all sorts of exciting community-ownership models that enable local communities to set their own targets, recycle money back into their communities—in a way that targets it at members of the community who most deserve it—and expand support for energy efficiency. The Government needs to take radical action. A lot of progress is being made but, in combination with the move towards zero-carbon housing, there are some exciting challenges. I say to Rob Gibson that we do not need to go to the continent to see some exciting projects. We can see them in Edinburgh Central, Glasgow, Berwickshire and elsewhere in Scotland.

I am in my last minute. Let us praise the work that is being done locally. Yesterday, I visited some excellent projects in my constituency. I saw the new allotments that are being created in Edinburgh and some excellent mental health community projects that involve people in the development of their area. I draw members' attention to the Edinburgh community back green initiative, which has revamped communal tenement back greens that had been abandoned and had become depressing eyesores. The initiative involves on-site community composting—which is not a straightforward thing to organise, given SEPA's rules—planting fruit trees, recovering garden spaces for residents and cutting through the awkward management and ownership issues that surround tenemental properties. The next phase will involve moving to community microgeneration. There are some exciting opportunities in that regard. The initiative, which is a model from elsewhere in Scotland, is working in seven sites in my constituency and I urge the minister to consider such bottom-up projects and think about how they can be incorporated into the work of the Executive.

I welcome the minister's answer to the previous questions. I look forward to seeing the detail of any proposals that he introduces. To go back to the original question, will the Scottish Executive commit to continuing support for work on footprinting so that individuals might themselves be able to reduce their household emissions in their daily lives? I particularly commend the work that has been done by WWF and the Energy Saving Trust, which have developed practical ways to calculate people's carbon footprints. Does the minister agree that one of the best ways of raising awareness of our carbon footprints would be through a Scottish Executive-approved process so that there is one way to examine the issue? Will he consider the potential of incorporating that into all our schools' curriculums? That would be one of the best ways of disseminating information and changing household behaviour.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Exactly. Will the minister give way?

When will the minister announce the detail of his proposals on energy efficiency? That is generally regarded as the most cost-effective place to start meeting our future energy needs. What financial and tax incentives does he intend to put in place for householders and businesses? Will he commit his Government to championing the radical proposals that were put in place by the recent Scottish planning policy 6, which would dramatically reduce CO 2 emissions in new developments and put in place decentralised heat and energy production on site in all major new developments?

I welcome the new front-bench team. We have crossed swords in the past and I look forward to our doing so in the future. I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary picked this issue as one of the first to be debated by his team in the new session. It is clear that we need to find a way forward for Scotland's rural communities. There has been consultation on the rural development plan. As the cabinet secretary made clear, the SNP does not start with a blank sheet. A lot of work has been done and communities have expectations. It is crucial that, over the next few years, the rural development plan is funded properly, so that the different types of rural communities and industries—land managers, people involved in the  agri-environment and the forestry community—are given proper support. More support is needed for the organic sector and crofting. Neither the documentation that was presented to us first thing this morning nor the cabinet secretary's speech convinced us that enough money is on the table to deliver on people's aspirations. We estimate that the Executive is at least £170 million short. We would like to know where the further £70 million that has been announced will come from—is it new or is it recycled from somewhere else in the department? Last week, there was a great deal of spinning, so we had low expectations of this debate. I would like Mike Russell in his concluding remarks to indicate how the cabinet secretary gained such a clear expectation of where the previous Administration intended to go in the future, given that the Liberal Democrat manifesto made no reference to voluntary modulation levels and the Labour manifesto made absolutely clear that we would move levels up towards 15 per cent over time. I would like to know where the cabinet secretary got the detail of his remarks. If the Government is not prepared to make the right decisions on modulation and new investment, our rural communities will face a problem. That is why we made absolutely clear in our manifesto where the money would come from and how we would spent it to support rural communities. We need to ensure that there is economic development and job creation and that there are good wages across our rural communities. That is why Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise have a crucial role in supporting sustainable economic development in those communities. We support rural diversification, with strong rural communities.

Not yet. We have talked about Scotland's landscape, which needs to be looked after. The First Minister spoke about the issue last week. Our environment exists not by accident, but because of the historical work of farmers, land managers, crofters and rural communities. The test for today is whether money will be available to enable them to do that work in the future. We believe that today is a missed opportunity. In the past two weeks there has been a huge amount of talk about consensus. I remind the new ministerial team that one of the last debates in the previous session was on organic farming. We managed to achieve almost universal agreement on the need for a more radical approach and for more support for the organic action plan. There is already huge consumer support and a huge  market for organics. Although progress has been made, we need to make more, as there is much more for us to do. I was particularly disappointed by the fact that the cabinet secretary's opening speech contained hardly a mention of organics, given his strong support for them in the previous session. The Soil Association briefing that we have received exposes the inadequacies in the current system. Some farmers who want to move to agri-environment schemes, to contribute and to enjoy the economic success that will come from that, compete with no expectation of success and lose out totally, whereas others are guaranteed support because of historical production. Today was our chance to change those ground rules and to get better ones for Scotland, but ministers have failed that test at their first attempt. In the previous session of Parliament, there was consistent support for increased organic support. The Scottish rural development plan offered the chance to give better and new support to meet the needs of Scotland's rural communities and our environment. Today's statement was unambitious and light on detail and missed the opportunity to shift investment significantly. There were other gaps in the cabinet secretary's speech.

If it is brief.

That is the whole point about voluntary modulation. The cabinet secretary's speech missed an opportunity.

No, I want to move on. Several members have spoken passionately and correctly about the need to direct public sector procurement to support our farming communities. There was no reference to that by the cabinet secretary, although it was one of the key areas of debate in the run-up to this new session of Parliament. If we are to support rural development, we have to go beyond the historical patterns of Government subsidy. We have to use Government expenditure, not just in the rural and environment budgets but throughout Government, to take a more radical approach to supporting our farming industries and rural communities, so that schools, hospitals, local authorities and the whole public sector spend their money on fresh, local produce.  We need to hear from the Executive how it will make that happen. We heard lots of rhetoric before the election. If we read all the manifestos, we find that we all support that idea, but there was not a word about it today from the cabinet secretary. I would like to hear in Mike Russell's winding-up speech how the Executive will do that. What support is there for farmers co-ops, which are one of the key ways of enabling small farming sectors to compete fairly on a level playing field? I am deeply disappointed that that was not mentioned. We know from the East Ayrshire project what can be done to meet European Union rules. Why was that not in the opening statement? It is a big missed opportunity, given the huge cross-party support for the policy. Members have heard from the Labour benches our clear support for rural communities, as well as an acknowledgement of the need for diverse investment. We heard from David Stewart about a vision of vibrant and strong rural economies and from Rhoda Grant about the crucial importance of maintaining and increasing support to some of our most fragile island and crofting communities, which need grants to support and maintain their population and to manage their land in an environmentally friendly way. I was deeply disappointed that there were few references to our crofting communities, given that today offered a big chance to set a new way forward on the basis of past SNP support. That point was reinforced by Peter Peacock, who made a powerful argument about the need to continue to accelerate support for agri-environment schemes, not to call a halt to them and miss an opportunity. Elaine Murray spoke about the importance of higher education infrastructure and training, which I suspect the whole chamber supports, but, again, it was absent from the cabinet secretary's speech. The Crichton campus, UHI Millennium Institute and all the further education colleges are crucial if we are to have the jobs that we need in our rural communities in the next few years. Today, we have seen the Liberal Democrats retreat on the rural environment. There was a lack of support for the use of increased voluntary modulation and new support for environmental schemes for agriculture. As the Liberal Democrat manifesto faced both ways, perhaps that is not surprising. Also disappointing was the continued lack of appearance of the Green party—

No, I have moved on to talk about the Green party, although I have in front of me the Liberal Democrat manifesto, which lacks the detail to which I refer.  The Greens played a constructive role in the previous session of Parliament, both in the chamber and in committee. Perhaps they are absent because they are simply embarrassed to be associated with today's ministerial speech and the missed opportunity for Scotland's rural environment. We heard a speech that was light on detail—there was ludicrous spinning in advance of today's debate—and the SNP has avoided at all costs any vote in the chamber on its plans. That is not acceptable for the future. There is not even a small motion that we could amend to set a tone or policy context for today's debate. The only reason we knew what today's debate was about was because of spinning by the minister through the media. We would like ministers to treat this Parliament with a little more respect. We on the Labour benches commit that over the coming months and years we will hound the Government on the detail of its policies. We want to know where its £70 million comes from, how the £170 million gap will be filled and what parts of the agri-environment process will suffer. We want to hear from the SNP a commitment to ensure that all our rural communities will be properly supported, including our fragile crofting communities in the rural parts of Scotland that will not be helped by today's announcement. An opportunity has been missed to offer integrated support to rural Scotland. We need support for all our rural communities. We need more support for the industries that were absent from the cabinet secretary's speech, such as forestry and woodland industries, which are crucial to biomass development, our construction industry and climate change. There has not been enough detail from the minister today. In the coming months, we will chase him in the chamber and committee to find out that detail.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

No, there is not.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Does the member accept that the framework that was put in place for Scottish Water has been accepted as financially rigorous and as much more transparent than any previous system for Scottish Water? Earlier this year, I made a lengthy appearance at the Finance Committee to talk through Scottish Water's detailed projects, performance targets and efficiency gains. It is not true to say that we are not interested in the efficiency of Scottish Water. Such a suggestion is unhelpful. The opposite is true.

The Pollution Prevention and Control (Scotland) Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/323) are the primary means of reducing pollution and controlling emissions from industrial processes to water, including Scotland's coasts. Implementation of the regulations is the responsibility of the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. In addition, in 2006 the Scottish Executive introduced a new regulatory regime under the Water Environment (Controlled Activities) (Scotland) Regulations 2005 (SSI 2005/348), which provides for SEPA to regulate any discharges from industrial sources into Scottish coastal waters not covered under the PPC regulations. At present, the United Kingdom, with the involvement of SEPA, is reviewing and setting new standards for pollutants viewed as posing a risk to the water environment. In due course, the Scottish Executive will consider where those standards may be applied under Scottish legislation.

I do not think that the member would expect me to answer the detail of that question in the terms in which he has posed it. I will be absolutely clear. The Executive wants the European Union habitats directive to be fully upheld by Forth Ports, which has accepted that it is the competent authority under that European regulation. I reassure the member that the Executive has repeatedly pressed Forth Ports to ensure that it takes its full responsibility under the directive. There is no lesser test for a private organisation in discharging its responsibilities than there is for a public sector organisation.

It is unfair of Mr Swinney to say that. We have given a commitment to the process, and I have already said that we do not prejudge it. It takes us seriously to the heart of the issue. We will consider the evidence at the time.

We have to reflect on the impact of the bill and accept that there is a disagreement. I am disappointed that Rob Gibson has lowered the tenor of the debate. We just disagree. There is nothing nasty or bitter about it, from the Executive's perspective. There are times when, with the benefit of hindsight and experience, we want to change our views. I am absolutely open in that regard. During the progress of the National Parks (Scotland) Bill, when I was a relatively new minister, I did not welcome the amendments to the bill that were moved by Mike Rumbles. I was defending an early piece of legislation of which I was passionately supportive, having supported the national parks principle in my former life as a town planner, particularly in relation to Loch Lomond and the Trossachs. However, I am happy to give credit where it is due and acknowledge that the decision that the Parliament made to amend that bill was the right one. That has proved to be the case partly because of the quality of the management of the national park. I put on record that I think that the work that has been done by the first chair of the national park, Andrew Thin, and his chief executive, Jane Hope, has been exemplary. Many people thought that a 25-member management team was far too large. Other places get by with an awful lot fewer people, but we wanted to have an inclusive national park in the Cairngorms. We—in the Executive and in the chamber—worked hard to deliver that. We set up the process. We debated the National Parks (Scotland) Bill endlessly with colleagues from the Cairngorms area and the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs area. We decided that the key principles for the national parks would be set out in the act and that we would use designation orders to consult on the detail of the boundaries. I accept that colleagues were profoundly unhappy with the Executive's decision at the time and that they remain profoundly unhappy. I did not attack John Swinney for using the member's bill process to keep the issue alive. My main disagreement with him is that I believe that it is not the right process. We agreed a different process. There was a consultation on the draft designation order. The Executive listened to the views that were expressed and agreed to accept into the park boundaries Glenlivet and Laggan parishes, the Dalwhinnie and Drumochter area, Glen Tromie, the Gaich forest, and the heads of the Angus glens. It is not true to say that the Executive did not listen. It just did not agree with all the representations that were made to it. I return to the fact that the Executive made a legitimate decision. The ministers—Allan Wilson and Ross Finnie, as the Cabinet member— decided that they wanted to ensure that the park would be a success. There was a lot of scepticism from businesses and there were doubts about whether it was right to establish a Cairngorms national park. We had never had national parks in Scotland. England and Wales had had them for 50 years, but they were new to us. Establishing national parks in Scotland was an innovative step and people were concerned. Ministers decided that they would opt for a national park that was smaller than the one for which people had aspirations. I accept that, and I do not dispute that the environmental NGOs, in particular, were disappointed. However, the decision was made. We are now three years into the national park and it is doing superbly well. As I said in evidence to the committee, I do not want to disrupt the process.

Let me continue. I am particularly keen that the national park authority is not diverted from its task. There are many different communities in the national park area and a lot of good work has been done to bring them together. The destination management organisations that have been, and are being, set up cover specific areas, but they do not yet cover the whole national park. The business community has come together. I do not want to jeopardise that work. It is clear to me that much more needs to be done in the existing national park area. Economic development in Perth and Kinross is a key issue that was raised both today and in discussions with the committee. When the committee asked me about signage, I said that I was keen for Transport Scotland to talk to Perth and Kinross Council to see whether they could hammer out an acceptable way forward. I understand that the first meeting has now been held and the council is reflecting on the options. I am keen that we get an agreement. There is nothing to stop businesses in Perth and Kinross working together and working with local estates to do more to promote tourism in the area. Let us not regard today's debate and our refusal to expand the park at present as a block to that activity. There was much discussion during the debate about the process. Our process is not about denying democracy. It is about having a sensible approach. I say up front that I have concerns about using the process of a stage 2 debate to discuss lines on a map. It was difficult enough to get agreement and get the process done through the designation order, but the process is crafted to let us do that. Let us have the debate about the boundary in the context of the debate about the boundaries of  the whole national park and the effectiveness of the national park. I am committed to that, and I add my voice to those who support that. I cannot put it more clearly than that. The matter will need to be considered. John Swinney has the Executive's commitment that we will ensure that we work through the best way to deliver that. Many people regard the debate as unfinished, but so is the current management of the park, and I certainly do not want to jeopardise that.

It would be helpful if I clarified two points. First, the challenge is not the number of people in settlements—although I was concerned about their being excluded from the democratic opportunity to select a representative—but the land management of the area. Secondly, the disruption is to the work of the national park authority. The key issues on which there is great concern that there will be disruption are rural housing; the local plan; the core paths network; and training for local businesses.

As a point of accuracy, the serious concerns that are being raised are about changing the boundaries at this time. That is the key issue about which there are concerns among the Cairngorms business community.

Since giving evidence to the Environment and Rural  Development Committee, I have had exchanges with the committee and with John Swinney on the detail of his bill. Essentially, the Scottish Executive's lawyers and John Swinney's lawyers do not agree on whether using a member's bill for such an issue is straightforward and manageable. Given the legislative framework—the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000 provides for the making of designation orders—we just do not agree on that issue. I want to acknowledge that at the outset. For me, the crucial issue is whether changing the boundary just now is the right thing to do. That was the key issue for me at committee. I am strongly of the view that now is not the right time to make such a change.

No. I am in my first minute, so let me get going. In my evidence to the committee, I was absolutely clear about three things. First, I was clear that the boundary that the Executive chose is the right one. Although it was not universally agreed on, the reasons for the boundary designation were given clearly at the time. Secondly, I gave evidence on why now is not the right time to change the boundaries. Thirdly, I highlighted the particular problems that John Swinney's bill would cause for elections and the representation of the councils on the national park authority. There are also concerns about dealing with detailed boundary issues at stage 2. We argued over the boundary in the debate on the designation order in 2002. Mike Rumbles was absolutely correct to say that the issue was hotly debated. Members such as Mike Rumbles and Nora Radcliffe made strong representations about the boundary, but the Parliament approved the designation order by 100 votes to 20. Colleagues are right to say that the designation order was approved because people wanted to get on with the national park. I understand the arguments that were made then, especially by non-governmental organisations, which wanted a much larger area for environmental management purposes. Their aspiration was for a much bigger park. However, at the time, we were creating the United Kingdom's largest national park. The Scottish Executive had also had to work extremely hard to win support in the Cairngorms—especially among the business community and the estates—for the national park. Ministers at the time were strongly of the view that, to meet the national park's criteria as set out in the 2000 act, we had to prioritise those areas that required national park status for their effective protection and management. Ministers were  concerned that delivering coherent and co-ordinated management would be a major challenge for the national park authority, given that it would need to deal with other national organisations, four local authorities and myriad local businesses and land managers. Crucially, the national park authority had to involve local communities, many of which had expressed concerns. It is testament to the park's excellent work in community building that there is still such a strong demand, particularly from businesses in highland Perthshire, to join in its success. Because of that success, I strongly believe that the worst outcome at this point would be to disrupt the park's momentum. As Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development, I have to take that on board seriously, which is why I approved the park plan for the Cairngorms national park last week. The park plan is the green light for action in the national park. It will let the park authority develop the core paths network and work to promote sustainable tourism in the national park area, which received the European sustainable tourism award in 2005. Crucially, the green light has been given to prepare the Cairngorms national park's local plan, which is central to building the affordable housing that is desperately needed in the area. The national park's local plan will let the four planning authorities get on with the job of working with the national park authority and local communities to deliver rural housing. I am determined that we should not get in the way of that good work and the momentum that has been built up.

I am happy to address that full on. This morning, I met the chair of the Cairngorms Chamber of Commerce—which, incidentally, did not exist when we started discussions on the Cairngorms national park. He made it absolutely clear that there is significant concern among local businesses and people within the existing boundaries that if we divert them from the process of implementing the national park plan it will be damaging to tourism and sustainable tourism management, to recreation and—crucially—to economic  development. Strong concerns about that exist in the national park area.

Let me be absolutely clear: as part of its considerations, evidence was presented to the Environment and Rural Development Committee specifically on business concerns. I was about to give Mr Rumbles credit for the discussion that we had in the Parliament about the issue that he raises. He is right that I strongly resisted direct elections. At the time, national parks were an innovation, and we felt that we were already being innovative in the way in which the four key objectives were set out in the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000. Mr Rumbles persuaded the Parliament to accept the principle of direct elections to the board, and I give him credit for what is one of the strengths of the Cairngorms national park. In committee, I expressed concern about the derailing effect that John Swinney's bill would have, because the nature of the present discussion means that 690 people in the Blair Atholl area would be excluded from the electoral process. It is not a question of being courageous, as John Swinney said it was in the newspapers this morning; it is a question of backing and not derailing the tremendous work that has been carried out in the three years since the park's establishment. As Maureen Macmillan said, that is why the committee backed the Executive's call not to support the bill. I turn to the Environment and Rural Development Committee's unanimous conclusion that the park boundary be considered as part of the quinquennial review. Although we do not want to prejudge the outcome of that review—there will be other boundary issues that it would be wise for the review to consider—I am now actively considering how best to carry it out. I give a commitment to consider the committee's recommendation that there should be wide consultation, and the Executive will assess whether it would be best for that to be an integral part of the quinquennial review or whether we should commission an independent body to assist  the process. John Swinney is right—future ministers cannot be bound by a commitment that I make today. However, I note that I am not the first minister who has reported to the Parliament that the issue needs to be re-examined. I give credit to John Swinney for keeping the issue alive, but my fundamental point is that his bill would not be good for the health of the Cairngorms National Park Authority, which the Parliament set up several years ago. Our first priority must be to continue that body's good work and not to divert or derail it or get in its way. That is why I strongly urge the Parliament to support the Executive and reject John Swinney's bill.

I, too, congratulate Jamie McGrigor on securing this members' business debate. Given the wide public debate on and media interest in the matter, it is appropriate that members are able to raise their concerns with us. Very difficult situations can arise when nature conservation objectives come into conflict. The situation on Rum is a classic example of that, and I feel that the review of SNH's management plan, which will take place later this year, will be the best place for the debate on how to manage and meet the different concerns with regard to the proposals for the island. Before the debate, I discussed the matter with the chair of SNH, Andrew Thin, who assured me that the organisation will be open and inclusive in its approach to the review of the management plan, with the aim of balancing the reasonable objectives of different interests while meeting SNH's legal obligations.

No. I confess that I was tempted to intervene on the member's speech but, at this point, I would rather keep going. I urge all colleagues to make their constituents aware of the forthcoming consultation so that they can make their views known. I have also secured an assurance from the chair of SNH that there are no plans for a reduction cull this year. However, there are plans for a maintenance cull similar to those in previous years to ensure that there is an appropriate number of deer on Rum. I hope that that reassures those  involved in the important research that is being carried out on the island—which is what prompted Jamie McGrigor's motion—and those who have raised their concerns with the members who have spoken this evening.

I will come on to that. I spoke to Andrew Thin yesterday, so my information about SNH's current plans is up-to-date. I want to concentrate on why Rum was designated a protected island, the implementation of the management plan, and the long-standing research that is being carried out on Rum. As colleagues have observed, the red deer on Rum are not native to the island, but were reintroduced in 1845 after becoming extinct. Since that time, they have been in a refuge and, as a result of that and the fact that they are protected from interbreeding with red sika hybrids, we have been able to study the long-term development of one of our most iconic species. As colleagues have said, there are other refuges in the outer Hebrides as well as on Arran, Islay and Jura, and most of Britain's estimated population of one third of a million are to be found in the Highlands and Islands. Getting the number of deer in a given area right depends on an assessment of the number of deer the area can support. While I was preparing for this debate, I found it interesting to examine SNH's 10-year management plan, which was approved before the Parliament was created and was intended to ensure the effective management of nature conservation on the island. I am told that it was assumed in 1998 that the number of deer would be brought down to a much lower level than is currently the case. Over the years, SNH has carried out a maintenance cull to keep deer numbers at the current level of 1,200 animals. Colleagues have talked about the problems with deer. There are no natural predators on the island and culling is the most important means of controlling them. If there are too many, there will not be enough food and real problems will arise, as has happened in other parts of Scotland.

I might take an intervention later.  Deer influence the composition and structure of vegetation. That has to be managed by those who are looking after the features on the island. It is important to put it on record that SNH has to deliver effective management of Rum to meet a range of objectives. Notwithstanding Fergus Ewing's antipathy to SNH's involvement on Rum, that is its job. Surveys have shown that the national and European designated habitat features on the island are in an unfavourable condition because of trampling and overgrazing by deer. SNH has a statutory responsibility to avoid deterioration on the island. A small number of feral goats live on the island, but the Macaulay Institute research Fergus Ewing quoted is not relevant in this case because we know there is a problem to be addressed. More detailed survey and monitoring work to assess the nature and scale of deer impacts is currently being discussed to inform the best way forward. That is where the suggestion of a reduction cull has come from. However, I want to repeat Andrew Thin's assurance that there will be no more than a maintenance cull this year. SNH is in discussion with the University of Cambridge and the University of Edinburgh about the management of the herds on Rum and about their scientific research. SNH will take their comments into account in its consultation. I want to correct the suggestion that Jamie McGrigor and Fergus Ewing made, that the only reason there are discussions on plans to cull deer on Rum is to protect the trees that SNH has decided to plant without any protective fencing. The issue is much more complex. SNH is trying to protect a range of habitat features. The consultation on the management plan will have to look into all the issues. I am told that SNH is planting trees without using deer fences because of the landscape impacts, the restrictions on the movements of deer, interference with public access, and the logistical difficulties with large-scale fencing operations. The latter is a particular problem on Rum, which has remote and difficult terrain.

I am sorry. Fergus Ewing may disagree, but that is what I have been told.

Yes, I have been to Rum.

Some additional tree planting will take place this year in line with the current management plan. That will be done in areas  where deer density is currently low—in the east and south-east of the island, and not in the north. I am happy to take an intervention from Jamie McGrigor now.

There is no suggestion that SNH is refusing to use deer fences around plantations. It is avoiding them because of landscape impacts, hindrance to recreational access, interference with the movements of deer and logistical difficulties. I am happy to get SNH to write to Jamie McGrigor, but I am told that, because Rum is an island and because of its nature, it is particularly difficult to get equipment there and then around the island. Rum is a wonderful place. It is host to a range of important plant species and to birdlife—and it is a refuge for red deer. In consideration of a future management plan, all those issues will have to be weighed up. We have focused on deer tonight, but the points that Mark Ruskell made also have to be taken into account. There are many key features on Rum, which is why it was designated a protected island. There is birdlife; upland, coastal and aquatic habitats worthy of protection; special areas of conservation; sites of special scientific interest; and a range of species that are nationally scarce. Many issues of management of species and habitats arise. The deer have to be part of the discussion, but they are not the only issue that SNH has to consider. The part of the motion that I very much agree with is that red deer are an asset and are iconic to Scotland. They are valued by all concerned. They will continue to be an integral part of Rum for years to come. I invite colleagues to ensure that they are in dialogue with SNH. When the consultation on the management plan comes round, SNH will be willing to listen to people's comments. I hope that it will be a constructive process. SNH is willing to listen.  Meeting closed at 16:49.

It is for local authorities to take the initiative in promoting flood prevention schemes. Schemes follow a statutory procedure under which they are made and advertised by the local authority and then submitted to Scottish ministers for confirmation. For our part, we are committed to helping local authorities' efforts to increase protection for communities that are affected by flooding by investing in flood alleviation measures and flood defences. For the period 2006 to 2008, we made £75 million available to local authorities to support their flood prevention schemes, and we have increased the grant rate to 80 per cent of eligible costs. The Executive has also published research findings on the implications of climate change for flood risk and we require local authorities to take those into account when they design flood prevention schemes.

Yes. I am happy to do that. I met Elaine Smith to discuss the matter, which is a long-standing issue on which she has campaigned. Some 34 properties are affected by the major investment programme. When the work is complete, they should be removed from the flood risk register. I understand that the project was delayed because Scottish Water discovered  ground problems that made excavation difficult and it had to do extra work. However, it is still on track to complete the work by June. I will certainly encourage Scottish Water to keep Elaine Smith abreast of developments as the project progresses.

In April 2005, a major United Kingdom research project—the foresight project—considered future flooding problems. That provides a challenging vision of flood and coastal management for the UK between 2030 and 2100 and it contributes significantly to our understanding of the longer-term challenges. In the next parliamentary session, flood maps and increased investment will be in place. The key issue is working out our priorities, which means working out what communities it is possible to protect, particularly in coastal areas. In landward areas, the new planning guidance will deal with major planning issues, and managing the whole process will also raise issues. We have done a lot of work and we are trying to be more joined up through the national flooding framework, but we have major challenges for the future. The Parliament will have to debate the subject in future years.

The member makes the valuable point that many of the procedures and much of the legislation guiding how we act on flooding could be regarded as out of date. The Executive is working on that. Earlier this year, I spoke to the flooding issues advisory committee about flooding. That committee now has a definition of, and principles and objectives for, sustainable flood management. It believes that that will help all stakeholders to become involved when we manage and plan schemes, so that we take a more strategic  approach to managing flood risk as well as new types of flood defences. Work on that continues and I hope that we will consult on that in the summer. I urge members around the chamber to get involved in and add their constituents' experience to that consultation.

As the member is correct to say, I agreed not to participate in the decision about that scheme, on which my views are well known, so I have not seen the paperwork. However, having consulted the minister, Ross Finnie, I am allowed to say that he will announce a decision very shortly. I say to Malcolm Chisholm that every week that goes by reinforces to me the need to have a new and modern system in place, so that we can introduce such schemes faster and more effectively to protect the households that are affected by the devastation of flooding.

The member's suggestion is helpful. Our officials are considering how we can think more up front about better managing flood risk, rather than just putting in place physical schemes. That work continues.

I am satisfied with the progress that has been achieved in implementing the access provisions of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003. However, there will be scope within the wider review of the act, which we have indicated will be undertaken during 2007, to consider any matters relating to the access provisions. I welcome the appointment of Dennis Canavan to the post that he mentioned. Future ministers will have to listen carefully to his representations.

Further funding of £8.1 million for 2006-07 and 2007-08 for access-related activity has been made available to local authorities across Scotland in the grant-aided expenditure assessment. That money is not ring fenced, but I hope that local authorities will take seriously their responsibilities to implement the provisions of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003. The principles of the act were widely supported, and its provisions have secured wide acceptance in practice. However, I am interested in Dennis Canavan's concerns. I would be concerned if people believe that landowners are ignoring or deliberately breaching the access code. Obviously, I do not want to comment on any court cases, but I point out that the access code was subjected to wide consultation and a lot of discussion and negotiation. The final wording was not reached easily, but local authorities, landowners and groups representing those interested in securing wider access were involved in putting it together. I would be grateful if Dennis  Canavan would write to me about any particular examples that I need to be made aware of.

The Scottish Land Court is now considering the Pairc case. A contribution of £16,000 has been received from Highlands and Islands Enterprise. It is expected that the first substantive hearing will take place in June. Matters are therefore progressing. On interposed leases, section 35 of the Crofting Reform etc Act 2007 will enable community bodies to purchase any lease with a commercial value over croft land that they wish to purchase under the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003. The provisions of the 2007 act will come into effect in June—I recently announced that crofters will be able to take advantage of the provisions from June. The two acts will work together from that point.

As I said, we intend to carry out a wide review of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 in 2007. I do not want to comment on any court cases. If members who were on the committee that examined the 2003 act have specific concerns—I know, from questions that Pauline McNeill has asked me, that concerns exist—we would be keen to hear from them.

The Executive certainly has no concern about the 2003 act not being compliant with the European convention on human rights. I would be concerned if Pauline McNeill took the view that we are getting less access. That was absolutely not the intention of the act. Again, I say to members that we will review the issue during 2007. It is difficult to discuss this in the chamber, although I know that the bill was debated line by line in detail by the committee. A review is the proper way of assessing the issues. If members have concerns in the meantime, it would be appropriate for them to contact ministers.

Ministers have asked Scottish Natural Heritage to bring forward proposals to resolve the difficulty that has arisen. Those are expected in the next six to eight weeks.

The issue is complex. Jim Wallace has made several representations to me and previous ministers. SNH is clarifying the position in relation to state aid. That must be done properly. It also has to check whether there are any vires issues. Unfortunately, investigating the scope and financial implications of the issue has been a significant task for SNH, which has involved examination of the basis of payment and determination of the number of production units involved for all the management agreements that were active during the single farm payment reference period of 2000 to 2002. As Jim Wallace rightly points out, the majority of those agreements were negotiated individually and many date back to the 1980s. I am very keen that this matter is resolved. As I said, we expect to receive SNH's proposals within six to eight weeks and I am keen that that date will be stuck to.

None. Our focus has been on supporting Scottish Water to deliver dramatic improvements to drinking water quality, the environment and customer service at the same time as making huge cost reductions.

No. We have been down these tracks before. Scottish Water is doing a very good job. Record levels of investment are being made throughout the country. Day after day, I see press articles about improvements in rural Scotland. The £2.45 billion investment programme is huge. Scottish Water is considering its structures to see how it can deliver improvements to the quality of customer service—that issue is firmly on its agenda—and it is looking forward to managing the issue of retail access and competition. On proposals to change the structure of Scottish Water, the Executive is firmly implementing its partnership agreement commitment.

I am delighted that the Neilston Development Trust has been successful in buying the former Clydesdale bank building. The Executive sought to offer advice and assistance throughout the process to enable the local community to take advantage of the provisions of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 on the right to buy. As we move forward to review the act, we will want to draw any lessons about its operation from the experience of those involved.

The member makes some interesting points. In the local area to which he refers, it was a challenge to get a high turnout in the ballot. Although the 50 per cent turnout that the 2003 requires was not achieved in Neilston, an overwhelming majority of those who voted—1,122 out of 1,156 people—supported the proposal for community buyout. In those circumstances, ministers believed that there was strong justification for approving the right to buy. We are interested in hearing local communities' views on the issue, but we set the 50 per cent target to ensure that there is genuine support in communities for such proposals. Ken Macintosh asked about the work that has been done with communities, especially regeneration communities. We have worked with Communities Scotland to ensure that it helps communities to build the capacity to submit proposals and that communities are assisted to understand the implications of asset ownership, so that they can look at its benefits and the key management issues that they must consider. In each of the financial years 2006-07 and 2007-08, £250,000 has been made available to ensure that communities in urban areas that are interested in the community right to buy get the chance to examine those issues. We hear what Ken Macintosh is saying, but ministers will consider in depth the issues that he raises when they review the 2003 act.

There would be little point in making such investment if it was not accompanied by initiatives to tackle maintenance-related issues such as leakage. That is why Scottish Water has been given a series of challenging targets for leakage reduction during the first four years of its current investment  programme. It is required to close 50 per cent of the gap between current performance and the economic level of leakage by 2010, with interim targets of a 16 per cent reduction in this financial year and a 25 per cent reduction by 2007-08.

I could not disagree more. Vast investment of more than £2 billion is being made. The key point is that Scottish Water must tackle the level of leakage and reduce it progressively year on year. The Water Industry Commission is keen to ensure that that happens. It is important that Scottish Water has a clear understanding of the quality of its assets throughout the network. If it reduces significantly the amount of leakage in one area without having a consistent programme in other areas, the network may pop elsewhere. A coherent programme is needed. Scottish Water has been set challenging targets that have been agreed with the WIC. I am confident that the resource allocation from the WIC that has been agreed with Scottish Water will enable it to meet those targets.

If the member had attended Tuesday's meeting of the Finance Committee, he would have been able to participate for the best part of an hour in a detailed discussion of such issues, including the one that he raises. I made the point to Jim Mather that we cannot take a simplistic view of what is appropriate. The drinking water quality regulatory process is important. The quality of drinking water in Lismore—including water for schoolchildren—is one of the key issues that were considered. The WIC deals with economic regulation and considers what Scottish Water can afford. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency deals with environmental regulation. I am perfectly satisfied that those three regulatory processes will determine what Scottish Water should do.

I am conscious that this has been neither the longest nor the most contentious or fractious debate that we have ever had in the Parliament, so I hope that I can follow the example of previous deputy ministers in speaking until 5 o'clock—I cannot guarantee it. As many members have said, the bill is absolutely not an end to the Parliament's interest in aquaculture and fisheries. There will be monitoring of the implementation of the bill. We have been supported ably by the freshwater fisheries forum. The speeches that have been made reflect the fact that there has been a lot of participation and that a lot of work has been done by different sectors of the fishing industry. Right from the start, a range of stakeholders have been involved in producing the bill that the Executive has taken through the Parliament. I know that there is enthusiasm throughout the Parliament for further work to be done on the issue.  Dennis Canavan was right to point out that there has been a long-standing commitment to do further work. In the next session, the Parliament will need to address aquaculture in the forthcoming strategic framework on freshwater fisheries. I reassure Dennis Canavan and John Home Robertson—who also has a long-standing interest in the issue—that we want stakeholders to be fully involved in designing the future management structures. I got the sense from this afternoon's debate that there will be a lot of interest in this work throughout the country. We need to ensure that the different perspectives are brought around the table to design the next legislation that is required. It was said that Dennis Canavan has shown consistent interest in aquaculture in this Parliament. Officials tell me that his interest goes way back beyond this Parliament, as he was active in representing the views of anglers at the United Kingdom Parliament throughout his time as an MP. I thank the many individuals and organisations who helped shape the bill. Without their input, we would not have had a short and uncontentious debate this afternoon. They have helped demonstrate that the best solutions come from working through proposals with practitioners who have to live and work with the issues every day. I also thank my officials and the legal team and the drafters who worked on the bill. I thank the Parliament, particularly the committee members and their clerks who helped in the process of consideration and scrutiny of the bill. A lot of technical issues had to be addressed. I thank Maureen Macmillan for her work in the Parliament and for taking over seamlessly as convener of the Environment and Rural Development Committee when I moved to the other end of the table.

The Executive's view is that the code is extremely useful and the vast majority of aquaculture companies are fully signed up to it. However, not absolutely everybody is and we want to ensure that there is pressure to do so and to push up standards throughout the industry. Eleanor Scott mentioned escapes. The bill is absolutely clear that fish farms must have satisfactory measures in place for the containment of fish—an enforcement notice can be served if they do not. It is an offence if a fish farmer does not take the necessary steps set out in the notice.  There has to be a tough back-stop when there is not effective management. A range of other issues have been raised, such as GS. The contingency plan was tested last month, in which all relevant stakeholders were involved. The process requires to be fine tuned. Although no major flaws were identified, we all agree that the last thing any of us wants is GS to move into Scotland. The precautionary measures, the publicity, posters and leaflets are crucial in getting across to people the message that we cannot afford to let GS enter Scotland. Richard Lochhead asked a specific question about the available money. He referred to the sum of £36 million. That would be the cost of putting in disinfectant points at all ports, not the publicity that we are putting in place. I hope that colleagues will be happy to support and disseminate that in their constituencies. This has been a good debate. I reiterate that we recognise the importance of aquaculture and freshwater fisheries in Scotland. They are incredibly important economically. They support many jobs in rural communities throughout Scotland, and they support our tourism industry by attracting people to Scotland to enjoy our wonderful natural environment. Continued strong commitment from the Scottish Executive and the public sector, working with the aquaculture and freshwater fisheries industries, is the way forward. I welcome the consensus that has grown around the bill. All that remains is for the Parliament to formally support the motion.

Ted Brocklebank's amendment 3 would convert a discretionary power into a mandatory power. We do not believe that that would be appropriate, and I note that only 17 per cent of the aquaculture companies that responded to our consultation stated a preference for mandatory, rather than discretionary, payments. At present, the fish farming industry is free of any disease that would require the destruction of stock—long may that continue—so there is no pressure to introduce a scheme in the short term. The power is discretionary for the good reason that no provision for a scheme exists in current spending plans and because the Scottish ministers would have to consider whether and to what extent the Executive could afford such costs.

Yes, but we are now introducing a discretionary power in the bill. We expected some acknowledgment of the fact that that is a big step forward. It will give the Scottish ministers powers to set up a scheme for such payments if they feel that there is a need for one. We have kept our options open. Should there be a need to take powers for a payment scheme for aquaculture under the bill, we will be able to do that. Such a scheme would, of course, be designed in consultation with the aquaculture industry and would be set up by order under the affirmative procedure, which means that Parliament would have the chance to scrutinise the order in detail. That is a step forward. The Executive responded positively to calls for payments for the destruction of fish for disease control purposes. The proposed discretionary provision is unprecedented in  aquaculture—I would have thought that members would acknowledge that a discretionary provision is far better than none at all. However, I sense that Mr McGrigor is not prepared to withdraw amendment 3, so I ask members to vote it down.

Amendment 13 is a technical amendment to the power that will be conferred on the Scottish ministers by section 25C(1) to prescribe by order a scale of fixed penalties for sea fisheries offences. Amendment 13 will set a maximum limit for fixed penalties of 80 per cent of level 4 on the standard scale—currently £2,000. The amendment addresses concerns that the Subordinate Legislation Committee expressed last month when it considered the Executive amendments that were agreed to at stage 2. I move amendment 13.  Amendment 13 agreed to.

The bill already includes an enabling provision, which was introduced in section 25, to allow for a prohibition of the use of live vertebrates as bait to be made through subordinate legislation. That would allow for the use of specific baits and lures, such as live vertebrates, to be prohibited in fishing for freshwater fish. Following concerns that were raised by many stakeholders about the risk of adverse effects on biodiversity in our inland waters from the use of unused live bait, we decided that putting the provision on the face of the bill would make the policy absolutely clear. The Environment and Rural Development Committee endorsed that position in its stage 1 report and the bill was amended at stage 2 to include such a provision. Ted Brocklebank's amendment 2 would remove that provision. I want to refute some of the myths that have been flying around about this issue during the past few weeks. First, it has been suggested that the provision that was inserted at stage 2 was some kind of late amendment aimed at getting through a new policy at the end of the process. It was not. The prohibition on the use of live vertebrates was first proposed in the Executive's green paper "Scotland's freshwater fish and fisheries: Securing their future", which was published in August 2001. It was subsequently debated thoroughly in the freshwater fisheries forum and included in the consultation document that was issued in December 2005. The response to the question in that consultation was four to one in favour of a ban. I acknowledge that the strongly held views for and against the use of live vertebrates as bait tend to split along the lines that are associated with different branches of the sport. Those who wish to fish for predatory fish such as pike want no ban, whereas those who fish for other fish want a ban. It has been argued that introducing the ban simply supports the views of the latter group, but those on both sides of the argument share the same environment, and the fact remains that the use of live vertebrates by one group could compromise the environment and the fishing of another group. The second point has been raised by several people; Eleanor Scott mentioned it today. The ban is not about welfare, and the Executive's next step will not be to prohibit the use of worms and maggots, if not fishing itself. I emphasise that the  Executive has been consistent on that issue from day one. The issue is one of biodiversity, and I welcome Richard Lochhead's acknowledgement that biodiversity must be the central issue. There is also a myth that live vertebrates are not a problem. That is not so. The use of live vertebrates as bait has resulted in the translocation of live fish from one body of water to another. We need only look at Loch Lomond to see what has happened. The loch now supports a number of fish species that are new to the loch. One of those species, the ruffe, is now the most numerous fish in the loch and it is thought to pose a major threat to the loch's indigenous powan, which is an internationally important species of freshwater fish found in Loch Lomond and Lock Eck and which is listed in the habitats directive. The use of lures and dead fish—often marine species such as sprat or mackerel—gives anglers an ample range of methods and there is no need to put biodiversity at risk. We do not want to suggest that pike anglers should not come to Scotland; they will still be very welcome. Although the use of live vertebrates is supported by a minority, support for a ban was, and remains, widespread. The case for prohibition is compelling. That was also the view of the majority of members on the Environment and Rural Development Committee. I ask Jamie McGrigor to consider withdrawing amendment 2 for the reasons that I have outlined. I listened carefully to Richard Lochhead's arguments in favour of amendment 12. We have to focus on the issue of our native biodiversity. The fact that it has been compromised in some places does not mean that we should allow that to continue in others. The Executive's view is that the risk is just too great. I ask Richard Lochhead not to press his amendment. The Executive's position is clear and is supported by the majority: the provision should stay in the bill. Taken together, the effect of Dennis Canavan's amendments 10 and 11 would be that Scottish ministers would not be able to make conservation regulations that would completely prohibit the use of lures or live invertebrates as bait either directly or as a result of the cumulative effects of sets of regulations. Some stakeholders are concerned that banning the use of live vertebrates as bait will also mean a ban on the use of live invertebrates, or that it would be followed by such a ban. That is not the case, and I am happy to repeat the commitment that I gave at stage 2: the Executive supports angling and does not intend to ban the use of live invertebrates as bait. I met Dennis Canavan and I fully understand that the use of worms and maggots as bait and certain spinners as lures is central to the  introduction of many young people to the sport of angling. I assure him that it is certainly not our intention to put any obstacles in the way of potential new entrants to the sport; quite the contrary. By introducing new section 51A into the Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 2003, section 25 of the bill addresses the need that was identified by stakeholders for a set of appropriate tools that may be used when there are conservation concerns about freshwater fish. If the appropriate response to an identified problem includes prohibiting specified lures or baits, the appropriate regulation can be made. Scottish ministers can make regulations only if they are satisfied that it is necessary or expedient to do so for the conservation of freshwater fish. That power is not available to be used for any other reason. For example, it could not be used to ban the use of live invertebrates as bait solely on supposed welfare grounds. Before any regulations are made, a system of checks and balances will apply. There is a requirement that ministers must consult and take advice from a range of bodies, including the Fisheries Research Services, SEPA, and environmental non-governmental organisations; the views of anglers must be sought, too, of course. Ministers must always be proportionate and reasonable in the action that they take. The final check and balance is that they will have to persuade the Parliament of what they want to do. As I have explained, the Executive has no intention to ban completely the use of any lure or of live invertebrates as bait, and we can see no circumstances in which section 25 would be used to introduce such a complete ban. Dennis Canavan's amendments 10 and 11 are unnecessary and, on the basis of the reassurance that I have provided, I ask him not to move them.

Amendment 14 is the same as a probing amendment that Rob Gibson lodged at stage 2. I said then that the Executive's intention was to strike a balance in the bill between regulation and not undermining investor confidence in the industry. The bill is appropriate regulation and retains the commercial freedom that our aquaculture industry requires to remain competitive. That approach has been welcomed by the Environment and Rural Development Committee and it would be disrupted if the Parliament were to accept amendment 14. Rob Gibson mentioned the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006. The five-year time limit on undertaking development has been reduced to three years under that act, so there has been a reduction in the timescales. At stage 2, I gave the committee a number of examples of the legitimate commercial reasons that might prevent the  development of particular fish farm sites at any given time. I also explained at stage 2—and subsequently in correspondence to Alasdair Morrison, which I copied to the convener of the Environment and Rural Development Committee—that any companies that believe themselves to be subject to unfair competition may take that up with the Office of Fair Trading. Given the probing nature of Rob Gibson's stage 2 amendment and the fact that he withdrew it, I was not required to consider its legal effect in detail. However, the proposal is now before the Parliament in amendment 14, and I must consider its effect. Amendment 14 seeks to include a time limit within the code of conduct that the Scottish ministers may approve under section 7. Section 8 requires the Scottish ministers to monitor compliance with any such code and gives them the power to issue notices that require the taking of such steps as they consider necessary to secure compliance with the code. Contravention of such a notice without reasonable excuse would be an offence. The legal effect of amendment 14 would not be to force companies to free up undeveloped sites, nor even to encourage them to do so, but to give an unreasonable degree of power to the Scottish ministers. I doubt that Rob Gibson really intends that the Scottish ministers should be able to force the occupiers of fish farm sites to operate a business on those sites on pain of criminal sanction, but that would be the effect of his amendment 14 were it to become law. I fully understand the concern that lies behind amendment 14, which is that companies may be stifling competition by hanging on to potential fish farm sites and thereby limiting the opportunities for other companies and the potential growth of the aquaculture industry. As I said at stage 2, the issue is important, and the Executive takes an active interest in the work that Fisheries Research Services, the Crown Estate, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and the Scottish Salmon Producers Organisation are doing on site use and availability and the efficiency of site sharing among key players. Rob Gibson's amendment 14 would not be effective in preventing abuse that involved anti-competitive practices or agreements or abuse of a dominant position. That would be a matter for the competition authorities. I urge Rob Gibson to withdraw amendment 14 for the reasons that I have outlined.

I want to echo the positive nature of many of the comments made by colleagues. In my opening speech, I was keen to be positive and upbeat and to give credit where it is due for the big improvements that there have been in the organic sector. I was not trying to say that we have delivered perfection; I was trying to get underneath some of the statistics and talk about some of the challenges in achieving the targets that we set. I was also trying to debate the way forward and consider where we might go next. There have been some good achievements. There has been vastly increased support to farmers to enable them to convert to organic or to  maintain their organic status. We have been particularly successful in awarding processing and marketing grants. We have awarded more than £10 million, but that has levered in an additional £56 million in investment. We heard members—Conservative, Scottish National Party and Liberal—talking about the importance of working with farmers and, in particular, considering the processing chain so that we examine not just the primary producers but where they sell their produce. That has been a key issue in ensuring that we get the important match-up that Alex Johnstone talked about. Karen Gillon's suggestion about farmers co-ops was important. When farmers can work together, they get a better price and the opportunity to share marketing costs. I am keen for us to enable farmers who work together locally to bid for major contracts. They clearly cannot do so on their own, but if they work together and we support them with grants and advice—through, for example, the Scottish Agricultural College's dedicated organic advisory and market information services—that would be a good way forward. We have made a lot of progress in the past few years, and it has been interesting to hear colleagues reflect on progress in their local areas. One key question is where we go next in designing new organic support measures. They will clearly be delivered through land management contracts, and I am keen to consider with stakeholders—with input from colleagues—how best to target the resources to meet the needs of the organic market and ensure that the whole organic sector is addressed. One interesting point made by several colleagues, including Mark Ruskell, is that we need to develop a range of organic produce. If we are looking at local produce, we need to ensure that different types of produce are available across Scotland. The organic action plan has been an effective focus for the development and co-ordination of our support mechanisms. Given how the industry has developed in the past four years, I am very optimistic about our ability to work with it in future. As for the amendments, I am happy to acknowledge, as I did in my opening speech, that conventional farmers can achieve high environmental and animal welfare standards. I have been impressed by the growing awareness of the contribution of farmers—particularly those who follow the Linking Environment and Farming principles. Much is to be welcomed in the conventional sector. However, I particularly wanted the debate to focus on organic farming, to enable the Parliament to support that. For that reason, I am keen not to support Alex Johnstone's  amendment. However, I understand the principles that lie behind it. Richard Lochhead's amendment starts from a false premise, so it would not be right to support it. I am keen not to overstate our success, but I am equally keen not to underplay it and to dismiss the success of the past few years. Richard Lochhead's amendment asks us "to minimise the bureaucracy associated with organic production." Of course I am absolutely in favour of reducing bureaucracy—

No, thanks. The bureaucracy that organic producers face stems from the need to be properly certified. In his speech, Rob Gibson gave us useful feedback from Brussels. It is important to have a level playing field. Consumers who buy organic produce want to know that it is organic produce. That means that, regardless of where produce comes from—whether it comes from the UK, elsewhere in Europe or further afield—we want to ensure that it is genuinely organic. That is why we have standards and need effective mechanisms to monitor those standards. I am sure that the certification bodies would not welcome calls from us to reduce the measures that they take to safeguard their organic standards. The consumers to whom Pauline McNeill referred want to know what they are buying and do not want to be sold short with weaker standards. I have said that I am keen to work with the industry to ensure that the next organic action plan lets us move significantly forward. I reject Mark Ruskell's amendment not because I disagree with all its content—

No. I have done that before, and it was a big mistake. I very much support much of what is in Mark Ruskell's amendment. Like the current plan, the new plan must be ambitious and must reflect many of the issues that colleagues have raised. However, I do not want to pre-empt that discussion with colleagues and the discussion that we will need to have with stakeholders in the organic sector, with people in the agricultural sector more widely, with people in rural communities, who have a role to play, and—crucially—with consumer organisations. I am happy to take soundings from the organic sector about the Executive's future research  policies, which I would be keen to examine. That involves challenges. As Andrew Arbuckle said, some inaccurate research that damaged the organic sector was published recently. It was not rigorous research, because it did not consider all the issues that needed to be considered. On Monday, I attended an excellent conference that brought together local authorities and non-governmental organisations to consider what we can do throughout Scotland to reduce our carbon footprint. One way to do that is to promote the sourcing of much more local produce for our schools and hospitals and to enable smaller producers to compete. We need more marketing and we need to grow the sector sustainably. As for the points that Karen Gillon and Pauline McNeill made about affordability, the best way to achieve affordability is for the public sector to work to create the market. That will enable organic producers and high-quality local food producers to compete for the public purse. The schools projects under hungry for success have been massively successful and the food for life programme provides another way to proceed. Hospitals also represent a huge market. There is a challenge for the organic sector. My message is that the Executive is with that sector and supports it in meeting that challenge. The next organic action plan will have to be radical and ambitious and I hope that the whole Parliament will support it.

I was keen to secure a parliamentary debate on progress on the organic action plan. The Parliament was keen to support that plan in the first session, and I give credit to Robin Harper for pushing the issue up our agenda then. I wanted to restate the Executive's continuing commitment to organics and to enable colleagues in all parties to air their views about how we can progress and to add insights from their work as members in their constituencies and regions.

Obviously, I pay tribute to them. Environmentally friendly conventional farming can make a strong contribution to our country's biodiversity and landscapes. I acknowledge its importance and its contribution. Environmentally friendly conventional farming is one of the issues that we want to progress through the new land management contracts, by which we can further encourage environmental stewardship in the conventional sector. All members know about the strong demand from our constituents for organic produce. Last year, estimated United Kingdom sales of organic produce increased by more than 30 per cent to £1.6 billion. The Soil Association estimates that Scotland's share of that figure is £140 million and growing. The demand is prompting supermarkets to increase their organic ranges and encouraging the expansion of farmers markets, box schemes and other local food initiatives. This debate is taking place in fair trade week. Consumers are expressing a preference for produce that brings social and environmental benefits to producers in developing countries. We all know that consumers are increasingly keen to buy food that they know has been locally produced or that meets fair trade standards. From the Executive's perspective, organic farming brings several benefits. It provides a range of environmental benefits and contributes to Scotland's reputation for producing good-quality food in an environmentally friendly way; it  minimises the use of non-renewable resources; it avoids pollution by minimising the use of artificial fertilisers and pesticides; it aims to build up soil fertility by enhancing the natural biological cycles in the soil; and it demands high animal welfare standards. Studies over the years have shown that organic farming brings significant biodiversity, pollution control, energy efficiency and soil protection benefits. As my colleague Christine May said, environmental standards are rising in the conventional farming sector. Organic farming plays an important role in setting environmental standards for farming and demonstrating the benefits that farmers can gain by providing produce that meets the growing demand for high-quality, environmentally sustainable food with an assurance about its standard and the farm in Scotland from which it came. Many members will be aware that converting to organic production can be a difficult and expensive process, and that the market returns in that relatively small and segmented market sector can be variable. Therefore, our agricultural industry requires support to achieve the benefits that organic farming can provide. That is why I was keen to have this debate today. Our third annual report on the organic action plan gives us a good platform to debate how far we have come during the past few years and enables colleagues to think about where we should be going next. It is not enough for the Executive to say that it supports organic farming; we have to think through the mechanisms and take a sustainable approach. We also have to help farmers to respond to the challenges that they face, and remember that conventional farming faces similar challenges as we move towards modulation and common agricultural policy reform. There are things that the Executive can do. We can help farmers to get over the initial hurdle of organic conversion, when costs are higher and returns will not come for two to three years. We can help the industry to identify and tackle weaknesses in the supply chain that prevent producers from accessing the market—smaller producers often face such difficulties. We can also provide advisory and research support so that farmers can make the transition to organic production as easily as possible. We expressed our commitment by including two specific undertakings in our partnership agreement. The first was to implement the organic action plan to develop the infrastructure that is needed to increase Scotland's share of the organic food market and the proportion of organic food that is available in Scotland. The second was to increase the finance that is available to farmers who wish to convert.  In the run-up to the 2003 election, we saw a dramatic increase in the area of organic land in Scotland, but that concealed deficiencies in the operation of the organic market and the infrastructure that was needed to deliver to consumers. For example, it led to large quantities of organically reared livestock that could not be sold into the organic market ending up on the conventional meat market at lower prices. After consultation with a wide range of industry stakeholders, and pressure from this Parliament, the organic action plan was developed. I would like to take that set of stakeholders into the future, to ensure that people continue to work together and think not just about the Executive's agricultural policies but about our general policies on food and drink, so that we can take a joined-up approach to supporting the organic sector. It is fair to say that we now have the conditions in which Scottish producers can meet 70 per cent of the demand for indigenous organic produce. That is double the percentage that pertained before the organic action plan existed.

I will finish my point first. Of course, if we look behind those figures we can see that most sectors meet more than 70 per cent of demand, particularly the beef, lamb, table birds and fish markets. There are, however, other areas where we need to do better, particularly the fruit and dairy product markets, where we still have to reach 70 per cent. We have significantly increased the amount of finance that is available to enable conversion. Further rate rises were introduced in 2005—as much as fourfold in some cases—and we are now spending significantly more on the organic aid scheme. A record £11.7 million was committed in 2006, which is double what was committed the previous year. However, we need to do a lot more. I hope that this afternoon's debate will focus on where we should go next, whether that is promoting good quality and local food, working with and supporting farmers so that they can get to markets and market their goods, or ensuring that we support projects that link our primary producers to processing so that they can access new markets. We also have to think about the food service sector, so that we can help producers to gain access to it, particularly through public procurement and access to markets in schools and hospitals. A lot more can be done on that, and we should look to the East Ayrshire procurement pilot scheme to see how we can do that while staying within European rules.  The agenda is an exciting one. We have made progress by working with the industry. We have a lot to do, and the new Scottish rural development programme will help us to work together to take the organic action plan forward. I am keen to hear members' views on the future and, in moving my motion, I would welcome the Parliament's commitment to continue to support the organic sector to enable it to meet the aspirations of Scottish consumers who want local food that is produced in an environmentally sustainable way. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the progress made to date in implementing the Organic Action Plan; welcomes the increasing consumer demand for Scottish organic produce, the contribution of organic producers in improving the availability of good quality local food at local markets and the contribution of organic producers to sustainable development, and commits to continue to support the organic sector in the future.

First, I join colleagues in congratulating Phil Gallie on raising the matter and giving us the chance to discuss not only the laudable step that the Clyde Fishermen's Association has taken but other issues and pressures that affect our inshore fisheries. Phil Gallie made a reflective speech. It is unusual that we all agree with him, so I also congratulate him on that. The fact that the CFA agreed voluntarily to stop trawling in areas of Loch Fyne and Loch Shira in the interests of biodiversity and conservation is commendable. The key beneficiary of the action is the firework anemone, which is present in the area. It is a burrowing sea anemone that is found in deepwater mud habitats and can grow up to 30cm in length. It is susceptible to physical disturbance, so it is good that the CFA has put in place a self-limiting process. The firework anemone is present extensively in the area concerned, which is an indication of good biodiversity and that the area is relatively undisturbed. That is a good-news story. I am keen on initiatives that involve stakeholders from different sectors and which have multiple benefits. I am pleased that the CFA has worked with the Argyll Fisheries Trust, the district salmon fisheries board and Argyll and Bute Council on the initiative. Partnership is the way forward on some of the difficult issues and projects to which colleagues have referred. A range of multi-agency initiatives are under way in the Clyde. The project that is mentioned in the motion is one of four pilot management schemes that are being prepared under the Scottish sustainable marine environment initiative. The Clyde and Sound of Mull projects aim to deliver an improved integrated management plan to help ensure the sustainable management of local marine resources. They are welcome initiatives. There is also the Clyde fisheries development project, one objective of which is to develop and promote best practice in the operation and management of Clyde fisheries. The project includes a set of quality environmental standards and involves a range of organisations, including the Clyde Fishermen's Association, Scottish Creelers and Divers, Seafish, Scottish Natural Heritage and WWF. Another initiative is the Community of Arran Seabed Trust's proposals for Lamlash bay, which Rob Gibson and Eleanor  Scott mentioned. The proposal has developed into a marine management project that aims at involving areas in which fishing is controlled and managed. Scallop enhancement proposals are also involved. Crucially, in addition to the input by the Firth of Clyde forum, SNH and Fisheries Research Services, the proposal has been developed jointly by COAST and the Clyde Fishermen's Association. From previous discussions in the Environment and Rural Development Committee and with Allan Wilson, who is a strong supporter of COAST, I know that there is a great deal of enthusiasm for and momentum behind the project. I will update colleagues on further progress that has been made on that initiative. SNH has helpfully prepared and will soon circulate a paper setting out the possible next steps for the project. My expectation is that the paper will help the acceleration of the initiative. To clarify, and for the record, the Scottish Executive remains committed to supporting the project and to the statutory underpinning for the restrictions and closures that would be required as part of the work. Another initiative is the Scottish Executive's development of the Clyde inshore fisheries group, which will be one of up to 12 such groups throughout the country. That mechanism will provide for the management of the Clyde inshore fisheries to be devolved to local fishing interests. However, that will not be fisheries management in isolation. Those who are involved in the group will be required to take account of the requirements and aspirations of others who are involved in or dependent on our inshore marine environment.  Colleagues will have noticed a common theme in my comments—the Clyde Fishermen's Association is involved in every one of the initiatives that I have mentioned. To me, that shows a willingness to engage on a wide range of issues with a diverse range of organisations and it demonstrates an awareness and understanding of those organisations' aims and objectives, despite the fact that many of them will differ with the association from time to time. The process is about people bringing their perspectives to the table. Phil Gallie asked me to say that we consider fishermen's organisations to be crucial to the future partnership discussions. I say on the record that I agree fully with that. It is important to note that each of those initiatives has a scientific basis, to varying degrees. In particular, the Executive is keen for the inshore fisheries groups to have access to science and research so that the management proposals that the groups develop have a sound evidence base, and appropriate monitoring or evaluation is incorporated. That is one issue that I will certainly take away from the debate. Jamie  McGrigor asked me to examine the DEFRA proposal that is currently being considered. I am happy to consider that further and ensure that progress is made. A couple of members mentioned science and research. I will certainly take their points on board for our future discussions of the development of fisheries science. I welcome the work that has been done thus far. George Lyon and Jamie McGrigor referred to the Firth of Lorn SAC. George Lyon referred to the importance of family-scale fishing interests and the importance of responsible fishing to encourage conservation and sustainable sea fisheries. He was right to say that discussions are on-going, and I reassure colleagues with a particular interest that although the issue is challenging in some ways, we expect progress to be made shortly. I welcome the step that Phil Gallie has highlighted in his motion. We welcome the Clyde Fishermen's Association's initiative in Loch Shira and Loch Fyne, and its appreciation of the need to take account of broader issues—not least, the environmental issues. As Eleanor Scott said, difficult and sensitive choices will have to be made. We will have to get people round the table to discuss those choices.  I hope that the next step will be to take the debate further. For example, I hope that the Clyde Fishermen's Association might consider shifting the depths slightly further in the boundary of the fishing area, from 20m to 30m. I am told that a small step such as that would result in a significantly wider area of habitat for the firework anemone, thus giving it further protection. We probably all have specific issues that we would like to discuss tonight. I look forward to hearing further examples of the Clyde Fishermen's Association—and other fishermen's associations around Scotland—moving ahead of the game and being involved in other management proposals from the inshore fisheries groups, to ensure sustainability in fisheries management and to help maintain and improve our marine environment. That is an exciting challenge. I thank all the members who have offered specific proposals and ideas tonight. I hope that we can take these issues forward as we consider marine issues over the next few months.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

First of all, I apologise for arriving late. Under the former crofters building grants and loans scheme, the average number of approvals for new houses in the Western Isles over the five years to March 2004 was 61 per annum. Under the new croft house grant scheme, which we introduced on 1 January 2005, the average number of approvals for new houses in the Western Isles rose to 89 per annum for the first two years of the scheme's operation. Those figures are based on approvals granted, not on houses built, as the timescale for building the houses can vary.

I would certainly be keen to ensure that we have joined-up government and that crofting communities are able to benefit from the Executive's Scottish community and householder renewables initiative—SCHRI. I would be keen to meet the member to discuss how we can promote the croft house grant scheme and ensure that crofters are aware of the opportunities that can come up under SCHRI. I would also be more than happy to meet local representatives from the Western Isles. The last time I visited the Western Isles, I was very  impressed by the work that was being done by the local housing association to reduce people's fuel bills from £700 a year to £200 a year. If there is more work that we can do with the crofting communities, I would be keen to do it.

The next five years takes in the next spending review, so we do not have a five-year programme, as such. Significant increases in grants will be made. The full budget that is in the system for the scheme is £3.4 million this year and will move up to £3.7 million next year. We are keen to ensure that the scheme continues. I will be keen to hear views on it from the committee of inquiry when it completes its work.

Scottish Water has improved customer service and achieved better quality and environmental standards. At the same time, it achieved greater cost reductions than any other water company in the United Kingdom in the four years from 2002 to 2006. As a result of that achievement, households and small businesses saved about £211 each. That is an outstanding performance.

I strongly prefer to concentrate on ensuring that Scottish Water delivers for the future by providing more connections, by achieving high standards for customers and by reducing costs. The last time Tory plans for water services were put to the electorate, they were resoundingly defeated. Nearly three quarters of the electorate in Strathclyde responded and 97 per cent rejected the plans. That is a lesson to all of us to ensure that we are clear about our plans.

When the Environment and Rural Development Committee visited Wales, I was most interested in the lengthy discussion that we had with Welsh Water, which reached its position after the previous private company went bust. When lessons can be learned from companies throughout the UK, we shall learn them. My interest is in making the current system work, with the Water Industry Commission for Scotland and our record investment levels, to ensure that we achieve environmental performance, new connections for businesses and the best value for customers.

Scottish Water is tested on that issue, and delivering on its targets is an operational matter for it. If the member has insights that he wants to pass on from experience in his constituency, I am more than happy to address them.

As the First Minister said at First Minister's question time on 8 February 2007, "Different parties are going to put across different ideas between now and the election".— [ Official Report , 8 February 2007; c 31995.]  The Conservatives are perfectly free to do that, just as the Labour Party and other parties are free to do it. We will debate those issues in the election campaign.

Mr McLetchie should not hold his breath. First, there has been no change whatever in the Environment and Rural Affairs Department. Members of Parliament are, quite rightly, developing policies for the election campaign, which will happen soon enough. I am confident that the Scottish Executive is giving the right directions and guidance to Scottish Water. We are making funds available so that Scottish Water can do the work that it needs to do. We have a new protocol between Scottish Water and local authorities to ensure that throughout Scotland the right connections are delivered to enable us to develop our environment and our economy. I make no comment on Mr McLetchie's manifesto proposals; it will be for the people of Scotland to decide which prescription they prefer.

A key issue is that work now takes place between Scottish Water, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and local authorities to ensure that development constraints are identified and tackled. There are issues to do with odour management, which is why the Scottish Executive was keen to put in place a new protocol. From 1 April there will be new requirements throughout Scotland in relation to odour management. I know that Christine May is interested in water treatment. Water-mains pressure is an operational issue for Scottish Water, but if the member wants to discuss particular issues with me I would be happy to hear her views.

The member's view is very much a minority view in Parliament—[ Interruption. ] I would like to continue. The Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform has made it clear—I concur with him—that the Water Industry Commission sets the financial framework for Scottish Water. The WIC has set Scottish Water's total expenditure and determined the capital expenditure that is required between 2006 and 2010. Lest the Scottish National Party again deliberately mislead people in Scotland, it is important to stress that Scottish Water has available to it every pound that the WIC and Scottish Water say it needs. Jim Mather raises the issue in Parliament time and again, but we just do not agree with him.

Yes.

The Advisory Committee on Releases to the Environment considers the GM variety that the member mentions to be as safe as the conventional variety. The Scottish Executive therefore agreed that the United Kingdom should vote in favour of the application.

First, it would have been helpful if the member had listened and responded to my answer. The Scottish Executive agreed with the UK Government that it should vote in favour of the application. There were extensive discussions with ACRE. The application was not agreed to when it was first considered. The company was sent back to rework its information and was told that it could not use the potato as animal feed. A lot more information was presented and, when the application came back a year later, it was approved. We must be clear that it went through the correct processes. On Rob Gibson's comment about future decisions, it would be premature to initiate a consultation. There are continuing discussions at the European level and the Scottish Executive is fully involved in debating the role of GM products. The Executive's position on the matter is clear and I stated it in my first answer to Rob Gibson's question. He should go and do a bit of homework. This particular crop is not going to be grown in Scotland or the rest of the UK, but it has been agreed under EU procedures with our careful consideration after taking scientific advice.

The flooding issues advisory committee is providing advice to the Executive on the implementation of a more sustainable approach to flood risk management. We plan to launch a public consultation on the issue later this month.

We need to be able to speak authoritatively on the exact cause of that incident, which is something that I am very concerned about. My predecessor met George Reid, the constituency member for the area, before Christmas. I have spoken to George Reid since then, and I know that he has been trying to keep local colleagues up to speed with the issue. The key thing is that Perth and Kinross Council has produced a preliminary report on the incident and it will now commission a more detailed report, on which we will all need to reflect. There may be lessons to be learned throughout Scotland, and there will definitely be lessons for residents and businesses in Perth and Kinross. I recognise the wider points that Mark Ruskell makes about sustainable flood risk management. We want a consultation on the issue, gathering experience from throughout Scotland, as the increased incidence of flooding is leading to problems all around Scotland. I am very much looking forward to seeing the results of the Executive's World Wide Fund for Nature scoping study, which is compiling and examining evidence relating to the impact of land-use techniques on flood risk management. The study aims to see the implications of the current situation in Scotland and to look at land uses more generally. There is a specific issue in Milnathort that needs to be addressed, but there are wider lessons to be learned and we need to think much more about sustainable flood management principles.

Malcolm Chisholm is absolutely right about my long-term interest in the issue. Having seen the impact of a flood on constituents' businesses and houses, I assure him that it is a matter of great concern to the Executive that it has taken so long for the issue to be resolved. I acknowledge the point that he makes about timescales. It will be my colleague, Ross Finnie, who decides the issue, because of my previous interest. He has reassured me that he will complete his consideration of the matter as soon as he can. The issue underlines the need for us to review how we deal with flood management. Malcolm Chisholm is absolutely right to say that it is a long time since the flood happened and a long time since the planning application was approved. We need to streamline the process. It is not about having another consultation; it is about looking at our legislative processes, which cut across getting swift, streamlined decisions and robust flood management systems in place. That is something that I am keen to pursue. The process was started with Malcolm Chisholm's work on the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill, and it must now be brought together with our flood management principles. I am keen to pursue that general issue urgently.

There is obviously the work that will be carried out by the local council, which is taking the lead in such matters. It is for the Executive ministers to work with local councils, once they have worked their schemes up, to find appropriate funding mechanisms. I know that, in his previous conversations with the minister, John Swinney has raised some practical thoughts as to how we might expedite some of those procedures and consider the funding issues. If John Swinney was prepared to put some of those thoughts down in writing, I would be keen to take them forward as I think that they are constructive ideas.  As regards the wider issue of flood management, we hope that the flooding issues advisory committee will be able to help us explore how to use land management techniques more generally to reduce the risk of flooding to communities. If partnership work is being carried out by the local council and Network Rail, I would be keen for it to be passed into the process. If there are good lessons to be learned, I would want to ensure that we did not miss out on them.

I own up to not being an expert on that, but I would be more than happy to ensure that that question is included among the other issues that we are considering, such as using reservoir storage and natural flood attenuation, in examining the implications of different techniques. If Murdo Fraser wants to put a note to me, I will ensure that it goes to the flooding issues advisory committee so that that that issue is taken on board.

In the first instance it is for the local authority to bring forward flood defence schemes to the Executive. In addition to a scheme it promoted at Lhanbryde, which has been confirmed by the Scottish ministers, Moray Council is also in discussion with the Executive about a further three schemes in Forres, Rothes and Elgin. For our part, we are committed to helping authorities increase protection of communities affected by flooding through investment in flood alleviation measures  and flood defences. The Executive is also pursuing a wide range of initiatives under its national flooding framework to improve and strengthen flood arrangements in Scotland.

I reassure Mr Lochhead that the Executive will deal with the Elgin proposal as soon as possible. I would not want our consultation on sustainable flood management to cut across any current Executive consideration of schemes. The purpose of the process is to engage communities, businesses, councils and all other key stakeholders in considering the successes of sustainable flood management that could be developed throughout Scotland. I reassure Mr Lochhead that it would not cut across the work that his council is putting forward to the Executive.

Let me begin by quoting from the Scottish Executive's amendment, which "welcomes the substantial improvements that have been made in Scottish Water's performance, all of this having been achieved while keeping Scottish Water in the public sector ... and affirms that Scottish Water operating in the current regulatory framework will go on to deliver further improvements in this vital public service." Our position could not be clearer, as the speeches by Labour back benchers such as Maureen Macmillan and Mary Mulligan have affirmed. Iain Smith spoke for the Liberal Democrat party. It is entirely obvious what the Scottish Executive amendment means. A number of members have disputed the success of Scottish Water over the past few years, but the company deserves to be congratulated, which is why our amendment welcomes the huge progress that has been made. Scottish Water is not a failing company or one that has not received clear directions on sustainable development. It is a public sector company that works within a regulated framework and which is delivering for Scotland. Our policies and our effective regulation mean that Scottish Water is delivering improved performance for less money.  The statistic that most people in Scotland care about is that Scottish Water's average household charge in 2006-07 is £287, which is £7 less than the equivalent charge in England and Wales. By 2009-10, the difference will be even greater.

No, thank you. Andrew Arbuckle was absolutely right to highlight the contrast between investment now and the historical lack of investment, when water services languished as a low priority for cash-strapped regional councils. I do not accept that the current system was set up deliberately to facilitate privatisation. Over the past few years, three companies have been merged into one. We have given Scottish Water a massive investment target and other, detailed targets. Maureen Macmillan was right to highlight efficiency and the importance of tackling leakage. The Water Industry Commission has set specific leakage reduction targets for Scottish Water, under which it must close 50 per cent of the gap between its current performance on leakage and the economic level of leakage by 2010 and, in the interim, reduce that gap by 16 per by 2006-07 and by 25 per cent by 2007-08. Those are tough targets. If members want us to go further, faster, we must pay more or rein back other projects for which there is support in the Parliament. The challenge for the next investment regime is to pick up the excellent points that Maureen Macmillan made about the need to ensure that we make progress on water conservation. I think that we are delivering on sustainable development and I do not accept the Greens' argument that Scottish Water is not tackling the issue. The company is taking highly specific measures. Efficiency gains must be linked to sustainable development. Why should we not use innovative techniques to renew water mains so that minimum disruption is caused to customers? Such techniques allow 36km of pipes to be laid per week in the busiest periods. Why should we not cluster similar projects instead of wasting resources on the design of unique projects? Why should we not have rigorous project management to achieve efficient and effective solutions? Why do we not implement no-dig solutions for renovating sewers, which cause communities less disturbance and which save time and money? Sustainable development principles and economic efficiency can be combined in numerous ways. That is why the Scottish ministers' directions require Scottish Water to deliver its aims sustainably. However, we must ensure that economic regulation—

Let us count how many words the member uses.

The SNP has made its position no clearer this morning. We have had three different speeches from SNP members, none of whom has lodged an amendment to the motion. I will take no lectures from a party that has been comprehensively defeated every time it has brought forward its alternatives. We have made clear our financial position and our investment programme is under way. During the first session of the Parliament, we set a £1.8 billion investment programme; now it is a £2.5 billion programme. The Executive has committed to ensuring that that investment takes place. Jim Mather made an extremely casual comment about the implementation of EU directives, which are in place to improve the quality of our environment. We need to meet them. Scottish Water and the framework under which it operates—whereby public sector control by the Scottish Executive is combined with economic regulation—are unique. The system that is in place gives us the best of both worlds. Ministers are able to set policy objectives that have been approved by the Parliament, while economic regulation ensures that we can afford the necessary investment. It is important that we draw those two aspects together. Excellent environmental improvements are being delivered because Scottish Water is operating more efficiently. That is good news for the environment and for customers.

Would Rob Gibson like to explain specifically what model the SNP supports and how it would deliver that?

I very much welcome the debate. We have systems of managing our water networks in Scotland that are different from those in the rest of the United Kingdom. That is a result of our policies and the ability to deliver them through this Scottish Parliament. Mark Ruskell's motion notes the substantial improvements that Scottish Water, operating in the public sector, has delivered. I go further in my  amendment by welcoming those improvements. Scottish Executive policies have transformed our water industry into a more effective and efficient organisation that delivers improved performance for less money.

No thanks. I want to get started. We have a unique model: it is a third way that provides a public sector company that is directed by ministerial policy, that has an overarching requirement for sustainable development and which is regulated and benchmarked against the private sector. Scottish Water reinvests in water the efficiency savings that it makes. It has been a challenging time for Scottish Water. We pulled together three separate water authorities into a single operation. We transformed the services that it has delivered to 2.2 million households and 136,000 business customers through improved operational practices and a £1.8 billion investment programme, which was supported by £600 million of borrowing from the Executive. Other countries have been interested in the model in Scotland. South Africa was very interested and sent representatives to Parliament to meet one of my predecessors, Lewis Macdonald, and to see how the public company and regulation system worked together. Northern Ireland was also very interested in our approach. The model is unique to us in Scotland, but it has worked.

No. Scottish Water is using private companies to deliver our investment programme, which is set by Scottish ministers. It is using the best system of delivery. It is not a private system. Scottish Water is using companies that are directed by the public sector. We see that throughout Scottish investment, which is a good thing. Let us consider the unprecedented levels of cost reduction that the partnership has been able to deliver in Scotland. The Water Industry Commission has calculated that savings of £946 million in operational and capital costs have been made. Those are unprecedented levels of efficiency, even for the water industry in the public sector. The savings equate to £211 in the average household bill in Scotland over the four years. Those are important savings for people who need  to know that Scottish Water is spending our money properly.

No, thank you. I want to get on. That means that Scottish Water is delivering more for less. Our constituents are benefiting from lower charges, Scotland is benefiting from improvement in the environment and drinking water quality and, crucially, our economy is benefiting from a better service being delivered more efficiently. Those achievements are good news and we should pause to congratulate Scottish Water on its successes, which have been delivered by a focused and determined management and dedicated staff. They have shown that our model for the water industry, operating in the public sector, can match the performance of the very best of the private sector. Mark Ruskell's motion displays a fundamental misunderstanding. He is wrong to assume that such improvements can be delivered without the system of robust economic regulation that this Administration put in place, which was approved by Parliament, with the support of Mr Ruskell's party. In the stage 3 debate on the Water Services etc (Scotland) Bill, Mr Ruskell said: "The delivery of water services in Scotland is about striking a crucial balance between the economy, the environment and social justice. Those three drivers need to be at the heart of the development of our water services. I am content that the bill offers a structure to enable that balance to be struck and controlled by the Parliament."— [ Official Report , 9 February 2005; c 14378.]  That is what we have—the correct system of regulation for Scottish Water. It achieves the maximum affordable improvement in public health and standards of environmental protection by improving our drinking water quality and the quality of discharges to the water environment. It supports housing and economic growth throughout Scotland through investment in new strategic water and sewerage capacity. It delivers those outcomes with a capital programme that means that we will get delivery over the next few years and that water charges will remain affordable. That is what customers want, that is what the people of Scotland want and that is what Parliament voted for. I move amendment S2M-5510.2, to leave out from first "notes" to end and insert: ""welcomes the substantial improvements that have been made in Scottish Water's performance, all of this having been achieved while keeping Scottish Water in the public sector; recognises that the objectives set by ministers for 2006-14, which properly recognise the social and environmental priorities of the Scottish Executive, will not only deliver further improvements in drinking water quality, environmental protection, and customer service but also  relieve development constraints, upgrade the water and sewerage system and reduce leakages; recognises that the role of the Water Industry Commission for Scotland is to assess the lowest reasonable overall costs of delivering the objectives that ministers have specified, taking account of appropriate external benchmarks, and affirms that Scottish Water operating in the current regulatory framework will go on to deliver further improvements in this vital public service."

Sometimes life takes unexpected twists and turns. Who would have thought that, after convening the Parliament's Environment and Rural Development Committee, which gave the Crofting Reform etc Bill such a grilling at stage 1, I would be standing before the Parliament today closing the debate on  the motion that the bill be passed? However, the committee did its work extremely thoroughly and engaged extensively with crofting communities. The bill now contains important provisions that will make a real difference to the lives and fortunes of crofters and crofting communities for many years to come. I record my thanks to committee members, for their hard work; to the clerks, for the able support that they provided to members; to Executive officials; and to all those who contributed their views to the process, which was extensive. A large amount of evidence was put before the committee. Our consideration of the bill was a very good example of the Parliament's work, with the committee and ministers listening to, and reflecting and acting on, the representations that were made. The bill is not the last word in crofting legislation.

Would Jamie McGrigor like to agree with me?

There was a fair amount of consultation before the bill was introduced. If Jamie McGrigor reads the committee's conclusions, he will find a deep analysis of the issue. The bill is a good example of working together, but it is by no means the end of our work on crofting. It is part of a long-term commitment by the Executive to the future of crofting, crofting communities and some of most fragile island and rural parts of Scotland. Alasdair Morrison was right to note that, by passing the bill, we will allow many valuable provisions to be implemented and provide a platform on which to build further action, once the committee of inquiry on crofting has reached its conclusions. In today's debate, we have heard broadly positive views expressed about the important provisions in the bill—for example, those that tackle interposed leases, simplify the regulation of crofting and tackle the underlying bureaucracy. We heard from Eleanor Scott that for the first time the Crofters Commission will have the scope to challenge the neglect of croft land. We heard from Rob Gibson, Fergus Ewing, Maureen Macmillan and Nora Radcliffe about the importance of establishing new crofts and extending crofting tenure to Arran and other parts of Scotland. The Minister for Communities, Rhona Brankin, is now considering how the Crofters Commission can best contribute to the modernised planning system. I note that she has remained in the  chamber for the entirety of the debate, which demonstrates her continuing interest in the topic. The bill will deliver big headline changes but, as Ross Finnie illustrated, it also includes many detailed provisions that will have a positive impact on day-to-day matters for crofters. I will give members some examples. Earlier this morning, we debated an amendment from Maureen Macmillan, which stipulates that the Crofters Commission should discharge its functions with regard to local circumstances. The insertion in the bill at stage 2 of the word "specific" will allow ministers to be very clear and precise about what they expect the commission to achieve and prioritise, and to set out how they expect the commission to conduct its business. Much of the rest of the bill and existing crofting legislation is about how the commission should handle local circumstances. By adding the ability to give specific ministerial direction, we have provided sufficient scope to ensure that local circumstances are considered. That may have seemed a modest amendment at stage 2, but it will be important. There are other detailed changes that we have not had time to debate today. The existing protections in crofting legislation for the spouses and partners of crofters who die without a will, which ensure that they have rights over their croft house, have been extended to give them rights over the croft as well. That simple provision should avoid distress and disputes in crofting households at what are, inevitably, difficult times for people. The tighter definition of what constitutes family members will prevent croft collectors from gathering up their so-called cousins' crofts. It will be much more difficult to avoid the formal assignation process and to claim that the croft has been assigned within the family. As a result, young people and others who would like to gain access to a croft should stand a better chance of getting one. One of the more important features of the bill is that, in the future, the register of crofts that is maintained by the Crofters Commission will be a public record that is accessible to anyone. It will be a more comprehensive record and, significantly, if a croft has been registered or recognised as a croft for more than 20 years the matter of whether it is a genuine croft will no longer be open to dispute. In future, it will be possible for land that is apportioned out of common grazings for use by an individual to be returned to common use. Neglected and unwanted apportionments will now be capable of being returned to common use. Grazings committees, which are important to the effective management of common grazings, will in future be able to challenge a shareholder who breaches grazings regulations and may ask the commission to suspend that shareholder's rights.  It will no longer be viable for a single shareholder to ignore the wishes and intentions of the majority of shareholders. The Scottish Land Court and the Crofters Commission will have a definition of a crofting community on which to base their judgments. The importance of that was only too evident in the now famous Taynuilt case. In mentioning the details and explaining their importance, I do not underestimate the significance of some of the more complex and involved provisions. I agree with John Farquhar Munro that our passing the bill today will be historic for our crofting communities. It will be recognition of the fact that we needed to modernise crofting legislation in the 21 st century and that there is more to come from the Executive and the Parliament. The provisions in relation to schemes for development have the potential to facilitate large-scale developments on croft land that might otherwise be frustrated. I refer to developments such as renewable energy projects, which—if they secure planning approval—could benefit crofters and crofting communities enormously. Some developments have the potential to create something akin to the Shetland oil fund, which was negotiated in the 1970s and has sustained massive economic and infrastructure development and social progress in those islands for decades. This is an important bill. I know, because I heard all the evidence. I commend the motion to Parliament.

I will be brief, because amendment 17 is relatively straightforward. The Scottish Land Court has a general power under section 53(1) of the Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993 to determine questions of fact or law that arise under that act, on a reference to it by the commission or an interested party. Examples of such questions are whether a holding is a croft or what the boundaries of a croft are. Such questions of fact or law might also arise in the context of an application to the commission under the 1993 act and therefore the Land Court's general jurisdiction must be excluded in that context in order to avoid a conflict of jurisdictions. However, the commission still requires the ability to refer voluntarily to the Land Court preliminary questions of fact or law that are related to an application that is before the commission. Amendment 17 will provide for that and I invite the Parliament to support it. I move amendment 17.  Amendment 17 agreed to.

I warmly welcome the intention behind Rob Gibson's amendments. As he noted, I have been a strong supporter of clear and gender-neutral legislation—indeed, I have supported it for years. I am delighted to repeat to the Parliament the commitment that Ross Finnie gave to the Environment and Rural Development Committee: at the next opportunity, when we review crofting legislation, it will be not just modernised but made  gender neutral. [ Interruption. ] SNP members seem to be having some fun with that, but I point out that Rob Gibson, in moving his amendment 1, exemplifies the difficulties. When lodging a well-intentioned amendment, it is incredibly difficult to avoid unintended consequences elsewhere in the bill. That is why a thorough review will be needed. The two passages that Rob Gibson seeks to amend do not refer to the same individual. Amendment 1 refers to the title of a particular office, whereas amendment 2 refers to the function of a person—who may or may not be the commission's chair—at a meeting. Changing the expression to "convener" in both places could cause confusion. Although I am extremely happy to support amendment 1, I urge Parliament to resist Amendment 2. Amendment 38, in the name of Ross Finnie, will have the same effect as Amendment 2, but it will not risk causing the same confusion that I spoke about earlier—Rob Gibson himself appeared to cause some confusion. Amendment 38A is unnecessary. I appreciate what Rob Gibson is trying to do and I support his amendment 1. For the reasons that I have given—and in the spirit of harmony and of trying to take us forward—I invite Parliament to support amendments 1 and 38. I ask Rob to consider the comments that I have made and not to move amendments 2 and 38A. If he does seek Parliament's support for those amendments, I urge members to resist them.

As Ted Brocklebank suggests, ministers agreed—in response to amendments that were lodged and withdrawn by Ted Brocklebank at stage 2—that the Executive would look again at the provisions in section 30 and lodge amendments to clarify the right to object to proposals for new uses of common grazings. Amendments 7 to 11, taken together, will create a comprehensive right to object—the same right that applies to other regulatory decisions that are taken by the Crofters Commission. That right is available to the landlord, the crofters and the members of the crofting community. In our view, amendment 35, which is intended to create a right to object for the landlord, is superseded by amendments 7 to 11. Amendment 36 is consequential on amendment 37. Amendment 37 reflects concerns that a new use for grazings might come to an end, requiring work to restore them to their previous use, or that grazings could be permanently changed and lose value as a consequence. Amendment 37 is the same as one that was withdrawn at stage 2. It is founded on two misconceptions. The first is that the alternative use would be by one individual. However, that is not the case. Proposed new section 50B of the Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993 is intended to allow for alternative use by all those who hold grazings shares, either collectively or individually. The second misconception is that new section 50B would allow development on grazings and that it would be possible to start such development but then not finish it, leaving the owner with loss of value or remediation costs. During our stage 2 debates, Rhona Brankin explained why new uses of common grazings would be unlikely to involve physical development and why, if they did, the fears that underlie Ted Brocklebank's amendment would not materialise.  Rhona Brankin explained that the owner's right to resume use of the land would remain. That would make it difficult to borrow to finance development because, if the owner resumed use of the land, the price that would be payable on resumption might amount to no more than half the development value. Rhona Brankin also said that, in the event of a physical development's being proposed, planning controls should deal with restoration and remediation issues. New section 50B(9) of the 1993 act will allow the Crofters Commission to set conditions to require restoration where an approved new use ceases. In addition, I stress that new section 50B(2) of the 1993 act will provide that a new use must not be detrimental to the interests of the owner. A use that could result in a loss of value or a need for remediation at the owner's expense would clearly be detrimental and could not be permitted. I invite Parliament to reject amendments 35, 36 and 37, and to support amendments 7 to 11.

At stage 2, Maureen Macmillan lodged an amendment that proposed the same provisions as are contained in amendment 6, but unfortunately it was not moved at the appropriate time. Amendment 6 is a consequential drafting amendment; it is required as a result of the decision to leave out section 8 of the bill. It removes the reference to a new section—section 41A—of the Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993, which section 8 would have inserted. The proposals in section 8, which would have involved the Crofters Commission requiring crofters to incur charges, proved deeply unpopular during the consultation period and with the Environment and Rural Development Committee. As a result, section 8, which required the provision of maps by crofters and allowed the commission to charge fees in connection with the maintenance of the register of crofts, was deleted at stage 2. Members therefore need to agree to amendment 6. Amendments 42 to 50 all make technical changes that should have been made in consequential amendments at stage 2. The amendments are necessary because the existing cross-references relate to the position before substantial amendments were made at stage 2 to section 37, which inserts proposed new section 52A into the 1993 act. The amendments create accurate cross-references to the provisions of proposed new section 52A. I move amendment 42.  Amendment 42 agreed to.  Amendment 43 moved—[Sarah Boyack]—and agreed to.

I am well aware of John Farquhar Munro's strong interest in clarifying the relationship between planning and crofting law and I hope to reassure him on some points this morning. The intention of amendment 39 seems to be that the Crofters Commission should make representations to planning authorities to prevent croft land that is capable of agricultural use from being developed. The wording of the amendment suggests that protecting land that is capable of agricultural use should be the commission's only concern in relation to planning consultations. According to the amendment, the commission would have no other obligations or interests in planning consultations, even though crofters and crofting communities might have wider interests in a planning matter that is under consideration. Amendment 40 is unnecessary. It seeks to require a planning authority to include a provision  in the local development plan that there should be no development of croft land unless it considers that the development is "in the public or community interest". The concept of public or community interest is broad. When a local authority formulates a detailed statement of its proposals as to the development of land, it is clear that it will need to consider the public and community interest, irrespective of whether the land in question is croft land. There is no need to make the amendment to the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 that John Farquhar Munro proposes. At best, the amendment would only make explicit an existing fundamental principle of planning policy. Maureen Macmillan rightly referred to the debates that we had at stage 2, including a debate on the relationship between the Crofters Commission and planning. At that stage, John Farquhar Munro lodged a series of amendments whose intention was to prescribe that the Crofters Commission should respond to planning and development matters. His amendments sought to prevent better quality croft land from being removed from agricultural use, and they related to concerns about the development of and speculation in croft land. Through the amendments, he sought to give the Crofters Commission, rather than the local planning authority, the final say over whether croft land should be released for development. At the time, John Farquhar Munro was assured publicly and formally by the former deputy minister, Rhona Brankin, and the then Deputy Minister for Communities, Johann Lamont, that when the secondary legislation associated with the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill was considered, the possibility of defining the Crofters Commission as a statutory consultee would also be considered. Consideration will also be given to the evidence submitted to the Environment and Rural Development Committee and the debates at stage 2. Rob Gibson made an absolutely vital point about the need to ensure that we identify sufficient land for housing in our rural communities. The best way to do that is to ensure that, in the secondary legislation created under the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006, the Crofters Commission is involved in contributing to the shape of local authorities' development plans. That will bring together two key objectives and ensure that we have an effective way of considering adequately and reflecting crofting issues and concerns in local planning policies for the crofting communities.

Stirling Water, the operator of the Seafield works, and Scottish Water have made significant progress to reduce instances of odour emissions in recent years. Capital and operational investment amounting to some £8 million has been implemented to date. That was designed to improve the overall works performance and has had a beneficial effect on the levels of odour emissions. That is clearly demonstrated both by the falling trend in the number of odour events recorded since 2001 and in the conclusions of research into public perceptions of odour pollution from the works. However, there is still a problem. I  will therefore meet Scottish Water next month to discuss further progress.

As Susan Deacon says, I am well aware of the history of the issue and of the frustration that has built up on it. There has previously been enforcement action, and a petition on the matter was considered by the Transport and the Environment Committee. The Scottish Executive code of practice on odour was produced as a result of that lobbying. There has also been investment to tackle the issue across the country. I assure Susan Deacon that I will read the research to which she refers and that I am determined to make urgent progress on the issue. I know that the matter is complex and that some improvements have already been made, but more needs to be done. My purpose in meeting Scottish Water next month is to press it to ensure that the problem is sorted out.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Will the member give way?

I speak on behalf of the Environment and Rural Development Committee, so I thank the committee clerks for all their work in helping to arrange our scrutiny of the bill. I also thank the witnesses who were prepared to be grilled by committee members and the people who submitted detailed written evidence. I thank the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development and her officials for their briefings and their answers to the many detailed questions that the committee put to them, which were extremely helpful. I thank the minister for the letter that she sent to the committee and for her commitment to allowing us early sight of amendments to the bill, in January. It will be important for us to see the amendments on some of the detailed issues about which we have expressed concern. I also thank the people who were involved in the process before the bill was introduced—[ Interruption. ]

Members have talked about how the process helped us to have a fairly consensual debate at stage 1. I will focus on parts 1 and 2 of the bill. All speakers in the debate so far have reflected on the significance of aquaculture and particularly salmon to Scotland. The committee agrees with the proposals on inspection for fish farms, but we want visits to be co-ordinated. We note that the minister has agreed to monitor the situation, but we want to ensure that no additional burdens are added to the industry. There is always a risk of fish escape, but the committee wants the greatest effort to be put into minimising that risk. We want the code of practice to be used and adhered to and we understand that there could be a legislative backstop if the industry does not comply. Although most of the industry will be happy to comply with the code, it will take only one or two rogue operators to let the whole industry down. We do not want that to happen, so high standards are needed. The committee wants details on how rigorous the regime will be and how it will be applied, particularly in cases in which there is cause for concern about the effectiveness of management to avoid escapes. What assurances will there be that the regime will operate effectively? The Executive must ensure that the FRS has the resources that it needs to operate the inspection regime. We welcome the fact that further detail on appeals mechanisms will be provided in January.  I highlight an issue that the minister did not address in her letter to the committee, although she welcomed the new measures on fish farm consents in the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill. The committee agreed unanimously that the long-term retention of sites that remain undeveloped is unacceptable. It would be good for the Parliament if the minister could update us on the progress that she is making in her discussions with the Department of Trade and Industry and the Competition Commission in that regard. Part 2 of the bill deals with GS. The committee spent a huge amount of time on GS because of the devastation that it would cause if it arrived in Scotland. Many members have said that strong action is required and that we should do everything that we can do to prevent GS from reaching our shores. Most people regard the importation of live fish as the biggest risk. The committee asked the Executive whether it would be possible to institute a total ban on the importation of live fish and I welcome the Executive's clarification that we can ban the importation of live fish from areas in which fish are known to be infected with GS. However, the committee remains concerned about the robustness of monitoring in other countries and the potential for a gap in time between the identification of GS and action to prevent the importation of live fish from the area affected. I am concerned that no discussions on the matter are taking place at European Union level—I hope the minister will change that. Members were sent a copy of the GS contingency plan a week or so ago. The committee has asked why particular areas would be chosen in which the contingency plan would be put into effect. The plan refers to the River Dee network but does not say why it has been chosen or explain its significance in relation to other river networks in Scotland. Clarification would be helpful. We must consider what would happen if GS arrived in Scotland. The committee wanted clarification on compensation, which members mentioned. The fundamental issue is the use of powerful chemicals such as rotenone and the damage that they could cause to our rivers and lochs. We must consider the impact not just on Scotland's image but on wildlife, which would continue for a significant period after the use of the products. Members have talked about the importance of raising awareness and it is crucial that we do everything that we can do to raise awareness of the issue among the people who use our rivers for angling and other leisure and recreational purposes. I welcome the minister's commitment to seek a meeting with the European Commission to ensure that approvals for payment schemes are in place.  Everything in the bill underlines how important it is that we try to stop GS reaching Scotland. That has to be our top priority, although compensation issues must also be resolved. There is strong support for the general principles of the bill and I look forward to addressing the remaining concerns in detail at stage 2.

I might not use all of my four minutes. I congratulate Nora Radcliffe on securing this timely debate, as I am sure colleagues will do. There was a huge turnout at the Carbon Trust meeting in the Parliament. One of the things that struck me most at that meeting was the practical nature of the projects that were presented. The presentations that were made by companies were critical. They talked about the benefits to their businesses, their increasing competitiveness, the lowering of costs and their pride in what they had done in conjunction with the Carbon Trust. That is a good way to proceed. Businesses should feel that they are part of the agenda. The Stern report and the climate change work that has been discussed in the Parliament aim to get businesses to feel that reducing carbon emissions is their agenda. An agenda will not be imposed on them. Opportunities are presented to them by taking on board the low-carbon agenda and working with groups such as the Carbon Trust to deliver it. I am proud of the work that the higher education institutions in Edinburgh have done to reduce their carbon emissions. The University of Edinburgh has looked at combined heat and power systems as part of its energy supply refurbishment programme. Last week, Napier University won an award at the green energy awards for its imaginative and radical use of photovoltaic installations, and Queen Margaret University College has put up very energy-efficient buildings in the east of Edinburgh. Some big public sector organisations have therefore signed up to the Carbon Trust's work. Nora Radcliffe made a crucial point about the NHS. She was delighted to praise her local NHS board, but it would be good if NHS boards throughout Scotland joined in the programme. The NHS runs a huge estate. It represents one of the biggest parts of the public sector, and its use of carbon in buildings and in getting patients and staff to and from buildings makes a huge impact. We must push the NHS further up the agenda and help it to play its part. Recently, I went to a presentation by Lothian NHS Board. It has to pump millions of extra  pounds into its budget to deal with fuel price increases, which is crazy. That money should go on front-line services. Lothian NHS Board is doing an excellent job in bringing down waiting lists, but money is being wasted. The issue is energy that is not CO 2 friendly. There is a real job to be done in thinking about the public sector, and particularly in thinking about the NHS. I hope that Allan Wilson and the Minister for Health and Community Care will speak to each other and think about how they can play a more proactive role and use the Carbon Trust's experience. Finally, larger businesses are doing hugely important work, but I want to focus on smaller businesses. In that context, I declare an interest in the work that I have been doing on my proposed energy efficiency and micro-generation (Scotland) bill. Very small businesses do not think that they have enough time or staff to go to the Carbon Trust or the business environment partnership, which is an issue, but it would be a worthwhile investment for them if they did so. We should think more about incentives that can be provided to them. The Scottish community household renewables initiative has done a superb job for householders. I would like business taxation on businesses that retrofit to be reduced, for example, and small businesses, which should be part of the agenda, to be targeted. Such businesses must be encouraged and given practical incentives. I hope that the minister will consider my suggestion, and I would be delighted if he commented positively on it. If he does not do so, I would be happy to meet him to discuss the proposal further.

The idea for the exhibition, Edinburgh's volunteers: a century of change, came from the Living Memory Association and the volunteer centre in Edinburgh. I thank the 40 volunteers who helped by assembling the exhibition and recording their experiences and memories of volunteering. Their personal mementos, photographs, membership badges and minutes of meetings are all fascinating records of the history of volunteering in Edinburgh and the Lothians. I thank my intern, Chris Bradt from America, who, by volunteering for me, helped to draft the motion and put together the background information for the debate. The ages of the people who helped to put together the exhibition ranged from 12 to 86. Their contributions included fighting for the International Brigade; helping with the girl guides, Boys Brigade and football teams; working at the city farm; helping at local museums; helping with health-related projects; carrying out research; and doing counselling work. There was also a volunteer who worked as a peace and humanitarian volunteer in Palestine and Iraq. A tremendous range of volunteering was covered. The exhibition gives us a chance to record our thanks for the contributions of those individuals; celebrate the difference that they have made in their communities; welcome the contribution of other members of the public in Edinburgh and the Lothians; and reflect on the changing context of volunteering.  The exhibition highlights the fact that social problems, expectations and ideas about what is acceptable change over time. However, the ethos of people helping other people and giving of their time remains a constant. Edinburgh is a fascinating city. We experienced major social change as the move from the country to the town led to the expansion of the heart of the city and the joining up of our urban villages. Much of the philanthropic work in those days was generated by the churches, as religion was seen as an antidote to people's poor health and living conditions and the social problems of drunkenness, prostitution and crime, which were prevalent at the time. The Boys' Brigade was started in Edinburgh. The minutes of its first committee meeting at the mission hall in Leith record that three activities would be vetoed: boxing, dancing and character dressing. I do not know what character dressing was at that time, but the reference is fascinating. There was a different response in the city centre. When I was carrying out research for the debate, I discovered that Heart of Midlothian Football Club was formed from a dancing club at the corner of Dumbiedykes Road and Holyrood Road, which is just around the corner from the Parliament. Hearts' website states: "The lads from the dance club ... decided to play football and ... a policeman directed the lads from the Tron Kirk to the Meadows, where he thought their energies could be put to better use kicking a ball rather than hanging around the streets." Some things do not change. In the 19 th century, Edinburgh was full of church-inspired and church-organised activities. There were evening meetings, orchestras, choirs and the temperance movement, which had a junior section—that is another reminder of difficulties that have not disappeared. During a visit by people from St Patrick's church to the Scottish Parliament a fortnight ago, I was reminded that Hibs—I am being fair—were formed by the church to provide healthy physical activity for young boys. Much of what we take for granted in Edinburgh has a long history. The focus had shifted by the beginning of the 20 th century. The state was seen as having a role in providing for people who were living in impoverished conditions. Over time, the state has addressed many of the social inequalities that the early volunteering organisations and charities were set up to address. Throughout the 20 th century, a wonderful range of voluntary organisations has joined churches in the city to help the diverse and changing range of groups that need our help. One of the most powerful parts of the exhibition shows the  contribution that volunteers who went abroad to help have made. The photographs of Edinburgh volunteers who served in the International Brigade bring history alive. It was fitting that the exhibition was opened by Steve Fullarton, who was a serving member of the International Brigade. Work has continued in the aftermath of last year's make poverty history coalition. Members of all parties have been involved in the fair trade, aid and trade justice movements. Across the city, there has been an incredible expression of support for the work that has been done. Schools, churches, theatres and businesses have worked with the voluntary sector to make a difference to some of the most impoverished people in the world. One exhibit records the work of humanitarian volunteers in Palestine. Those people do not want just to draw political attention to the plight of the Palestinians, important though that is. Their work is also aimed at making us think about the practical assistance that we can provide. Palestinian goods, such as embroidered goods, ceramics, carvings and olive oil, are sold at Hadeel in my constituency. Such goods bring real economic benefits to communities that live in desperate circumstances. The new Polish and other migrants who have come to the city are also developing and adding to our traditions of volunteering and providing cultural bridges to well-established local communities. I have been told by charities that they are bolstering their work. Volunteering work has many faces. In the past few months, I have been with volunteers at the Barnardo's shop in Gorgie, some of whom have served in that shop for 25 years. I have worked with volunteers who give out advice on tackling fuel poverty in the Community Service Volunteers Scotland, Energy Action Scotland and ExxonMobil project, and I am sure that colleagues are aware of the thousands of parents who run amateur football clubs in the city. Regardless of the weather, those parents sacrifice their Saturday and Sunday mornings so that their boys and girls can play safely. A huge amount of work is being done. As we approach Christmas, it is right that attention will focus on people who are homeless or alone. Many groups do a huge amount to help such people. The positive experiences that volunteering can bring to people who get involved in it should be highlighted. I have met people who have been involved in the Cyrenians FareShare project who started out as clients for the Cyrenians and became volunteers; some of them have moved into employment. Their confidence and pride in their achievements are incredible and should be valued.  I want to say something about the wider political challenges. This week, the excellent "Inspiring Volunteering—A Volunteering Strategy for Edinburgh" was published. I recommend it to everyone. It is the result of work by the public sector and volunteering and community organisations. In responding to the debate, I would like the minister to reflect on ensuring that the voluntary sector is sufficiently well funded to co-ordinate the army of volunteers in Edinburgh—there has been an army of volunteers here over the past 100 years. All the voluntary groups and organisations with which I work constantly chase resources. Let us see whether we can do more to help them out. Local authorities, for example, now have three-year funding horizons. Why do not they pass such financial certainty to all our voluntary organisations? Doing so would help. Realistic funding with full cost recovery would also help so that voluntary organisations can develop innovative projects and we can ensure that good projects are kept going. I finish by saying something about project Scotland, which is a great project that we should be doing more to support. I am proud that the Canongate youth project was one of the first groups to work with project Scotland, and I have seen how valuable those volunteers are. Let us, in the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive, give a lead by supporting staff to become active in volunteering. With unemployment in Edinburgh at a record low of 2.4 per cent, we need to find ways to enable people who are in employment to become involved and to play their part in volunteering. I hope that colleagues will make their way to the fascinating exhibition that is just up the road and take some time out of their busy schedules to celebrate and enjoy the wonderful contribution that volunteers have made to Edinburgh and the Lothians over the past century.

To ask the First Minister what action is being taken to tackle poverty among children, in light of recent reports. (S2F-2570)

Does the First Minister agree that it is unacceptable that the Executive's excellent progress on tackling child poverty might be totally undone by huge fuel price rises? Does he also agree that Npower's suggestion that parents should make their children wear their socks in bed, which was drawn to our attention just this week by children's charities, is an unacceptable response? Does he agree that energy companies should follow Scottish and Southern Energy's lead and introduce cheaper tariffs and a package of support for customers who are in severe fuel poverty? Finally, does he agree that all energy companies must do more to meet their social obligations to help the 100,000 children whose families have been pushed into fuel poverty by their huge price rises?

We would all agree that the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill is one of the most important pieces of legislation that the Parliament will pass. Amendment 156 is a probing amendment that is designed to try to get a feel from the Executive as to what it intends to do in future to review the legislation. The fact that the Communities Committee spent a marathon amount of time scrutinising the bill, with lots of input from members who were not on the committee, and the fact that 20 MSPs have lodged amendments for stage 3 consideration, tell us that there is huge interest across the Parliament in the successful implementation of the bill. Many of us will have attended meetings in our communities on local plans and planning applications over the past year, so we know that there is also great interest in planning outside the Parliament. The bill is complex and implementing it will require additional resources and a big change in culture in our local authorities and in our  development industry. If implementation is to be successful, we will need to follow through on that interest. We will need trained planners who are equipped to lead that process of engagement and, I hope, empowerment of local communities. It will be important that we monitor the success of the bill as a Parliament. Through development plans, we have sought a much more effective system of providing a framework for the protection of the environment. That will require a greater investment by those local authorities that have not hitherto made that a priority, so we will want to keep an eye on that. We must consider how the election of local authorities under a different system will affect the planning system, given the new procedures for neighbour notification, the delegation of decision making and some of the notification procedures that the Executive has put into the new framework. Implementing the bill will also require the revision of a lot of Executive guidance, and I hope that implementation will focus on the outcomes as well as the processes. We must examine how the planning process delivers better outcomes. I would like the minister to take the opportunity, in responding to amendment 156, to outline the timescales within which she envisages that the Executive will review the bill. We have had a lot of discussion in Parliament about the importance of post-legislative scrutiny. To make the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill a success, the Parliament will have to review its implementation. I would like to hear how the Executive sees the implementation of the bill. In amendment 156, I suggest a timescale of three years. I note that, in a letter to the Communities Committee, the deputy minister suggests that it will take two years just to revise and issue some of the guidance, so she might think that a three-year timescale is too short. However, I believe that we need to start to review the bill within five years, and certainly within a decade, of royal assent. Perhaps the trick is to have a programme from the Executive that is similar to the programme that was built up for the bill's introduction. As I said, amendment 156 is a probing amendment, but it makes an important point about post-legislative scrutiny. I certainly hope that the Scottish Parliament will spend more time in the next session on scrutiny of how acts have been implemented than it spends on new proposals. That will be absolutely crucial for the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill. I move amendment 156.

On the basis of the minister's response, I seek leave to withdraw amendment 156, if the Parliament is happy to let me do so.

I welcome the minister's willingness to consider how we can maximise use of the existing railway infrastructure between Glasgow and Edinburgh and the new range of services that could be delivered. Given that willingness to examine future options, does the minister agree that now is the time for him to ask Transport Scotland to examine long-term capacity at Waverley station? If we have ambitions to improve the railway in and out of Edinburgh and Glasgow, we need to consider that key pinch point, which will frustrate our ambitions if we do not start looking at it now.

It is a great pity that the Scottish Executive will not accept the proposals that Jackie  Baillie, Pauline McNeill and I have made to extend the community right of notification. It is in line with the partnership agreement, which commits us to improving planning rights for communities. I welcome the emphasis on up-front consultation. It is what I was trained to do as a town planner 20 years ago, so members must excuse me if I do not see it as an innovation. I see the benefits of developers consulting communities early. It leads to better proposals that are more in tune with what communities need and what is in the local development plans. It also provides the opportunity for better proposals and leads, at the end of the day, to more happy communities. However, it is not the full story because not everyone engages enthusiastically in that process. We need better checks and balances in the system. In drafting amendment 123, we used and extended the Executive's notification procedures. It is not TPRA; Patrick Harvie was right to emphasise that. We are looking at communities, not individuals. Our proposal is not about automatically adding a year to every application if just one person is not happy. It is about the right for the communities concerned to be listened to before final consent is issued and before the developers' contracts and legal commitments kick in. I do not see what developers have to fear from our proposal, the process for which would involve a marginal amount of extra time for a much better outcome. Euan Robson made a specific point about development plans. If the Executive wants us to move to a culture in which there are not just more development plans but leaner, less specific and less comprehensive development plans, I predict that more questions will arise in the future about what such plans mean in practice. More communities will be unhappy with local authorities' interpretations, and the Executive's notification procedure will leave that final judgment with the local authority and exclude communities. Historic Scotland will still have the right to call for a review by the Scottish Executive, but communities will not. We will all still get hundreds of letters from people who are unhappy. The process that is proposed by the bill is neither transparent nor effective. Jackie Baillie's proposal would be a better way in which to deliver community planning rights, so I hope that members will support amendment 123.

I sympathise with what Donald Gorrie is trying to do, but I am not convinced that amendment 80 is drafted in a way that will achieve his objectives. If the ministers are going to encourage us not to accept amendment 80, will they tell us what they are doing about planning guidance, building standards and the review of permitted development? What action will they take to encourage local authorities to improve their enforcement of energy efficiency measures? That is a big issue. As I say, I am not convinced that the wording of Donald Gorrie's amendment 80 will deliver opportunities for energy efficiency and microgeneration, but those are clearly issues that the ministers are thinking about. I would like to know how fast the ministers are moving. Will energy efficiency standards be raised and will microgeneration be made standard? I know that such changes have been suggested in the draft consultation on Scottish planning policy 6. Will the ministers tell us where they are going with that? Will the guidance be boosted for its final version?

Does the minister accept that the issue involves not just having good guidance on HMOs from the Executive but landlords taking responsibility, acting as good landlords and ensuring that their tenants do not undertake antisocial behaviour and ensuring that the powers in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 are used to take decisive action?

I refer members to my entry in the register of interests. Does the First Minister agree that the Scottish Executive's policies on housing, planning and procurement offer us the chance to start now on Stern's agenda for energy efficiency, microgeneration and decentralised energy? Will he note the cross-party support that exists in the chamber for such action? Will he further agree that if the Executive were to follow the lead that the City of Edinburgh Council has taken, it would be good for Scotland's economy and taxpayers, it would help to tackle fuel poverty and to deliver a secure energy and heat strategy for Scotland and it would lead to significant reductions in our CO 2 emissions?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being taken to expand diversionary projects to prevent antisocial behaviour. (S2O-10898)

Will the minister discuss with the Minister for Justice, Cathy Jamieson, a recent meeting that she attended in my constituency, at which local people were extremely concerned that not enough diversionary projects were in place for young people? Does the minister agree that we need to monitor the effectiveness of diversionary projects, because we have a small but persistent number of young people whom the criminal justice system is not dealing with effectively? There is great dissatisfaction with the effectiveness of our policies to break the cycle of crime that some young people are trapped in. That is a huge issue for people, not only because of the impact of that behaviour on communities, but because of its effect on the futures of those young people. Will the minister agree to consider the issue of the number of diversionary projects in Edinburgh and the number of secure places, so that we can have a comprehensive strategy that gives young people the right kind of support but also challenges them? That is how we can turn them away from a life of crime.

I am delighted to hear the SNP's fulsome support for the Labour Government at the UK level. Does the member not accept that it is not an either/or situation? We can have a  much better managed marine environment—which we are beginning to debate here—and national park status, which is something special. That was accepted in the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000. We are talking not about things that cut across each other but about things that work together.

I welcome the fact that the Executive has initiated the debate at this point in the process. It is entirely appropriate that we have an early debate on the topic because of all the issues that colleagues have raised so far. In the first session of the Parliament, we addressed the big priorities that awaited devolution: land reform, community land buyouts and the establishment of the first national parks in Scotland. John Muir, the inventor of national parks, spent his life creating them around the world and we need to catch up in Scotland. I strongly support the establishment of a coastal and marine national park. It was in our previous manifesto and I welcome the progress that the Executive has made so far.

No; let me get into my stride. When we established the national parks at Loch Lomond and in the Cairngorms, we had lengthy debates about the principles that underpinned them but, even though there was a clear expectation that they were the key areas that would require national park status, we had debates—which still continue—on the detail of their management and boundaries. That is why I welcome early engagement on coastal and marine national parks, on which we start, in effect, with a blank sheet.

I will come to that later. The Parliament is capable of thinking about more than one topic at a time. A bit of joined-up thinking would do Richard Lochhead a lot of good.

Richard Lochhead has made his point. Marine and coastal areas represent different challenges to land-based national parks, but they also represent different opportunities. Other colleagues have begun to talk about those. For a coastal and marine national park to be established in a particular area, it would have to bring demonstrable benefits to those who live and work in the area and to the management of its natural attractions. It would have to bring with it opportunities to enhance the understanding, enjoyment and care of the area. I am grateful for Eleanor Scott's clarification of the access issues, but we all know that nature tourism in Scotland is expanding. There are new recreational opportunities in Scotland and new companies pop up all the time throughout the country. People want nature tourism. Whale watching alone now generates £11.8 million for the west coast economy, and WWF identifies a host of economic benefits from nature tourism. That is where we are at the moment, but I ask members to think about where we could be if we learn from other countries that have set up marine national parks. The National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000 was crafted to allow coastal and marine national parks to come afterwards, and I ask members to think about the social and economic benefits that national park status would bring with it—job creation and economic vitality for the fragile rural communities that they have talked about—and to examine best practice and innovation.  Surely we could concentrate on those things in the Parliament. That is an exciting agenda. I always felt that national parks should be in warm areas of the world—Kenya, Australia, the Caribbean, Costa Rica and the Seychelles—but countries in colder parts of the world, such as Canada and Chile, have made marine national parks successful. We must learn from those experiences, because the establishment of coastal and marine national parks is not without difficulties. The range of recreational opportunities that is already available in Scotland includes fishing activities and nature conservation, but nobody is pulling them together or looking at the further opportunities that exist. We can learn lessons from around the world about promoting both our economy and, crucially, the protection of our natural environment. Consultation and participation must be a key principle of the process from the start. I support the work that SNH and the Scottish Executive are doing to raise the issue up the agenda. When I visited the stand in Fort William last week, I was impressed by the range of information that was available. One could not possibly expect the people who were staffing the stall to answer every question when we are still debating many of the principles and the location of any new marine national park. Maureen Macmillan's speech will focus on the need for participation. I agree with others that participation is crucial. In places such as Loch Lomond and the Trossachs and the Cairngorms, not everybody agreed during the participation but we still needed significant buy-in. That is a responsibility on which we should all focus. There are some key issues on which we need to focus to identify the location of a marine national park, but I will not follow colleagues by giving my best guess of where such a park should be. From my position as member for Edinburgh Central, I do not want to dictate that to the rest of the country. However, my constituents will want to visit the marine national park because they will want to appreciate its benefits. They will travel to other parts of Scotland, where they will spend money, enjoy recreation and enjoy nature conservation. The issue is how we do that in a controlled and structured way. We need proper integrated management. The SNP amendment points out that we have 85 pieces of legislation on marine areas, but that is why I want the Environment and Rural Development Committee to get going on the discussions that will shape the proposals on marine legislation in the next Parliament. The UK Government is already active and we cannot  afford to fall behind. However, that does not mean that we should stop considering issues such as marine national parks, the superb initiatives to bring together the fishing industry and nature conservation in Alasdair Morrison's constituency, or the proposed ship-to-ship transfers in the River Forth. A range of conservation issues needs to be considered, but a marine national park would be special and we need to get it right. I hope that today's debate will show people that we in the Parliament are interested and prepared to listen and, crucially, that we see the big benefits of a marine national park. Those other countries around the world are not wrong, but we need to do things to suit our communities and our nature conservation opportunities in Scotland. Let us get on with it rather than be negative about the proposal. Let us take the comments that we have had from all parties in the chamber—with the exception, as ever, of the SNP—and let us think big and be constructive. Let us look at the opportunities. Let us not talk ourselves down. Let us go for it.

I thank Parliament for giving us the time to debate an issue that the Environment and Rural Development Committee feels is an important topic. I want to thank the many witnesses and members of the public who contributed to our call for evidence and helped us to produce a report that came to some important conclusions and made some important recommendations that we firmly believe need to be acted on by the Scottish Executive and others. Over the past few months, as we concluded our inquiry, there has been a big debate on this matter in the newspapers. I think that that reflects the level of public interest in the issue. We wanted to examine what was happening between various elements in the food chain. We picked up concerns about the impact of the changing retail markets, particularly with regard to centralisation in some of the major retailers. It was reported to us that that is putting pressure on farm-gate prices. From our previous work on the reform of the common agricultural policy, we were aware of the need to manage the impact of CAP reform, particularly with regard to the issue of preparing the farming industry to adapt to a world in which there are no subsidies for production but, instead, subsidies for stewardship of the land. That will mean that there will have to be a much greater emphasis on marketing products that are grown in Scotland. We also wanted to recognise the importance of agricultural production to our rural areas and to look for a focus from the Executive, through its agricultural strategy, on how more can be done to bolster rural economies and to promote rural diversification and new economic communities in those areas in which two or three jobs make a big difference. We had a number of key objectives when we set out on our inquiry. We took evidence from a wide range of interests and heard some passionate and well-argued views. We spoke to farmers, food processors and supermarkets and we had representations from consumer representatives and business development agencies. We also wanted to hear not only from the Minister for Environment and Rural Development but from the Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department because we wanted to find out how joined up the  Scottish Executive is and how committed it is to the twin aims of making sure that our agricultural industries are fit for the future and are promoting the economic opportunities that come from the growing of food in Scotland. It is fair to say that the committee heard a lot of strong views, but there were some clear messages. There were big worries about price pressures, particularly in the farming community. It was argued that there is uncertainty about and a downward pressure on prices. We heard a range of views from different parts of the agricultural sector about supply and demand issues—there were many articulately-made points about that. There were big concerns about the long-term viability of the Scottish agricultural community, depending on how CAP reform goes through. The committee also heard that the supermarkets' purchasing policies are adding to the general uncertainty and pressure. It is important to say that we found it difficult to get specific examples, names, dates and times from farmers who have experienced difficulties with the major supermarkets. They were reluctant to put their names to those difficulties in public because they were worried about potential retribution and about losing contracts. It is fair to say, however, that we received good evidence about the major trends. The committee was keen to pass those messages not only to Executive ministers but to the Competition Commission's recent inquiry. Farmers told us of their concern that supermarket dominance is putting them at risk. There are short-notice contracts and word-of-mouth contracts whereby there is no guaranteed price and no guarantee that the retailer will purchase the food. Such concerns exist not just about retailers but also about the food processing industry. Pinning things down and seeking transparency was a key challenge for the committee during the inquiry. We found it impossible to track where the money goes in the food chain, and we were not the first to have found that impossible. The House of Commons Select Committee on Environment, Food and Rural Affairs reported on the milk industry in England and Wales and it, too, found it difficult to get people to put numbers on the record. Another issue is two-for-one offers. The Environment and Rural Development Committee was surprised to learn that it is usually the farmers who pay for the two-for-one deals that we see in supermarkets.

We managed to get the starting price of milk as it comes out of the farm gate and we managed to work out—not surprisingly—how much it costs on the supermarket shelf, but the process in between was not transparent to us. The committee explored that with a number of witnesses but we could not pin it down.

If Alex Fergusson lets me move on, I will take his intervention later. There is also an issue of scale. Because there are major contracts that cover the whole country, it is difficult for the small producers to get into the system and to get access to the process. The smaller farmers told us that they found it difficult to gain the expertise in negotiation that is needed to deal with major organisations. We also talked to food processors because we acknowledge that it is important to add value to agricultural produce, but, again, we found it difficult to get transparency on costs. The committee thought it important to talk not just to farming interests but to retailers and other people who are involved in the food supply chain. One of the key conclusions of our report is that, in future, it is important to consider not just the supermarket industry but the public sector, which is a critical potential market for Scottish farming goods. Schools, hospitals and Government organisations are important purchasers. A key message that came back in evidence to the committee was to think of the opportunities and not just the problems. The committee came up with some strong conclusions. We wanted to put on record the importance of the food industry to Scotland, considering the money that it generates in Scotland. We wanted to focus on how the agricultural community can be supported in a time of change. We considered business support, promoting collaboration among different farmers and developing farm businesses in the long run. We also looked at how local enterprise networks could help the process, particularly through the development of agriculture and food strategies, so that they can give business assistance and advice to farming communities. We felt that the Scottish rural development plan was crucial in terms of funding opportunities. If we are moving away from an agricultural-based subsidy system, we have to look to rural development and diversification, which we look to the Executive to promote.  We also considered how to increase the value of local production, by keeping local jobs and ensuring that farmers markets are fully supported. We saw huge opportunities in that, and we asked the Executive tell us how important that was for its strategy. We came up with the idea of a food surplus agency. A number of farmers reported that if they did not produce agricultural goods of exactly the shape, size and weight requested by a supermarket, that produce potentially went to waste because the farmers were tied into a contract with one supermarket chain. The minister was not particularly enthusiastic about that in the Executive's response, but it was one of the issues that came up in evidence that we would like to be pursued. I said earlier that procurement is important, and one of our key recommendations to the Executive concerned it. We are well aware that European Union competition rules are not joined up. For example, they are fully in favour of sustainable development, but we are not allowed to use food miles as a criterion in choosing the produce used by the public sector. We find that crazy in a context in which we are trying to cut CO 2 emissions and be more environmentally sustainable. Permissible criteria include freshness and whether something is organic. We know that the Executive has done successful pilot work in Ayrshire, and we would like the lessons from those projects to be learned across Scotland and the Executive to promote them in the future revisions to procurement guidelines. A lot could be done by the Executive. There are also issues with competition rules. Competition is not a competence of the Scottish Parliament, but we know that the minister has previously commented on it to UK competition authorities, and we felt that the Scottish experience that we picked up should be fed into the process. We would like more collaborative supply chains, food co-ops and farmers co-ops. We would like to learn lessons from other countries, particularly on milk production. We felt that previous decisions by the Competition Commission had not helped Scottish business and that it was important to lobby the commission. When the commission came to Edinburgh, cross-party committee representatives gave feedback to it from our committee report. The approach to competition must not be short-term or narrow. We have to be able to take a long-term perspective. If we take only a short-term approach, we could risk the viability of part of our farming communities. We would certainly have a longer-term impact on the choice that is available to us as consumers and our access to good-quality fresh goods at a price that we can afford. We also thought that the environment must be part of the process of considering competition. It needs  to be internalised into the process, rather than seen as an external issue. There were a lot of detailed ideas on competition, including that of a supermarket regulator. We believed that the current code of conduct does not go far enough in encouraging supermarkets to take a full role in considering the opportunities from local food supplies. It is fair to say that, since our report was published, there has been a lot of debate in the media and rural communities about some of these issues and how we take them forward. Over the past few months, most members have probably been lobbied by a major supermarket chain wanting to show off its local food supply and tell us the good stories coming from its supermarkets. Several months on from our inquiry, I think that the committee very much welcomes that but does not want it to be a one-off. We do not want to be told good stories just this year; we would like those good stories to continue. Our retail industry faces a challenge in working together with the farming community to improve the quality of networking in the farming community—particularly through food co-ops and farmers co-ops. We look for the retail industry to be keen to promote local produce and to be keen for local produce to be retained in Scotland and for more food processing to take place in Scotland. We wanted to put a range of issues on the table. I very much look forward to hearing how the Executive has developed the agenda since our report was published several months ago. We received positive feedback from the Executive on some matters, such as procurement and support for rural businesses, but we would like the Executive to go further on other matters. We should take opportunities from the procurement pilots and build them in with the bricks, so that every time a hospital contract for food is produced or somebody looks for a supply chain for a school, a process is followed that gives local food producers a chance to be part of the market and does not exclude them on the ground of scale. The report contains many messages. I hope that the minister will also take forward our comments about the European Union's rules and regulations as part of future discussions in Europe. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Environment and Rural Development Committee's 8th Report, 2006 (Session 2): Report on an Inquiry into the Food Supply Chain (SP Paper 595).

rose—

Yes—probably an historic one, because I want to express my whole-hearted support for Fergus Ewing's comments. That might never happen again. If the Scottish Parliament can pass five pieces of legislation on housing and three on transport, why can we not have two on crofting? Surely the key point is to get ahead with the new crofts and all the other good measures to which Fergus Ewing referred, and to come back later to deal with the more difficult issues.

I thank committee members, witnesses, committee clerks and all those who were involved in the preparation of our committee report. In particular, I thank the clerks for the phenomenal amount of work that they did on the bill and on our report. The bill was extremely difficult to scrutinise—crofting is a complex field—so we needed good advice. We kicked off our consideration of the issues with a special evidence session on the draft bill last November at which we heard some of the emerging concerns in the crofting community  about the bill's proposed shape, some of which Elaine Smith outlined. Those issues, which were about the market, the relationship between planning law and crofting and the vision of the future for crofting, were echoed throughout the evidence that we took on the bill. We fed those points back to the minister and, in the spring of this year, we took formal evidence on the bill. We wanted to get the views of crofters from throughout the crofting communities, so we had full committee meetings in Stornoway, Oban and Inverness. The process was a fascinating experience. Each meeting threw up the particular concerns of crofters in the area. We heard incredibly detailed evidence about the reality of crofting today and about people's concerns for the future. We also heard common concerns. A lack of satisfaction was evident with the consultation on the bill and how the bill was processed. We found an appetite to debate the role and purpose of crofting, which were felt to be absent from the bill. We heard concerns about the operation of the Crofters Commission, particularly a worry that it does not use the full extent of its regulatory powers. A strong desire was expressed for simplification of the law on crofting. However, probably the biggest underlying concern, which colleagues have aired, was the fear that the bill would open up crofts to the free market. The committee listened to those concerns and took the highly unusual step of not recommending that the Parliament agree to the general principles of the bill at stage 1, although we recommended that the many positive elements of the bill should become legislation. That was the committee's unanimous view. Given the overwhelming concerns and genuine worries about some of the bill's provisions and the question whether the bill addresses the issues that crofters face, we could not simply rubber stamp the bill; instead, we had to ask for changes to it. We recommended that changes be made on several key matters. We support strongly the idea of an inquiry into the future of crofting to develop a vision of crofting for the 21 st century; to consider the opportunities for a more rigorous application of crofting legislation; and to consider further the elements of the bill that we feel have not achieved general support. Issues also arise about the financial support for crofting for the long term, which must be fleshed out if the bill's aspirations are to be achieved. A key issue in the establishment of the inquiry should be to ensure that it reflects the range of crofting community experiences and views from throughout the crofting communities and that it involves crofters. We identified a clear enthusiasm for crofting among those who gave evidence, but we also found worries about whether the system is being undermined. I welcome strongly the  minister's commitment today to establish such a review of crofting. Our stage 1 report states: "While the Bill may not create a free market in crofts, the concern is over whether it does enough to protect crofting from the market. The more free the trade is, the higher the prices are likely to be, and the more unreachable (particularly for local, young new entrants to crofting) in a relatively low wage economy. Many witnesses expressed fear that the basic intention of holding land in perpetuity is now being thwarted." That is why we feel that immediate action must be taken on the inquiry so that proposed legislation can be introduced early in the next session of the Scottish Parliament. That is a key issue that must be addressed. Several colleagues have quoted comments by Ross Finnie that we felt fuelled crofters' concerns about the market. However, in formal evidence to the committee, the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development stated: "there is nothing in the bill that will introduce a free market in crofts. I do not favour and I will not introduce an unfettered market."—[ Official Report , Environment and Rural Development Committee , 15 May 2006; c 3262.] Ross Finnie made similar comments in his opening remarks. However, because the words were out there, we had to deal with the concerns. I welcome the commitment to establish an inquiry, but it is important that the Executive sets a speedy timescale and keeps the committee informed of progress throughout. The committee also recommended that the minister issue directions to the Crofters Commission to address the problem areas that we identified in our report and, in the process, to help to re-establish the crofting communities' trust. We want crofters to engage effectively in the development of a modern vision of crofting; we want consultation on the commission's future priorities and that tighter regulatory framework to which the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development referred in her evidence to the committee; we want the Crofters Commission's new focus to be worked out in the light of the revised legislative framework; and we want clear guidance on issues such as dampening the market in croft land, absenteeism, neglect and assignations to family and non-family members. As the Executive's written response did not specifically address the point about the need for such ministerial directions, I welcome Ross Finnie's initial comments to John Farquhar Munro this afternoon. It has been helpful to get on record an acceptance of that need and we look forward to the development of those directions. As members have heard, colleagues on the committee wanted the Scottish Executive to take out of the bill certain particularly contentious  elements and issues that we felt had not been sufficiently worked through, particularly with regard to the status, role and operation of the Crofters Commission and the correct balance between crofting regulation and the promotion of policies that protect and enhance crofting. We also wanted a lot more work to be carried out on the relationship between the crofting communities and the Crofters Commission. For example, how would such a relationship be structured? More important, how would the proposal for new local policies operate and how would crofters be involved in steering them and monitoring their implementation? We also wanted the proper occupier proposal to be rethought. There was certainly not a lot of enthusiasm about its complexity and lack of clarity, and the Executive's response to our report reinforces that concern. We were also concerned about the lack of co-ordination between the land use planning process and the retention of crofts, particularly in light of evidence about the loss of crofting properties on land to be developed for expensive housing. As such housing would be out of the reach of local communities, crofting land would be lost to future generations. On the other hand, we do not want to wait for legislation on the ability to create new crofts; on interposed leases; and on the extension of crofting tenure outwith the crofting areas, which has to be introduced now. On our most recent visit, the people on Arran were enthusiastic about—indeed, were desperate for—the extension of those crofting powers. For that reason, I very much welcome the Executive's commitment to negotiate over and remove the elements of the bill on which consensus could not be reached. I hope that the bill will reach stage 2. However, at that stage, a great deal of work will still need to be done on it. For example, we will need to carry out further scrutiny of many detailed issues, particularly with regard to the bill's operation. I look forward to that process, but I suspect that it will be hard. I believe that the process that the bill has gone through stands as a good example of the Parliament in action. The committee has listened to people's concerns and the Executive has considered the issues that we have raised and agreed to our key recommendations. Members will not be surprised to learn that the committee was frustrated at how long it took to get the Executive's response, but we should acknowledge the complexity of this legislation and the length of our stage 1 report. However, I should also say that on one or two other matters I am still awaiting a  response—which, ideally, should reach us before stage 2. It is up to us to take forward the really positive elements that remain in the bill and ensure that there is a vision for crofting in the 21 st century. Our challenge is to get the bill right at stage 2; kick-start the discussion on the future of crofting; and examine the key difficult issues that other members have already mentioned.

My intervention will be brief. I accept Mr Ballard's point about the marginal increase in journey time. However, does he accept that there will be a significant benefit for passengers travelling between Fife and Glasgow of 15 minutes less travel time, which could encourage more people to use the train?

Like previous speakers, I welcome today's debate and the committee's work. It has produced an excellent report that considers the extent to which the proposal will meet the objectives of the EARL project. I will devote most of my speech to those objectives and to the extent to which the project potentially contributes to the development of a rail network in Scotland that will meet our future needs. I strongly support the committee asking difficult questions. Its job is to do that and to identify the issues on which it wants more information. I refer in particular to finance, assurances on operation throughout the Network Rail system, rolling stock, the frequency of services to the airport station and, crucially, fares. Fares are central to the vision of the project. The first time that I heard a presentation on the project, I asked why it was called the Edinburgh airport rail link, because it is so much more than that. EARL gives 62 stations in Scotland access to Edinburgh airport, but it also gives rail travellers greater access across the central belt. Crucially, it provides us with the opportunity to relieve congestion in and around Edinburgh, the city region and central Scotland generally. It provides an interchange in an area that will be one of the most congested parts of Scotland over the next two decades. That is already evident. There are no reliable journey times for people travelling through the area to the airport by car, and we must provide a better alternative. The project will not be dedicated only to the airport. For that reason—and because the service will be affordable, as Scott Barrie pointed out—it is not comparable to the Heathrow express or the Gatwick express. It is not an exclusive service, but brings the rest of the rail network into Edinburgh airport and provides a transport hub and  interchange. There should not be exclusive fares for the service. Today's debate should be about how the project relates to our overall national vision and how we build on the investment that there has been over the past few years. We can see the benefits that have come since the Parliament was established. New stations have been opened and new routes have been opened or are planned. I refer to the Larkhall to Milngavie line, the Airdrie to Bathgate line, the Waverley line and the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line. Longer platforms have been built and there are more trains. Over the past decade, the number of trains passing through Waverley station has increased by 50 per cent. Crucially, the number of passengers is on the up and is continuing to grow. We know that wherever we open new rail services, people will use them far more than those making the preliminary calculations expected. This is an on-going debate, but I despair at the approach that the SNP is taking today. It was appropriate for the minister to quote Kenny MacAskill, because from day 1 of the Parliament, the SNP has changed its mind on transport every six months. The lesson from everywhere else in the world is that we need first to get our strategy and ambition right, then to have a political debate about top priorities and then to get on with things. We cannot swing about on every project or be opportunistic. When we debated the Transport (Scotland) Bill in 2000, the SNP did not want buses, which were a mode of transport for the last century, but more trains and trams. We then put trams on to the agenda, because that was the right thing to do, but the SNP decided that it wanted heavy rail rather than trams. Now that we are proposing heavy rail access to the airport, it does not want that project either. That is no way of engaging in political debate. It is not good enough, because we need to get on with things. We are catching up with other European countries. I welcome the support that the First Minister gave to the project in the chamber today. Jack McConnell acknowledged the project's importance to the development of the economy, not only in Edinburgh, but in the whole of Scotland. We cannot achieve sustainable economic development only through the car. We must think about the long-term implications of projects. The committee report's analysis of carbon emissions is particularly good. We must bring such methods into our normal thinking. I agree with Mr Ewing that we need to expand Waverley station. We also need faster and more frequent trains on the east coast main line; increased capacity on our key commuter routes; and probably new services between Edinburgh  and Glasgow. The committee report points out that the Edinburgh to Glasgow line is nearly at capacity. The project is not the only one that we need, but it is part of the revolution in the Scottish railway network that the Parliament is leading and overseeing. The project will make an important difference. Why are we even thinking about building thousands more car parking spaces at Edinburgh airport when the area is already overcongested? We know that people need to get to the airport from Fife and the rest of Scotland. I hope that Bruce Crawford will mention the potential alleviation of congestion on the Forth bridge as a result of the project. The rail link is not an alternative to proper road access over the Forth, but it is one way in which to relieve the pressure there. Edinburgh airport will be a key part of Scotland's future, so we must ensure that people can get there sustainably. I strongly support the links to the airport by bus and tram, but the project will provide accessibility for people throughout Scotland. Now that we have a new transport agency, we must give political direction, ask tough questions and ensure democratic accountability. We need TIE, the transport agency and Network Rail to do their job as the technical experts and to ensure that the project works. The debate is crucial. We must go ahead with such projects, particularly this one. We all agree that the process for dealing with such projects is daft. My heart goes out to the private bill committee members. I am glad that we will have to oversee only a few projects but, at present, we must scrutinise them. We will have to return to the finance and operational issues that the committee has raised. However, it is utterly rich of David McLetchie to criticise us for a radical set of transport infrastructure proposals when, for 18 years under the Tories, nothing happened and we fell behind the rest of Europe. The bill is a chance to catch up and we should take it.

Will the member give way?

Does the fact that the SSP has not yet been mentioned in its leader's speech mean that he does not see his party as having a future in Scotland?

The motion and amendments before us, and the tenor of the debate so far, set out the clear choice for people in Scotland. Either we can recognise the progress that has been made in the first few years of our new Scottish Parliament or we can retreat into navel gazing and negativity. I believe that there is much worth welcoming in the past seven years of our work in the Scottish Parliament. We need only look at the investment in key public services and the boost that has been given to our social and physical infrastructure. We have seen massive changes coming through in our health service and through our investment in education and transport. We should take pride in  the fact that about 94 per cent of our under-fives now have the chance to attend pre-school education. For years, we in the Labour Party campaigned for that provision and we have now delivered it. Pre-school education now looks like something that we have had for all time because we have made it a natural aspiration and expectation. We have been able to invest in those high-quality policies because we have had economic stability, which has enabled us to benefit from massive public investment and expenditure. It is crucial that we ensure that the investment continues. I can see the transformation that has taken place in my Edinburgh Central constituency, which has benefited from investments in further and higher education that have produced highly skilled graduates and world-class research. Thousands upon thousands of new jobs have been created in the city. I can also see the benefits from the fresh talent initiative, which has built on the contributions that have been made by people who have come to Scotland and have added their talent to ours. That benefit can be seen in the labour market and in the new Polish shops that are popping up across the city. However, there are challenges as well. We need to make choices about how we use our energies. We need to build capacity to work in partnership. It is not enough to think just about what the Scottish Parliament does; we need to ensure that we work in partnership with local authorities throughout Scotland, with the business community and with the voluntary sector. I disagree with the SNP's prescription for Scotland. At a time when the European Union is enlarging and when we have major global environmental challenges, we should not look inwards on ourselves and indulge in prolonged constitutional navel gazing. That would be a huge waste of our collective energies. Surely it is far better to focus on the historic challenges that Scotland faces and on how we tackle our root inequalities. Even with the work of the past seven years, too many people still live in poverty and too many children do not have the opportunities that we need to create for them. We need to ensure that every Scot has the chance to be part of our prosperity. We will do that partly through investing in public services, but we also need job creation and tackling unemployment—issues that did not feature once in John Swinney's treatise on economic development. We need to focus on those practical issues and look at how we build a way out of poverty for people. We will do that through providing employment opportunities and by building their talents. Jack McConnell's speech is to be endorsed for focusing on the importance for Scotland's future of investing in skills and learning. That must be a priority for the next Parliament.  We also need to focus on our geographic and strategic advantages. One of the success stories of the work that Labour members—along with our Liberal Democrat colleagues—have done is the way in which we have built a renewables industry almost from scratch. We are turning Scotland into Europe's renewable energy powerhouse. We need to make the most of our distinctive constitutional settlement by focusing on those practical issues rather than letting ourselves be diverted into negative debates. The challenge is about how Scotland is to be equipped for the future. The discussions that have taken place through the futures forum, in which I know many members are involved, have happened outwith the Parliament but they have taken place in the capital city, which is crucial to Scotland's economic future. We need sustained, long-term investment and we need to resist the cherry picking whereby Opposition parties are in favour of a project one week but are against it the next week. We need long-term commitment and sustained investment. I want to raise two issues—to which I ask the Deputy First Minister to respond in his summing up—on which we need to do more work. First, we need to look at the relocation policy's strategic and cumulative impact on our capital city. The Executive response needs to consider the long-term impact of that policy. Secondly, we need to consider the impact of the huge lack of affordable housing in our capital city. In both those policy areas, the Executive can act, but in both it could jeopardise the success that we have delivered so far. There is innovative futures thinking in Scotland, in this Parliament and outwith it. The city regions debates that we have been having in Edinburgh and the Lothians for the past two years need to be plugged into the economic future of the country. There must be consideration of the links between Glasgow and Edinburgh, our key cities, and of how they can work together, and we must examine the infrastructure between those two cities. We should look at our quality of life and welcome the fact that Glasgow and Edinburgh have topped the Condé Nast poll for UK cities. That is quite an achievement. It is not just about our economic future; it is also about our quality of life, and we ignore that at our peril. We must ensure that we have sustained quality of life. That is partly about quality of life in our cities and partly about transforming our economies, but it is also about looking at people's real life experiences. Annabel Goldie's speech ignored the reality on the ground; it was a speech full of doom and gloom. We can see the positive impact that we have collectively made on our communities, with new jobs, new schools, new community facilities, and people in work whose  families have never had employment. Those are real achievements and they are the kind of things that we need to reflect on in the next nine months. Let us ensure that our last few months in this parliamentary session are used properly. It is true that we must focus on the big picture, but let us also examine some of the issues that affect our constituents on a daily basis. Futures thinking is not just about big, high-level strategic thinking; it is also about thinking about people's quality of life. We must think about how we can tackle the tragedy of the drugs that destroy people's lives in our communities, but we must also consider our long-term licensing policies and how we can move forward on antisocial behaviour. Those issues must also be reflected in this chamber. The motion from the Executive parties gives Scotland the chance for confidence and success, and I argue that we should all support it.

I have to say that there are no strings whatsoever between me and Ken Macintosh. I recognise the positive elements in the minister's response, but legislative change is needed. One thing that has struck me most about the consultation on my bill proposal is the sheer demand for accurate and informative advice on what people can do now about basic things such as energy efficiency, sourcing information and obtaining resources to install micro-renewables.  Even before we hit the legislative process, there is a great thirst for knowledge about how to get started. Will the minister make a commitment seriously to consider that matter, which is raised in the climate change programme? Will he tell us what the Executive might do through local organisations such as Changeworks in Edinburgh, energy advice centres and work with local authorities?

I congratulate Alex Fergusson not just on bringing the debate to the chamber but on making a speech that justified the purpose of members' business debates, which is to enable us to raise issues such as the current one. I thought that the level of Alex Fergusson's speech set a high standard for the debate. Indeed, I almost decided to cancel the flashing light on my console as I sat and listened to colleagues explain the significance of James Clerk Maxwell. I thought that Elaine Murray's speech was particularly effective in that regard.  I am not one of the five mathematicians in the Parliament. I am somebody whom science passed by at school, although I did biology, which I always think of as a science. However, from speaking to scientists, I know that not all of them agree that it is—I am not going there. It is entirely appropriate that we now celebrate the birth of James Clerk Maxwell 175 years ago. It is also appropriate that work has been done to ensure that his house at 14 India Street is accessible. I would encourage people to visit it. The house should be added to our tourism literature, because Edinburgh should be proud of it. Maxwell should be part of the story of Edinburgh. Many scientists made their name in Edinburgh—Charles Darwin for example—and it is hugely appropriate that such people should feature in our adverts for the city and in our education about the city. I want to congratulate the steering group that was set up to celebrate the anniversary of James Clerk Maxwell this year. I have met its members and attended one of its meetings; it is a very distinguished group. Its work covers wider issues than just this evening's debate; a whole series of events, lectures and discussions will take place this year in Edinburgh and throughout the rest of Scotland.

I was going to come on to that. Alasdair Morgan pointed out how few streets in Scotland are named after James Clerk Maxwell. We in the chamber could collectively address that issue. It would be highly appropriate if one or two squares in Edinburgh were named after James Clerk Maxwell, and possibly some streets. A statue would give a physical entity to the man who was James Clerk Maxwell—as long as it had a little plaque beside it, as long as it became part of a tourist trial, and as long as it became part of the formal recognition of the contribution of James Clerk Maxwell. We could do a whole number of things. I ask the minister to consider the tourism implications and the worthwhile suggestions relating to schools that a couple of colleagues have raised. We are all trying to build a smart, successful Scotland, but we have not sufficiently emphasised the importance of James Clerk Maxwell. This debate could raise awareness and add weight to the ideas of the steering group. Much could come out of today's debate and it is important that we mark the anniversary in  Parliament. From an e-mail that I received earlier this week, I note that 100 MPs in the House of Commons have signed a similar motion in the name of my colleague Mark Lazarowicz, whose constituency contains India Street. Let us think about how we can take today's debate forward. It will be an important footnote in the history of this Parliament and will help us to focus on where we might go from here. I look to the minister for some ideas.

I join colleagues in congratulating Margaret Smith on getting her motion before us this evening. This is not a new debate for anyone in the chamber. Over the past couple of years, we have had several discussions with Lothian NHS Board about the future of this site. It is entirely appropriate that one of our last debates before the summer recess should be on this topic. The debate gives us the chance to air some of the choices and issues that all of us have discussed with Lothian NHS Board over the past couple of years. It is appropriate that we debate the issue in Parliament because, as local MSPs, Margaret Smith and I are very conscious of the concerns that have been expressed, especially by older people's groups, about the future of the site. Older people are nervous about what will happen to the site, so the reassurance that Lothian NHS Board has given us that it will think about how the site might meet the needs of older people is helpful. Margaret Smith's motion concentrates our minds on what the options might be. We all know that the hospital was not of the physical quality that older people deserve. In years gone by, issues were raised with me about the quality of equipment and the quality of care that  my constituents received at the hospital. Like Margaret Smith, I welcome the fact that there has been a range of discussions about the future of the site. My concern is that the site should be used in a way that makes the most of this opportunity. I am conscious that in Edinburgh precious few sites come up for redevelopment. Given the property pressures and the huge range of social needs that exist in the city, every one of those major sites is of huge importance. I suspect that in other communities in Scotland there is not the same range of pressures. That issue comes to the fore when we consider what Lothian NHS Board will do when it sells the site and the pressure on the board to get the maximum capital receipt for it. We must be cautious about that approach, which I have questioned with Lothian NHS Board and the previous health board structures in Edinburgh and the Lothians. The difficulty with going for the maximum amount is that it could mean that some very worthwhile services are ruled out of the equation. Lothian NHS Board wants to reinvest capital receipts in other services. We have seen and welcome the recent investment that has been made in the Western general hospital and new cancer services. However, we have a chance to pause for thought to think about the maximum opportunities that the Royal Victoria hospital site offers. Margaret Smith has outlined some of those in her motion. I would like to place greater emphasis on the issue of accommodation for older people and linking that to research and future services for that group. Provision of affordable housing is an issue in Edinburgh. It would be a pity if the site went for the maximum receipt and was used for housing at the highest possible cost. That will not serve our constituents as well as an alternative approach might. We should think about how safe, secure accommodation that would give older people maximum independence, but as part of a wider community that would offer them support, possibly with co-location of other older people's services, might be developed on the site. We may want to consider whether we have a chance to do more. Over the past couple of years, I have talked to Brian Cavanagh about the issue of research for older people. We have a population that is growing older. How do we ensure the maximum quality of life for older people? The opportunity of conducting research alongside the provision of older people's services is something that should be considered by the health board. How do we maximise the opportunity that is provided by the site? I want to raise the issue of affordable housing generally. From talking to nurses and key members of the NHS team in Edinburgh, I know that they find it incredibly difficult to find affordable housing. We know that  property prices are racing ahead in the city. The Executive has created some opportunities, such as those that are available through the homestake project and shared equity. However, I think that the matter that we are discussing might provide an excellent opportunity for NHS Lothian to look at providing housing for its own staff, which has been mentioned by others this afternoon. That is worth considering as it would deliver not only the maximum capital receipt but also the maximum social and economic benefit for the city. It cannot be good that NHS workers in the Lothians have to travel long distances to get to work in our city-centre hospitals and facilities. It would be much better if people had an alternative choice. From statistics that I have been given by the City of Edinburgh Council, I know that, under the choice-based letting system, there are on average 50 applications for each unit of affordable housing and that, in popular areas such as the one that I represent, there can be 300 or more applications for some units. There is a huge unmet demand that will not be met by the current funding for affordable housing. We will have a gap of 7,500 houses over the next decade. That demand could not possibly by met by the site that we are discussing, but I think that there is an opportunity for NHS Lothian to engage in the debate and consider whether part of the solution might come through creative thinking about the site. My main points are about the need to provide some affordable accommodation for NHS Lothian staff and affordable accommodation for older people that is linked to services; and the need to take advantage of the opportunity to expand research into older people's services in order to secure the excellence that we urgently need. As Margaret Smith said, the Jarvie report, which relates to research into the quality of older people's experience of hospitals, needs to be slotted into this discussion as well. I congratulate Margaret Smith on raising this issue. The debate will need to continue. We need to ensure that NHS Lothian keeps its promise to consult and that our discussion this afternoon can be part of that consultation process and will have some influence on the board.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to support new affordable housing in Edinburgh. (S2O-10285)

I welcome the commitment that the minister has made, but although we need 11,000 affordable houses over the next decade, the council has plans to provide 3,500 houses. Will the minister accept that that gap of 7,500 houses represents a huge problem in relation to social disadvantage and access to the housing market? Given that, on average, there are 50 applications for every house that becomes available through the council's letting system—in popular areas such as my own, there are up to 300 applications for vacant properties—will he acknowledge that there is a crisis? Will he address the issue through the strategic housing investment framework and ensure that it reflects the massive demand that exists in Edinburgh, which we must meet to enable people to live and work here?

Does the member not accept that, from genesis to construction, building a railway project is hugely complex? If the project is going to be the right project, it has to be done properly. Can the member name one railway project since the Parliament was set up that has come in on time and exactly as it was initially envisaged?

Do I have four or five minutes, Presiding Officer?

Excellent. I want to focus on some of the easier challenges that are before us. This afternoon, there have been some excellent speeches, especially focusing on the renewables sector, where we have made great strides since the establishment of the Scottish Parliament, although there is much more to be done. However, I want to focus on energy efficiency, because if we really want to tackle some of our climate change problems, we should start with some of the easiest areas, rather than always focusing on the difficult issues. I will come back to Mark Ruskell's excellent speech on the need to focus on the difficult issues, but today I want to consider why we are not cutting our emissions and reducing our energy demands by 20 per cent—that is the easy bit. We should really focus on cutting them by 40 per cent. To meet the 20 per cent target, we need to have an energy efficiency strategy. The Executive has heralded such a strategy three or four times, but we are still waiting for it. We need to get a move on. We are already missing out on some carbon savings because we do not have that strategy in place. As well as supporting energy efficiency, we need to provide much better public information about what people can do as individuals.

No. I turn to the issue of domestic use. A consultation on revised building standards is under way. That is extremely welcome. We should see it as a chance to ratchet up our standards. As all members know, the rise in domestic energy prices is a huge issue for households that are on fixed incomes and are on the brink of fuel poverty. Over the past two years, energy prices have gone up by about 30 per cent. That is dragging many people into fuel poverty. We need to ensure that we have higher general building standards. In the consultation, there is a welcome reference to the use of low or zero-carbon technologies. That is really good, and we should encourage builders to do more in that area. However, the use of such technologies cannot be at the expense of energy efficiency—the two issues must go hand in hand. We should take a lead from the Greater London Authority and some of our European neighbours and ensure that the consultation leads to higher energy efficiency standards for our buildings. We should combine such standards with low or zero-carbon technologies, rather than seeing a trade-off between the two, and ensure that we incorporate microgeneration, combined heat and power and heat exchange pumps in buildings. Recently I  visited a house for five people in Alasdair Morrison's constituency. Traditionally, the fuel bill would have been £700 a year, but this brand-new house, built by the local housing association, was going to have a bill of £200. That is the kind of house that we should be building everywhere in Scotland. It has a mix of energy efficiency measures and small-scale micro-renewables. In addition to acting with regard to our new houses, we must consider the fact that a majority of our existing houses will still be with us in 2050, by which time we have to meet our target of a 60 per cent reduction in carbon emissions. We have to do more to our existing housing stock. Recently, I asked a parliamentary question about whether we in Scotland could go ahead with a policy that is being piloted in England by the UK Government and British Gas and which gives people £100 off their council tax when they install energy efficiency measures. Apparently, because of a legal loophole, even though that is happening under the Labour Government in England, we cannot do it in Scotland. I think that we should sort out that legal loophole. The member's bill that I am working on at the moment would let us do that. We should be encouraging people to upgrade the energy efficiency of our existing buildings. The figures from Scottish Gas suggest that spending a modest amount on cavity wall insulation or loft insulation could result in a saving of something like £500 over three or four years. That is the kind of equation that people understand. We should be promoting that in Scotland and letting more people play a part in that agenda. There are, apparently, 700,000 houses in Scotland that could benefit from cavity wall insulation. Why are we not doing more on the simple things that I have outlined? We have the big challenges of climate change before us but we should be starting to take action on the issues in which we can link together social justice, the creation of local jobs and saving the planet. That seems to me to be an obvious thing for us to do. We should also be incentivising small businesses, which are acutely aware of the rising costs of energy. We should be helping them. If they are occupying a building and put in energy efficiency measures, we should give them money off their business rates as a practical incentive. We will be doing lots of extremely expensive things to promote low-carbon technologies. Some of the projects that I support in a foolhardy way, such as the hydrogen projects in the north-east of Scotland, are superb, but they are not cheap. Why are we not doing some of the basic things that every householder can play a part in? We need more education. Some of the Executive's education campaigns have been  excellent. No one person can find a solution; everyone has a part to play. Mark Ruskell's speech today was excellent but, on Monday, I was disappointed to see that the Greens were criticising the Executive for mentioning the fact that half-filled kettles should be part of our strategy. If that were the only part of the strategy, I would be fully behind that criticism. Last year, I went down to Wokingham to look at the national grid. On that visit, I found out that the national grid is under the greatest pressure at half-time in a football match, when everyone in the nation fills up their kettles to the top and puts them on. That is an amusing anecdote, but it focuses the mind on the need to use our energy more wisely. We need to think about the times at which we use our energy. Several members have mentioned the practical things that we can all do. Everybody needs to keep those things in mind. Schools are playing a part and eco-schools are a superb way in which to get the next generation involved in this agenda. However, those of us for whom the fuel bill is not a big issue are not under pressure yet. We have to encourage people to take action because it is the right thing to do. Bigger changes in lifestyles will come about once awareness is raised. Let us get on with energy efficiency. It is the easiest place to start and it would save £1.3 billion that Scotland currently wastes. That is inexcusable and must be tackled.

I thank all the members of the Environment and Rural Development Committee and its clerks for the huge amount of work that was carried out in scrutinising and debating the bill at stages 1 and 2. I agree with Ross Finnie that our discussion during those stages was detailed; in a sense, it reflected the complexity of the bill's provisions. The bill is  much stronger for the responses that we had from the Executive and from the input of the organisations, members of the public and key interest groups who helped the committee to deal with issues that were often very difficult. The debate on tail docking today did not give a full sense of the huge weight of evidence that we considered at committee, or of the difficulty of some of the decisions. The committee did not take those decisions casually; its members—who are from different political parties—took them only after much consideration. The bill is better for that level of discussion. In the stage 3 debate today, we did not discuss a number of the important issues in the bill. Although we debated the framework of provisions that set out where responsibility for care of animals lies, we did not have many of the other detailed and comprehensive discussions that are needed to make the bill better legislation; for example, we did not debate in any depth one of the key provisions of the bill, which is the creation of the new offence of not preventing harm or unnecessary suffering, and we did not spend much time debating the fact that people under 16 will no longer be able to own pets. That provision is important and says that only an adult can be responsible for looking after the welfare of a family pet. We also have not fully debated some of the biggest and most long-lasting benefits of the bill. Maureen Macmillan's contribution on animal fights was passionate and powerful and I was glad to hear the minister say that Parliament will revisit the issue. Trade in such animals is abhorrent; anyone who is involved in it needs to be clear that it is illegal and that it will be stamped out. I am grateful to Maureen Macmillan for continuing to push on that issue today. There is much in the bill that is important and not all of it is about punishing people for not taking care of animals. It is much more about encouraging people to meet higher standards of animal welfare. The long-term benefits of the bill will come from the codes, regulations and licensing powers that will be important in regulating the bill's provisions. If I have a regret, it is that it will take so long to put in place some of those regulations and codes. The framework of the bill is excellent—the Executive has moved forward on animal welfare. In the minister's summing up, I would be keen to hear reaffirmation of the importance of ensuring that the codes and regulations are put in place. For people who are involved in pet fairs, people who run livery yards and pet sellers the issues need to be addressed. That is also the case in relation to animal sanctuaries and the use of wild animals in circuses, about which concerns were  raised at committee and today. Those issues need to be addressed urgently and not left for years to come. We still do not have provisions on snaring that were discussed some years ago during the passage of the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Bill. Parliament needs to ensure that good legislation is followed swiftly by implementation measures. In addition to the introduction of codes, there will also be processes around inspection and enforcement, which are crucial and are needed as a backstop. There are people out there who will not take responsibility for the welfare of their animals and there are those who will make animals suffer. Parliament needs to tell them very clearly that society does not accept that. Local authorities will be responsible for enforcing the regulations—much work needs to be done in that regard. All of us should welcome the passage of the bill, so I hope that that will happen at decision time today. The bill will lead to the improvement of animal health and welfare, which the whole Parliament should celebrate.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister investigate the issue of the grants that the Scottish Executive awards? Yesterday, I heard from a constituent who wants to install loft insulation. She wanted to use a recycled product but, unfortunately, that is not supported by the relevant Scottish Executive grant scheme, whereas the more traditional fibreglass option is. My constituent has been left without a real choice because, faced with a bill of either £300 or £600, she knows which one she is going to go for. Can the Executive investigate the matter and do a bit of joined-up thinking by linking the issue of waste and recycling with that of energy efficiency?

I draw members' attention to my entry in the register of members' interests. To ask the First Minister how the renewable energy strategy will benefit communities and help to improve the health and well-being of Scotland's population. (S2F-2317)

I welcome the excellent progress that has been made towards meeting the Scottish Executive's renewables targets for 2010. Does the First Minister agree that, if we are to meet our targets for 2020, to tackle fuel poverty, to create Scottish jobs and to avoid reliance on energy sources that leave a legacy of toxic waste for generations to come, we need to increase significantly our investment in marine power, microgeneration, biomass, hydrogen technologies and energy efficiency?

Will Donald Gorrie give way?

Could the member give us some details of those proposals, as some of us have spent the past six months working up similar ones?

In this short speech I want to raise points on different aspects of rural development from the debates that we have had over the past two or three years and test whether they appear in the rural development programme that Ross Finnie has put out for consultation. Everybody is struggling with an overarching issue that has come through in the speeches this morning: how do rural communities deal with external forces that impact on the rural economy? I am thinking in particular of centralising forces in the public sector as we try to get better value for money for services, and I am wondering what that means for local communities. Private sector market forces are also centralising and changing. How will rural communities deal with those challenges? Part of the solution will have to be in the rural development programme. Ross Finnie's foreword is good at saying that we have to join the dots between different issues. We are not dealing with just one issue, and joined-up thinking will be required as we face the different challenges. I must admit that I had expected Ross to talk a little more about climate change. That might be because I have spent the past couple of days in the Western Isles, thinking through the big challenges that communities there will face over the next few years. The updated climate change programme, "Changing Our Ways", has just been released and I had expected climate change to be a thread running through this morning's speech. CAP reform is another issue that worries farming communities, which wonder how they will respond to external changes that are outwith their control. Our starting point has to be this question: how do  we equip our rural communities with financial resources and people skills that will allow them to deal with challenges and turn them not into problems but into opportunities? Real issues arise to do with the management of change and with leadership, and communities have to be involved in shaping the process. The consultation is important and I hope that we do not witness the consultation fatigue that Alex Fergusson mentioned. I hope that communities seize this opportunity to shape their future. The consultation has to come alive. The three themes in the document—underpinning performance in the agriculture, food and forestry industries; promoting and protecting our landscapes and heritage; and promoting a much more diverse rural economy with thriving communities—represent the overarching challenges. Communities should be helped so that they are equipped to face them. Ross Finnie talked a lot about the different schemes that will help rural communities, and my colleague Alasdair Morrison will focus on the LFASS. Some progress has been made on land management contracts. The Environment and Rural Development Committee was very critical of the minister early in the process. However, when we read through the explanation of the changes that have been made—in particular, to the second tier of land management contracts—it seemed worth giving credit to the minister for moving in the direction that the committee hoped he would move in. Issues such as environmental quality and management, animal health and welfare and biodiversity must be part of the integrated mix of challenges. There has to be money for such schemes as well. Alex Fergusson wondered whether environmental schemes were simply an extra that comes as part of the process. An issue perhaps arises to do with the way in which we value our rural environment and regard it as part of Scotland's economic wealth. We must ask how we can protect the environment for the future but also how we can obtain economic value from it. There is a debate to be had. Ramblers have worried about what they regard as an overemphasis on business development. Unless protecting and enhancing our environment is an overarching objective, and unless we can link that to business and economic development, we will miss a trick and make life harder for our rural communities. The ramblers' comment was a single line in a document, but I suspect that there will now be a debate on what it really means. We have to ensure that all the different stakeholders are party to the process and are not put in the position of only being able to send us a brief one-page document the day before we have  a debate. As the consultation continues, a series of issues will arise. Every time we have a debate in the Environment and Rural Development Committee, we come back to the issue of how we can add value, at local and regional level, to products that are created in rural communities. I very much welcome Ross Finnie's comments on the LEADER programme and on the need to have local and regional strategies. If value is not added at local level, communities are selling their products only for the benefits to be added somewhere else. We must change that. In that context, I was disappointed that the minister did not raise the issue of co-operatives. The Environment and Rural Development Committee has considered how, in other countries, benefits have been captured for local communities because they have a much more co-operative framework. When we consider the challenges of CAP reform and the different financial structures, we must ensure that we secure benefits locally and do not simply export low-value food products. The maximum possible value must be added in the communities where the food products are made. We have talked before about abattoirs and about local finishing. We have to support agricultural communities to develop their work in the food chain—and that is one of the issues that the Environment and Rural Development Committee will include in its report on the food chain, which we are still discussing. There are issues in that regard that I would like to have been stressed more this morning. Public sector procurement is of direct relevance to farming communities. We have a huge public purse in Scotland, and I do not go along with those who criticise the amount of money that we spend on public services, because those services are of huge benefit to communities. However, I would like more value to be wrung out of the expenditure, and I would like there to be better food sourcing by local authorities and by health boards. That would lead to practical links between communities in urban and rural areas, which would be good for our farming communities. There are many such issues that must be added to the debate.

But I was expecting those issues to come up today. I expected them to feed into the debate, because they are crucial. At the start of my speech, I talked about climate change. The Executive's documents, "Changing Our Ways: Scotland's Climate Change Programme and "Choosing our Future: Scotland's Sustainable Development Strategy", are excellent, but I now expect to feel them, and to see them feed through into all speeches that ministers make. It is a challenge not only for ministers but for all of us. I say to Ross Finnie that I am not being excessively critical, but I do expect such issues to be part of the story of how we support our rural communities. On climate change, the way in which we power and heat our rural communities will be crucial over the next few years. Those communities are overdependent on oil—a resource that will not be there forever and that is a source of carbon emissions that we are all trying to wean ourselves off. Renewables offer a massive opportunity. In passing, Ross Finnie mentioned the 100 measures that the LEADER programme will support. This is an area in which we need more joined-up thinking. When we consider renewables, we should not simply be considering a new industry coming into the system; we should be considering how to support our agricultural and rural communities to have locally based industries. The Environment and Rural Development Committee's recent report on biomass identified that 2,000 new jobs could be created in our rural communities. That represents a huge opportunity for rural communities to secure economic benefit in their areas, which would mean that they would not have to import highly expensive fuel and to export their goods at low value. We want to secure value in local communities by helping farmers to think about how biofuels can add value to their land and by encouraging the forestry industry to assess how to get the maximum value out of Scotland's forests. We have a huge resource and we should consider how our use of it fits into the rural development programme. Renewables must be part of that programme because they represent a massive opportunity, which we cannot afford to miss. Yesterday I was at an energy conference in Tarbert on Harris, to which it was expected that about 60 people would turn up, but more than 100 came. New industries such as renewables are a live issue. At the conference, I met people whom I had met on Monday in Stornoway, where the Environment and Rural Development Committee took evidence on the Crofting Reform etc Bill. By Wednesday, they were all wearing different hats—whereas on Monday they had been representing crofting organisations, two days later they were  representing bodies such as the North Harris Trust and community buyout organisations. It is important to bring together the key local players. It is excellent that some of the LEADER work is being moved across from the enterprise side to the rural development side, but we must ensure that we do not lose the emphasis on local skills and leadership. I hope that the rural development plan will do that. A key issue that emerged from the Environment and Rural Development Committee's inquiry into rural development was that rural communities' skills and confidence in their businesses are crucial to the success or failure of those communities.

The provision of grants and financial support to rural communities is vital, but how the people who live in those communities can access that support and make the most of it must be part of the picture. I welcome the rural development plan, which is a big step in the right direction. I have criticised aspects of it only because I want certain issues to be added to the picture. Most of the recommendations that the Environment and Rural Development Committee makes pop up in future ministerial decisions. If I sounded critical, that was because I want more to be done in the future, not because I do not acknowledge what Ross Finnie has done in the past.

To ask the Scottish Executive what timescale is envisaged for major improvement works to Waverley and Haymarket railway stations. (S2O-9470)

I welcome the fact that progress is being made on both stations. Will the minister use his influence to ensure that Transport Scotland does some work on the Waverley project so that Waverley station can be considered in the strategic transport projects review next year? Does the minister share my frustration that last year marked 20 years since the first plan was drawn up to make Haymarket accessible? Now that we have given the green light to trams, there seems to be no obstacle to our getting on and making sure that the transport interchange—which was in First ScotRail's franchise plans—is delivered. Can we get the blockage removed and see the improvements being made to our two major stations on the ground of their national and strategic importance?

Will the member take an intervention?

I welcome the changes that the committee has made to the bill while discussing it over the past two years. I welcome the tighter timescales that will reduce uncertainty for residents and businesses along the route. I welcome the noise monitoring scheme, and the compensation scheme that is to be made available during construction. I welcome the fact that the Parliament today agreed to Margaret Smith's amendments—amendments 10 and 11—which will require grants and noise insulation work to be provided where appropriate. I welcome the new landscaping plans. Finally, I welcome the huge amount of work that has been undertaken in scrutinising the financial and business case for the project. Attempts have been made to learn from the National Audit Office report. We have provided for integration with buses, we have re-examined the management and procurement processes and we have ensured that the tramlines go along the correct routes. Those points will now be required to be taken on board by the promoter. The opportunity for Edinburgh that we have in front of us today will not be available to us again for a long time. The trams represent a massive financial investment by the Scottish Executive in our capital city, which we all know faces significant transport issues. It will be a pity if we divide along party lines today, especially given our previous debates on transport in the city. One challenge for the future is to think about how on earth we can generate support for major long-term investment despite the pretty disastrous events of the past few years. With the Scottish Executive's commitment to the project subject to the revised business case that will be published later this year, we are in the difficult position of knowing that the bill before us cannot be implemented with the amount of money currently on the table. That leaves people with many difficult choices. I have every sympathy with the council members from across the political parties who had to try to arrive at a sensible way forward and ensure that as much of the network as possible is built, but that outcome is not the best available. Other transport projects in Scotland that have received funding from the Executive and cross-party parliamentary support have gone ahead even when their costs rose by a factor of two or three. I know that the transport agency will help to grapple with such problems in future, but it will be unfortunate if the tramline scheme becomes a victim of such problems just now. We have received representations from the business community, developers in the north of the city, Scottish Gas, Telford College, and people  involved in the waterfront development, telling us that the tram scheme is needed for economic prosperity. I believe that we must just go ahead with it. I have sympathy with Margaret Smith's desire to ensure that the tram provides better access to the Western general. It is our job to ensure that the promoter delivers on the written legal agreement by providing pedestrian access to the back of the hospital and a feeder bus network around the whole hospital campus for everyone else. Let us recognise that, at the start of the 21 st century, "the route ahead for the City of Edinburgh is a light rail network that adds to both existing and reopened lines and that complements and dovetails with other current and future modes of travel." That is what the bill will give us. "Better ... to take our time to get it right than progress at pace and repent at leisure. Moreover in transport like most other things in life you get what you pay for. Do it on the cheap and you'll get the quality it merits. The vision for Edinburgh has to be to aspire to be a truly Capital City." Those are the words of Kenny MacAskill in the submission that he made six years ago to the trams4edinburgh website. I whole-heartedly agreed with him at the time. However, it will take from today until the end of 2010 for phase 1 to be delivered and until 2015 for the Haymarket to Granton section. When will we ever get the right scheme at the right time? The time is now. We must put our money where our mouths are and vote for the tram scheme. The funding will be scrutinised by the Executive, but we must vote for the scheme today.

I welcome the amendments. Many people have grave concerns about these issues. Indeed, as a result of the tram proposal local groups have been established that are committed to enhancing and improving the quality of habitat management in the Roseburn area. The amendments will ensure that the bill provides a proper framework for the council to take forward habitat management. I warmly welcome the approach and look forward to the wildlife corridor's enhancement, as well as to its establishment as a transport corridor in future.

I rise to support amendments 10 and 11, in the name of Margaret Smith, but I will preface my remarks by highlighting how the present discussion illustrates not only the hard decisions that the bill presents us with but the difficulties that are thrown up by our current procedure for dealing with private bills. I do not believe that it is appropriate for us to have such debates in a meeting of the full Parliament. The committee has spent two years considering this and many other issues in great detail. I am not prepared to overturn the series of reports that the committee prepared, the discussions and negotiations that it held and the representations from constituents and others that it weighed up. Alternative suggestions have been put in front of us today, but I am not prepared to overturn all that work on the basis of the short speeches that we have heard today. That is not to say that I do not acknowledge that those views are held by various individuals, some of whom are probably my constituents who will let me know about their views afterwards. However, there is an issue about the process that we use to handle such bills. I am not prepared to take a chance by taking the word of people who have made a few short speeches in the chamber. I have read the committee's report. Like Margaret Smith, I have ploughed through some of the evidence sessions and I have attended many debates and meetings on the issue in my constituency. However, I am prepared to support amendments 10 and 11. Having read many bills, I know that a change from "may" to "shall" is not a huge change in legislative terms, but it is a symbolic change. It says to our constituents and people who are potentially affected by the trams that the authorised undertaker shall,  "after consulting the Council, make a scheme providing for the making of grants towards the cost of insulating buildings, or such classes of buildings", as are appropriate. It is important that we put that level of comfort in the bill, given the range of concerns that have been expressed and the work that the committee has done on the issue. I understand that the committee is not unhappy with the amendments. It is important that we reassure people, but we must get the issue in perspective. There is a limit to what we can do in plenary session when debating a bill such as this. I very much look forward to a new transport and works act, which will allow us to debate issues in a different kind of framework, with different kinds of expertise at the top table. We do not have that today. My judgment is to rely on the work that the committee has done over the past two years, with the amendments that Margaret Smith has lodged. I understand that the amendments in the name of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton would mean that we would never build railways except in tunnels. There is a debate about what the appropriate noise levels are. I am not prepared, on the basis of a brief discussion in the chamber this afternoon, to overturn the consideration and work of the committee.

I am aware—as, I am sure, is Mr McLetchie—that there is unanimity on the council that it will make the best of the money that is available from the Executive and from itself. Will  he not support that pragmatic approach to ensuring that we get the trams going in Edinburgh? The Conservative members of the council support it.

I am delighted to speak in support of the Edinburgh Tram (Line Two) Bill. I am very glad that we have reached final stage, and I add my congratulations and thanks to the members of the Edinburgh Tram (Line Two) Bill Committee, its clerks and advisers for the immense amount of work that they put into scrutinising the bill. I have spoken to constituents and, through the Official Report and minutes, I have followed the committee's diligent scrutiny of the bill as its members sat through the many meetings and pored over the evidence. My congratulations go to them for doing their job as our representatives on the private bill committee. I also thank the objectors, who had to deal with a tricky process. I know that they were guided through that process by Bill Aitken and his clerks, to whom many thanks should go for making that possible for my constituents. I thank those who have helped to improve the bill—both the objectors and TIE—for the robust discussions that took place before the committee. Today is an important marker point, and I hope that the Parliament will support the bill. We all supported it at preliminary stage. It is a significant  part of the public transport investment that we require for Scotland, and it is crucial for Edinburgh. I was appalled at the speech that we just heard from Kenny MacAskill. I well remember being castigated in the early days of the Parliament, when I was Minister for Transport and the Environment, for having the audacity to bring forward proposals on buses but not on trams. Kenny MacAskill can go back to the Official Report : he will see the demands for trams there. It is rank political opportunism to turn round at the very end of the process to say, "Oh, I don't like this scheme. It's not the right scheme and not the right time." We have heard that again and again. Let us be more ambitious. We want the trams and we want the Waverley station project. It cannot be viewed as a choice between the two. How parochial can we be in the Parliament? Let me remind members that we need to make the most of this opportunity in Edinburgh. Money from the Executive is providing us with an opportunity to build the kind of high-quality infrastructure that we need in this city. The proposed route starts at Leith, one of the great development areas in Edinburgh. It runs up past Waverley station, along Princes Street—Edinburgh's retail core—to Haymarket, where it provides access to the business district. It runs past Murrayfield stadium, out to South Gyle and Edinburgh Park and on to the Royal Bank of Scotland headquarters. When I last heard, that company was rather pleased to be getting a 21 st century tram system on its doorstep. The scheme is hugely important. From the Royal Bank of Scotland headquarters, the line will run out to the airport. There will be a shuttle service from the Ingliston park-and-ride out to Newbridge. We cannot afford to allow this opportunity to pass us by—the citizens of the future will not forgive us if we do. We need the trams to deliver economic and environmental benefits to our city. Edinburgh is a hugely successful city, but it suffers from traffic congestion and poor and unreliable journey times. We cannot sit back and say complacently, "Let's wait for perfection." This is a good scheme that the committee has examined robustly. I welcome the high-quality transport network that is proposed. I want more investment in public transport in Edinburgh—at Haymarket station, at Waverley station and in the tram project. I want our financial services and banking sector to survive. I want us to compete against the other European cities and capitals that are putting big bucks into their transport systems. There is a huge amount still to do. We need to see the business case for the project and further details. There will be key challenges for city residents when we get down to diverting utilities, but let us not turn our faces against a project that will have the biggest  impact on the city in our generation. It is part of a package of public transport investments. We have had stage 1 of the Waverley station redevelopment. We now need the tramlines and stage 2 of the Waverley redevelopment. A huge amount of investment is required in this city. It would be a huge mistake for the Parliament to turn its back on the tram project. Let us be consistent and vote for the bill today. That is what is needed for investment in transport throughout our country.

Will the minister give way?

I hope that the minister has got the message that Labour members support the new strategy. We welcomed its publication last week, want it to be implemented and want opportunities to be brought to farming and rural communities in Scotland. Ross Finnie started his speech by talking about the importance of a healthy, sustainable agricultural community for the whole of rural Scotland. We concur with that view. We must recognise and acknowledge that uncertain times  are ahead for many farming communities, but I hope that the document provides a clear framework of policy support from this Executive for the farming communities. It is important to put that on the record at the start, because I was disappointed by the tone of the nationalist and Tory amendments, and by the tone of some of their speeches; I will not say all their speeches, because positive and constructive remarks have been made by members on both sides of the chamber. I was surprised by the lack of reference—particularly by the nationalists—to consumers. Little reference was made to consumers, yet they are the people who must be persuaded to buy our farmers' produce. I was also surprised that so little reference was made to developing countries around the world and to the historical unfairness of the trade agreements and subsidies that we have lived with in the west since the second world war. That historical unfairness is what is driving the CAP reform process. It is important that we understand that political process and ensure that our farmers are equipped to respond to it. Procurement must be a central plank of the Executive's response. The Environment and Rural Development Committee raised that issue with the minister last month and his response to the committee made it clear that the Scottish Executive is beginning work on the procurement process. Seminars are being held to work with local authorities so that they can meet EU procurement rules, but we do not yet know about the results of the seminars. It is important that the minister reports back to us on the responses of those who are involved in the seminars—such as public purchasers, caterers and their customers—about the key blockages to their buying not only local produce but, as was said during the debate, Scottish produce. There must be appropriate, practical advice from the Executive before the national health service, local authorities and, as was mentioned, the Scottish Prison Service will buy Scottish products. There is nervousness about breaking procurement rules and guidelines, so the advice must be clear and strong. I ask the minister to give a commitment this afternoon that he will come back to Parliament—be it to the committee or to the chamber—to let us know how procurement advice and guidance is being developed. The Scottish public sector is a huge potential source for good in ensuring that we support our agriculture sector and our rural communities; I hope that we will see positive responses to the process in the future. A strong sense of gloom and despondency came from the Tories. That tone features in the amendment and although it did not totally dominate Ted Brocklebank's speech, John Scott's  speech was the gloomiest that I can remember him making in the chamber. As Nora Radcliffe said, the NFUS—the representatives of the farmers—are very positive about the strategy. They see it as an opportunity for change and as an opportunity to support the changes that the industry is going through and will have to go through in the future. I will not repeat Nora Radcliffe's comments, but it is important to make that point. There are core messages in the agriculture strategy. It is not fair to say that, as Ted Brocklebank suggested, farmers do not know where the industry is expected to go. A clear framework is laid out in the agriculture strategy, if people work to it. The strategy is about producing food and other products for market, about seeing agriculture as a major driver in a sustainable rural economy and about how we help rural communities to ensure that agriculture remains an important industry for Scotland in the future. I welcome the minister's announcement today that he is about to consult on the rural development strategy. I would like to see more reference in that strategy to agriculture. In particular, I would like more reference to support for agricultural diversification, for finishing at a local level, for farmers to work together to develop and market new products, and for farmers co-operatives. Farmers co-ops come up time and again at the Environment and Rural Development Committee as a key issue on which other European countries are way ahead of us. One of the disappointing facts that we came up with in our recent inquiry on the food chain was that, in the milk industry in particular, the opportunity for integrated and co-operative development is being frustrated by current rules. I hope that we see a response from the minister and from his UK colleagues on that issue. We need to move on some issues. I did not agree with all of John Swinney's speech, but he was right to raise the unfairness in how single farm payments are currently being administered. I take Alex Fergusson's point that single farm payments must be part of the process in order to let some farmers leave the industry and encourage new farmers to arrive in the industry. I think that we would all agree on that.

No. I must move on. Can it be right that there is a loophole that means that it is possible for an ex-farmer to receive single farm payments when there is no use of the farm or stewardship of it for environmental purposes? If there is such a loophole, it must be closed. There is clear support  across the chamber for that.

No, I need to move on.

That might be a pleasure that I am unwisely forgoing, but we will never know. One issue that has been mentioned in the debate needs more emphasis. It is the process of drawing in new people and skills to the farming community. As we go through the major change that is ahead, there will be an increased emphasis on training and support for new farmers. Several colleagues around the chamber have made that point. What new markets and opportunities will be available in the future? What skills will be required to seize such opportunities? During a recent biomass inquiry, I was struck by how many of us suggest that energy crops are a clear opportunity. The challenge of climate change is bringing such opportunities and they must be grasped. Somebody who is currently in agriculture might be thinking of converting their crops to biomass, particular biofuels and the new energy crops, and raising money for that investment, which might take three to five years to develop. However, will there be a market for them? We all talk about the fact that there will be a market. It makes sense that there will be and we need it to happen. However, there is also a need to ensure that, as part of the encouragement for farmers to take the financial risk, there is a coherent strategy for that sector of the market. We need to ensure that there are sufficiently accessible processing facilities so that we do not raise new, environmentally-friendly energy crops only to produce CO 2 emissions to get the products to where they can be processed. There is a real challenge there and we must ensure that it is addressed. Crucially, we also need a market for the end product. It would be crazy to encourage people to produce a product when we do not have a market in place for it. Again, I come back to the public sector. Parts of the public sector are clearly responding to this agenda. For example, Forestry Commission Scotland has set itself a target for the use of biofuels. Why do we not encourage other public sector organisations to do the same? Why do we not make that part of the targets across the Executive, so that we are not just talking the talk, but thinking about how markets can practically be created? There will also be an issue about the duty that is levied. That will need a joined-up approach in Scotland and at a UK level. The debate has been interesting, but it has perhaps been dominated a little too much by  people who are involved in the process themselves. It is important that we get the views of farmers and others who are involved in the agriculture sector, but we need to make links to those who will buy the products, such as consumers—as Eleanor Scott and Nora Radcliffe rightly said—who demand high animal welfare and environmental standards and want to know from where the products come. There is a real opportunity for our farming communities and we need to ensure that they get the support to work together to deliver. However, in discussing the forward strategy for agriculture and where we take it next, let us ensure that we have a joined-up approach that goes right across the Executive and which listens not only to what the farming community is telling us, but to what the consumers are telling us. We must ensure that we get a real market for the future. This is a challenging time for agriculture. It could also be an exciting time, but only if we seize the opportunities.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. We are delighted to put the committee's views on the record this morning. This is a departure from our normal way of working, and I understand that it is an experiment. If this speech goes totally awry, I think that only two other members will get to do what I am doing now. I hope that it works. As convener of the committee, I hope to raise some issues that have not been raised so far in the Parliament. I thank everyone who gave evidence to the committee, both in writing and orally. As members will have realised, some issues were controversial and views on them were expressed passionately. However, one thing that came across strongly was the overall support for the main principles of the bill—shifting responsibilities so that people look after animals proactively and ensuring that animal welfare is given top priority. A challenge that is thrown up by the bill is that of ensuring that people understand their responsibilities. I will come back to that point, because we learned in evidence that people did not really understand the interaction between the bill, the policy memorandum and the statutory instruments that will likely appear at some uncertain future date. People have to understand not only individual sections of the bill, but how those sections relate to other sections. Colleagues have spoken about part 1 of the bill. Although there is general acknowledgement that the minister must have effective powers to deal with outbreaks of disease, and that such powers would be exercised in emotional and potentially difficult situations, concerns have been expressed about the exercise of those powers. The minister has given us some assurances about safeguards and protocols and has made some concessions on greater parliamentary scrutiny of some aspects of those powers. We will return to the issue in more depth at stage 2; given the level of concern, it is right that we should do so. We must ensure  that there is nothing further that the bill must include. There was widespread agreement that we must focus not only on what happens once an outbreak has occurred, but on what can be done proactively to prevent disease and ensure that biosecurity measures work. In the light of the minister's response to our report, we need to give further consideration to several issues in that area. Animal gatherings are a crucial issue, which I do not think that any member has mentioned so far in the debate. In paragraph 86 of our report, we asked the minister to provide further information and guidance on how he plans to address the identification of animal gatherings. Ross Finnie referred to licensing and regulation, but I do not think that his response to our request went beyond a general commitment to provide control mechanisms. The committee wants more detail on what the criteria for the use of those mechanisms will be. The slaughter of companion animals is another matter on which the minister's response was not sufficiently detailed. That was a hugely sensitive issue during the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak. Although the minister acknowledges the emotional attachment to companion animals, his response does not address specifically our recommendation at paragraph 37 on compensation orders. We would like to obtain more information on those issues before we reach stage 2. We also want more information on import controls and the current technological developments. We said that we would welcome more feedback from the minister on progress on those matters but, as yet, the minister has not indicated that any such information will be provided, other than the report on illegal meat seizures that is currently before the Parliament. I turn to part 2. Some of the issues have already been discussed in depth by colleagues. The key point is that there is overall support for the consolidation, updating, modernising and strengthening of the law on animal welfare, which has been widely welcomed by members of all parties, by civic Scotland and by all the organisations that have made representations to us. The stage 1 evidence-taking process was helpful in clarifying issues on which people were unclear. However, I want to make a general point about the Scottish statutory instruments that will put into effect the detail of what organisations and individuals expect to be implemented. The committee is concerned about the timescale that the minister has said will be adopted for the laying of those SSIs. Although some of them will start to kick in in 2008, there is an issue about the length  of time that it will take to deliver the secondary legislation. As convener, I am concerned about such delay, especially as although the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004 was passed in the spring of that year, we are still waiting for the consultation on the snaring provisions, which was expected to have taken place by the autumn of last year, but which has yet to go ahead. That is a problem because some people are not happy about the provisions that they think will be included in the relevant statutory instruments. The absence of those provisions has meant that there has been a lack of clarity. Colleagues have mentioned the duty of care in relation to animals that are released into the wild. It would be helpful for us to see the snaring provisions before we embark on stage 2 consideration of the bill. Perhaps the ministerial summing up will be able to move us forward in that regard. During our stage 1 discussions, the minister expressed his willingness to bring forward some of those timescales. I make the general point that if a bill adopts a framework approach, which in this case is entirely right, the longer it takes to implement the statutory instruments that provide the content of the bill and its detailed provisions, the more difficult it is for people to know exactly what their responsibilities will be. In his opening speech, the minister rightly placed a great deal of importance on eliminating the cruelty to animals that leads to local authorities and the SSPCA having to deal with a large number of cases every year. It would therefore be helpful for ministers to reflect on whether it would be possible to bring forward the introduction of some of the statutory instruments and to give them greater priority so that people can see the whole of the bill and not just the framework that it sets out. Colleagues have raised several other issues, but I do not think that the minister's commitment that animals should be protected from unnecessary mental as well as physical suffering has been mentioned. That commitment is welcome, because the matter was not dealt with in previous legislation on animal welfare. It is entirely right that that should be part of a bill for the 21 st century. The intention to prohibit mutilations has been generally welcomed. Many members have spoken about the need to be clear about which practices—especially those relating to farm management—can be exempt. Some witnesses felt that there was a lack of clarity in the bill as drafted and they were not sure exactly what it meant. The process of detailed discussion at stage 1 and stage 2 will provide clarity for the people who have such responsibilities. It is worth commenting that those management practices will change over time. The detail that is provided after  the bill has been passed will be crucial. I hope that it will offer the chance for best practice to be adopted. I turn to the tail docking of dogs.

It is clear that tail docking was the most contentious issue at stage 1. There was unanimity on the committee that we did not agree with the minister's position on how it would be ensured that specified litters of working dogs could be exempted. We were not happy with the minister's proposals. On the basis of what has been said this morning, I suspect that when we return to the issue, our view will not be unanimous. I can anticipate what the position of the majority of the committee will be, but it is appropriate for us to consider the matter further at stage 2. I have run out of time. There are a number of issues that we raised in our report on which we would have liked to receive a more detailed response from the minister. If it would be possible for us to receive such information before stage 2 begins, that would help the detailed discussions that I expect we will have at that stage.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will change the procedures for flood management schemes in light of future estimates in respect of the incidence of flooding. (S2O-8793)

I welcome the minister's commitment, but it is nearly six years since my constituents in Roseburn and Murrayfield were flooded out of their homes. We have still had no progress with the flood prevention scheme. Local people are deeply unhappy with the proposed scheme, and I share their concerns. Will the minister take on board the fact that the process is interminable, which frustrates progress, and the fact that, with climate change, the demand for flood prevention schemes will increase? Will the minister consider the issue with some urgency? It is not something for the back burner.

It is difficult to make a coherent contribution on this complex subject in just three minutes, so I will  make only a couple of points. First, I cannot share the enthusiasm of colleagues that we should rush headlong into a nuclear future. Secondly, I despair at the lack of political support among Tory members for putting energy efficiency at the top of our agenda. Thirdly, we need to have a balanced energy policy that looks at some of the new and exciting opportunities, on which, as Allan Wilson outlined, the Executive is leading the way. Energy policy has to be about more than renewables. I have heard a lot of talk about security of supply this morning. It is important that we do not get fixated on electricity alone. Some exciting things are happening at the moment, even on the issue of the security of electricity supply. For example, Denmark is looking at 50 per cent of its electricity production being supplied through decentralised energy networks. One of the important debates that Scotland needs to have is on energy supply and electricity networks, but we have not even started that public debate; we are way behind on the issue. The real problem that we must face up to is our fixation with big power stations—regardless of whether they are nuclear or coal fired. I accept that big power stations have a part to play in the debate, but our fixation on them means that we are constantly being diverted from looking at the range of solutions that are out there.

No, I cannot give way in a three-minute speech. The Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution looked at a range of energy scenarios in a recent report on the subject. I suggest that colleagues take a long, hard look at the report, whose recommendations provide options for a nuclear-free future. Many difficult questions have to be resolved. The UK Government's performance and innovation unit has suggested that the cost-effective potential for energy efficiency is 30 per cent of our final energy demand. That should be the starting point for our debates on energy. We are wasting our precious and expensive energy resources and that is the wrong approach to take. We need to put energy efficiency at the top of the agenda and we must do that with some urgency. Energy efficiency is good for both businesses and householders; it is a key part of the solution to fuel poverty in Scotland. Climate change demands that we start with energy efficiency and our CO 2 demands. Energy efficiency should be what drives our housing and other building procurement and design and our future industrial and wider economic performance. We have to buy ourselves time and not fall for the  simple, easy, quick fix that the Conservatives have offered us today in their motion. Solar panels are being used in Edinburgh to create hydrogen through water electrolysis. Other exciting work is being done in Shetland. A lot of that new work will give us solutions for the future. We have to look at a balanced range of mechanisms to deal with supply and demand. That has to be where we go in future. Allan Wilson outlined the excellent work that the Executive is doing. We have to continue that work and not be diverted from it. That has to be our top priority today. Let us reject the Tory motion and vote for the Executive amendment.

Does the member agree with her colleague Fergus Ewing that the Scottish National Party will  consider the construction of a tunnel under the Forth?

To ask the First Minister when the Scottish Executive will respond to the publication of the Arbuthnott commission report on boundary differences and voting systems. (S2F-2059)

I echo the First Minister's welcome for this constructive report. I note that the commission says that the Scottish Parliament "is a major step in improving government in Scotland" and that we should give priority to establishing stability in our voting systems while improving people's understanding of how the systems work. Will the First Minister give a commitment to consider the recommendations on promoting wider and more effective teaching of how people can vote in the Scottish parliamentary and local government elections, particularly in schools? Will he consider in detail the recommendations on improving voter turnout at those elections, particularly through e-voting and boundary changes, to make life more straightforward for people? Will he also focus on what we can do to ensure that people are registered and motivated to participate in elections?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I strongly welcome the publication of "Choosing Our Future". It represents a huge step forward for us in terms of policy development and sets a framework and a vision to guide our future actions. I share some of the sense that has been expressed around the chamber that we have heard some of the rhetoric before. For the members who have turned up to the annual debate on sustainable development in each of the past six years—which is probably about half the members in the chamber—there is not an awful lot that is new in many of the speeches that we will hear this afternoon. What has changed is that we have a much more coherent, detailed and crunchy policy development in front of us today; one that we can debate on into the future. It feels as though time is catching up with us, so we should welcome the document. It is interesting that I have received briefings on the topic only from non-governmental organisations that have environmental interests, although perhaps other members' experience is different. A real issue arises about ensuring that the debate is not seen as being simply an environmental one. I will focus most of my comments on the economy, which is the real challenge. As a country, we use more than our fair share of the world's resources. We are fast running through  our scarce resources such as gas and oil, we are not accountable for the adverse impacts of the use of that energy globally, and our businesses and people still throw out perfectly serviceable materials in everyday life. Our clothes, furniture, computers and electrical goods all have built-in obsolescence, or we just get bored with them. That is not good enough. It damages our environment and communities and creates unattractive polluted areas with severe social justice problems. Such communities are losing out on the general prosperity that most of us enjoy. We have made a lot of progress in the past six years. Waste is one issue on which the Executive has had the biggest impact but, although 75 per cent of our waste comes from the commercial and industrial sectors, most of our energy has been aimed at domestic waste, so there is a huge amount more still to do. Most of our poorest communities are those that have the worst environments and many of them have to deal with the problems that the rest of us create—other people's pollution is exported to them. We must ensure that our social and economic priorities are absolutely plugged into the debate. As a country, we are happy to outsource some of the dirtier and more polluting activities. We have international agreements that mean that fair trade becomes much more important, but none of us engages with the real cost of trainers at £20 or a skirt at £10. We need to think about social justice in the UK and Scotland and about global economic prosperity. That is why the motion is absolutely right to put our economy centre stage and why the policy framework is bang on. We must tackle the central issue of greening our economy, which does not just mean creating green jobs in environmentally friendly industries such as renewables—crucial though that is—but is about transforming our economic activities and changing them for the future. We know that changing our economy has costs. Scotland's economic base was transformed absolutely during the past century and our poorest communities were devastated by some of that sharp economic change. We must make the link with social justice and ensure that when we reduce our carbon emissions by 60 per cent—as we must do over the next few decades—the poorest communities do not lose out again. Our economic strategy must link into social justice and be plugged into the climate-change agenda so that environmental and social justice are at the heart of the measures. People hate having change imposed on them; none of us likes that, but we will be forced to change in some ways, which is why the core elements of the strategy, which are about transforming our economy so that we have high- value jobs with lower ecological or environmental impacts and progressively lower carbon emissions, are the most important ones. We must redesign products and make them adaptable with reusable components. We must tap into the great ideas in universities and companies to make better use of our resources. We cannot afford to waste our resources; equally, we cannot afford to waste the world's resources or to make our companies uncompetitive. I totally disagree with Alex Johnstone's comments that we cannot afford to be ahead of the game—we must, for our economic and environmental future, be ahead of the game. Some hard thinking needs to be done on that now. As individuals, we make choices all the time. We need to enable people to make better and more sustainable choices. That will happen over time. The document contains good ideas about experimenting and seeing what is most effective. There is a really exciting and interesting agenda, but it must be translated into practical policies. People need to know that they are not the only ones who are changing and that other people are, too. We need big collective decisions, so that individuals' decisions have community impacts, which add up to a national impact. The tone of Rob Gibson's speech on that point was so wrong. The issue is not about Scotland having all the tools that a national Parliament would provide; it is about using the tools that we have as effectively as possible and integrating at UK and European levels to ensure that we make as big a difference as possible. Let us consider some of the small things that we have not done yet. If individual members of the public want to put up simple solar panels on their roofs, we still require them to apply to their local planning department, to wait months and to pay an awful lot of money. That is daft and we could change it tomorrow. We could tell every public sector organisation—which, as Rob Gibson pointed out, represents half of the expenditure in Scotland—that when they save energy and make efficiencies they can recycle that back into the organisation. Some of that work has been started by the Executive, but the question is how we kick that process up to the next level. How do we accelerate the process? The document provides us with an excellent starting point. A lot has been done over the past six years and "Changing our Future" pulls it all together, makes it coherent and allows Parliament to start to scrutinise the subject. I would like future debates on sustainable development to be attended not just by members who are interested in the subject. Every single policy committee of the Parliament should take the sections of the report, scrutinise them and ask what is happening on their watch. What is happening in the Enterprise and Culture Committee that relates to the document?  What is happening in the Communities Committee? Such scrutiny should not only be carried out by the Environment and Rural Development Committee; it has to be taken on board by the whole Parliament. That is why the chamber needs to be full. All of us know how the whipping system works, but every member attends committees. I suggest that we follow the recommendations in chapters 14, 15 and 16. We should consider the radical ideas on targets and on driving us in a different direction. We should ensure that Parliament criticises the Executive regularly, that it takes responsibility and that it cuts through the rhetoric and the cross-party consensus. Every single committee should consider what the Executive is doing and should sign up to some of the tough decisions. Then we will get to choose our own future and achieve a sustainable Scotland. That is something that everybody in the chamber would sign up to. The real challenge is what we do as parliamentarians to make that happen.

Does the minister agree that our thinking on these issues has to be consistent and long term and that, if we were simply to take the individual pitches that were made around the chamber, that would be no way to solve our transport problems in Edinburgh and the Lothians? We need long-term investment. Will the minister work with the regional transport partnership to ensure that we deliver on issues such as the trams and the south suburban railway and that we invest in buses, which I remember that Kenny MacAskill once described as being the mode of transport for the last century? We need to be modern, radical and strategic. Will the minister give that commitment?

I welcome the minister's announcement that she will link energy efficiency with renewables and, in particular, that public sector procurement will be used to drive that agenda. I also welcome her suggestion that the single seller survey will provide us with the chance to make every householder aware of the energy efficiency opportunities that are available in existing properties. What practical incentives will be introduced to persuade people so that we improve the energy efficiency of our housing stock? Will she examine the Energy Savings Trust's research that suggests that a discount of £50 to £100 on council tax is required to make people really engage with energy efficiency so that they do something about it?

To ask the Scottish Executive how its climate change strategy is promoting energy efficiency. (S2O-8376)

Is the minister aware of the European Union's estimate that we could reduce our energy demands by 40 per cent if we adopted radical energy efficiency measures? What targets for domestic and business energy efficiency will he set and what incentives for them to be met will he put in place? How will he deliver the win-win that can be achieved for taxpayers if all public sector organisations reduce their energy bills and their CO 2 emissions and make the best use of our renewables technology by adopting an integrated approach?

I support Karen Whitefield's amendment 85 because I believe that we urgently need a strategy to tackle home energy efficiency. However, there must be a wider energy efficiency strategy. Members of the Environment and Rural Development Committee were told during our work on climate change that we could deliver half of the 60 per cent reduction in CO 2 emissions that we must make over the next few decades by energy efficiency alone. There must be a case for joined-up thinking about this, with which we can tackle fuel poverty and ensure that we create energy efficiency in all our new housing. Karen Whitefield's amendment would be a step forward, but I would like the Executive to go further. If the minister replies to the debate, I would be interested to know from him whether he sees a role for targets in the energy efficiency strategy for housing. I know that the Minister for Environment and Rural Development has talked about that in the context of climate change generally. We need to examine all our opportunities for delivering energy efficiency and do it in a joined-up way, particularly with the review of the warm deal and central heating programmes. That is an opportunity to tie together action on fuel poverty and energy efficiency with the opportunities that small-scale renewables bring. I welcome Karen Whitefield's amendment and hope that it is agreed. This must be seen as the  start of the process, however, and a lot more action must follow. By bringing the issue back to the Parliament, I hope that we will reflect the consensus across the parties, which is that we need to take urgent action.

I welcome the minister's positive response and his commitment to considering the business case in depth. In signing up to any major transport investment, the Executive must spend its money wisely. I echo Margaret Smith's initial question. I  think that it was three transport ministers ago that the initial commitment was given. With every passing year, and regardless of the route that Parliament might select at stage 3, inflation costs must be taken into account. Those costs are nothing to do with the project itself.

Does Murdo Fraser think that it is healthy that people commit to a property the biggest sum that they will ever commit in their lives, without knowing the condition of the building or what maintenance might be required, and that they make their financial calculations without knowing those basic facts? Is that financially good for Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank colleagues for signing my motion and helping me to bring this debate to the chamber tonight. I am particularly delighted by the range of cross-party support, and the 38 members who took the time to sign the motion. Most members know that I have been working on this issue and bringing it to the Parliament for a long time. It crops up in many questions to ministers and it is regularly raised in written questions. We have also dealt with it in the cross-party group on renewable energy. We have been working on the grid, and Nora Radcliffe, Robin Harper and I have been involved in work on small-scale renewables for the past few years. We have now moved from talking about small-scale renewables as a future possibility, to talking about the micro-renewables option. I have also been working with my colleague Mark Lazarowicz, who has been working on the issue in the United Kingdom Parliament. I am pleased to report that he managed to get more than 100 of his colleagues to stay in London on a Friday to vote his bill through the first stage of the private member's bill process. That is not something that happens every day of the week in the House of Commons.  I strongly believe that we must not let Scotland fall behind in this debate. We need to legislate to make micro-renewables happen here too. that technology needs to be part of the Scottish Executive's renewables targets. I firmly believe that the idea's time has come and I acknowledge the tremendous support that there is for the proposals outwith the Scottish Parliament—from the environmental non-governmental organisations, the fuel poverty and energy efficiency campaigners, the renewables industry and the Scottish renewables forum. There is widespread support within and outwith the Scottish Parliament because it is a win-win idea for Scotland. Much support for the proposals comes because there are huge environmental benefits to using energy from buildings as part of our overall strategy to create zero or low-carbon heat and power. It is also a potentially significant way of tackling climate change and there are huge opportunities to gain benefits for our fuel poverty strategy. The era of cheap domestic power is now over. Energywatch reports that gas prices have gone up by 30 per cent, and electricity prices have risen by 20 per cent in the past two years. We know from the Scottish house condition survey that every 5 per cent increase in fuel costs drags 30,000 Scots back into fuel poverty. Barnado's estimates that 46,000 children live in fuel poverty. That must end, and this is an opportunity to bring it to an end. It is no coincidence that Scotland's social housing providers are leading the way in making use of the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative. Canmore Housing Association in my constituency has several projects that use micro-renewables, energy efficiency and management technologies. The Slateford Green project has won awards at European-level, but there are others. There are families in my constituency who are already living with lower fuel bills and warm homes. I would like all my constituents have the same opportunity. That is beginning to happen across Scotland, though: Berwickshire Housing Association, Queen's Cross in Glasgow, and projects in Dundee and Aberdeen are examples; more are happening all the time. The technologies do work, especially when projects are linked between micro-generation and energy efficiency. That is the real win-win situation.

That must be part of the picture. It is not enough just to encourage people to use renewable energy technologies; we have to reward them for it by giving them a fair price and encouraging them to install the new technology. The debate raises a huge series of issues about the grid. However, I do not have time to go into them in my brief slot tonight. The technologies are working already. We know what the barriers are and we have to get rid of them. We need to make sure that the projects that are working away quietly become the norm across Scotland. We need to move up a gear; we need to incorporate those technologies as standard in every new building. That is why we need to change our building standards and make sure that the planning system grants permitted development to those projects. We have to encourage and incentivise people to add the new technologies to their existing housing and buildings—we should not deal only with new buildings. By installing the new technologies we will create a mass market; we will bring down costs; we will stimulate manufacturing in Scotland; and, crucially, we will create a pool of skilled installers who know how to fit the technology. We also need to raise awareness and make it easier for people to install renewable energy in their homes, as it is far too difficult at the moment. It can be done, but it requires a huge amount of personal research and commitment. We should reward everybody for using environmentally friendly heat and power technology. The Energy Saving Trust pilot shows that if we knock £100 off people's council tax, they will start installing technologies that are energy efficient and renewable. I hope that the Scottish Executive will promote a micro-generation strategy as part of its overall renewables strategy. If we are to hit the 40 per cent renewables target by 2020, we need to use every technology in the box, and micro-generation has to be part of that process. Let us use the power of public sector procurement with every new building that goes up in Scotland and, crucially, with every project that looks at regenerating the fabric of existing buildings. This is a huge opportunity for us. I have set out ideas in my own member's bill, and I know that Shiona Baird has been working on the same topic. Tonight is a chance to get the debate going in the Parliament about how we deliver micro-generation and energy efficiency. It is a huge win-win for Scotland: we can protect our environment; we can tackle fuel poverty; and we can create jobs. I thank everyone who supported me in bringing the debate to the Parliament. Let us see this as  the start of the debate and a continuation of the ideas that are already out there in Scotland. Let us make sure that we really make a difference and that we create a tipping point where not just every new building, but every existing one takes advantage of the massive benefits that are available from the new technology.

I apologise to the Presiding Officer and to colleagues for not being here for the entirety of the debate due to a long-standing meeting with a ministerial colleague. First, I want to say where I think we have been coming from. I agree with much of the sentiment that colleagues around the chamber have expressed so far. We started off with one of the worst records in Europe and we are still one of the slowest countries in Europe to get our act together and recycle. However, without the European Union pushing us, with targets that are enforceable through daily fines, we would not even have got as far as we have. That has helped to concentrate the minds of the Executive and local authorities. The tranche of money from the strategic waste fund has been instrumental in enabling local authorities either to fund services themselves or to work with local community and voluntary groups to make a difference. We have not gone far enough or fast enough, but we must celebrate the achievement of authorities that have managed to go from a recycling level of 6 per cent to a point at which they can think seriously of hitting their 25 per cent target next year. Their achievement goes against the grain of our casual, throwaway, consumer society; we should celebrate it. I want not only to reflect on the progress to date but to think about where we go next.

If I may, I will get going before I do so. A huge amount of work has been done thus far. The combination of the strategic waste fund and the landfill tax, which I know nobody likes, has been critical in providing the resources to make people do things differently. There is an economic cost to landfill. Landfill is part of our whole out-of-sight, out-of-mind attitude, except that people who have to live beside a landfill tip suffer as a result. Even well-run landfills result in thousands of lorry journeys every year, so nobody wants us to rely on landfill. However, the money that comes from the landfill tax has been used across Scotland to very innovative and great effect. In my city of Edinburgh, the Lothian and Edinburgh Environmental Partnership has done some brilliant campaigning work to engage people in the waste agenda through its waste awareness campaigns; composting trainers, who train up people on local community councils; and  tenemental experiments, to enable people who live in more densely populated areas to become involved. We still do not have on-street recycling throughout the city of Edinburgh for tenemental properties, which is an obvious thing that needs to be addressed. We are at the point of reflecting on how far we have come and thinking about where we go next. When the Environment and Rural Development Committee considered the issue two years ago, we identified recycling markets and businesses as critical areas of influence, as is waste minimisation. Not every member has focused exclusively on recycling in the debate; a focus on recycling markets and waste minimisation should be part of the discussion today. In considering the waste hierarchy, we need to think about how we can make recycling worth while and how we can create products that are marketable. For example, nowadays, the vast majority of our newspapers are produced from recycled paper. As a result of the drive towards remade products, we now have new products that did not exist a few years ago. We need to keep developing and expanding that kind of work. I agree with colleagues' comments about the need to involve businesses in the waste agenda. We have domestic targets, but we need to get across to businesses the message that waste is a resource-usage problem; we need a culture shift. We need to return to the waste hierarchy: reduce, reuse, recycle and recover. Recycling is down there at number three, so much more emphasis needs to be put on reducing the waste that we create in the first place and reusing the products that we have. Let us take product design as an example. We know that it is possible to produce products that are much more efficient not just because they use recycled materials but because those materials can be recovered after the product has finished its useful lifespan. Packaging is a huge issue, which the Environment and Rural Development Committee has considered over the past few weeks in our debates on the poly bag levy. Those debates have highlighted the extremely wasteful practices of supermarkets across the country. Instead of encouraging us to use bags for life, whether they are made from plastic or cloth, shops are offering us multiple bags and excessive packaging. Raising awareness is a real issue in that regard. The Parliament should congratulate companies such as B&Q that have progressive policies and are taking the lead in a competitive market. It is disappointing to see that others have not focused on the issue.

Reuse is also hugely important. I am thinking of some of the furniture reuse projects in Edinburgh. It is appalling that people dump furniture just because they are bored with it. Furniture should be passed on for reuse to people who need it. Because of the Bike Station in Edinburgh, bicycles that would historically have been chucked in the bin are being reused. Charity shops are a brilliant model of reuse. I went to a Barnardo's shop on the recent make a difference day. I was amazed to hear that Barnardo's bills have been slashed because its shops can now recycle stuff that they used to have to dump—indeed, they get paid for that recycling. We are talking about joined-up thinking. Repairing goods should also be on the agenda. Most of us just chuck out goods. I cannot remember the number of stereos and compact disc players that I have owned. It is cheaper to buy a new one than to take the old one to be repaired. The economics of that are crazy. My final point is about procurement, which is where the Executive can take a lead. Let us look at the procurement guidelines.

I will wind up with two specific points. We must ensure that there is legal certainty to encourage people to buy products.

We must also ensure that we fully implement the European Union's directive on environmental protection through our procurement guidelines.

I would be keen for the minister to get back to me in writing on that matter.

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it is giving to the development of children's health services in Edinburgh. (S2O-8109)

Is the minister aware of the recent media speculation on the outcomes of the reviews of children's cancer services in Scotland and the future of the Royal hospital for sick children in Edinburgh? Will he reassure me and the Parliament that excellence in the provision of children's cancer services in Edinburgh and the Lothians will continue to be paramount? Will he also reassure us that his top priority is to ensure that children with cancer receive the best possible treatment and care?

This is meant to be a constructive intervention. It strikes me that we have been good at putting new money into individual rail freight projects at the ends of lines, but does Mr Adam agree that the minister and his officials could consider a bit more strategically the future pinchpoints for rail freight?

Will the member take an intervention?

I want to add some perspective to what has been an interesting debate in which most members have been positive and upbeat. There are significant choices to be made in the coming years, but we should all be proud of what we have achieved on the railways since the Parliament was set up. Fergus Ewing did not let me intervene during his speech, but I was going to say that when I inherited the road and railway programmes in 1999, we had the possible Larkhall to Milngavie rail project and about 19 big roads and motorways projects. Those were the choices for significant transport expansion in Scotland, so it is clear that we have achieved a huge amount in the past few years. We now talk about real rail projects such as the Bathgate to Airdrie line, the Edinburgh crossrail project, the Waverley line and the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line, which in 1999 were aspirations rather than worked-out schemes. The Edinburgh airport rail link represents a huge opportunity to link up the central Scotland railway network and it will massively increase travel opportunities for people who cross the central belt. In 1999, that project, just like the Edinburgh tram project, was not even on the horizon. We have come a long way and the money has come with the projects. In 1999, we did not have significant resources in the transport budget, but the two subsequent spending reviews gave us those resources. For the first few years, we concentrated on how we could make the most effective use of the railways in the short term. We knew that we wanted to improve access for commuters, safety, the quality of services, reliability and comfort. Improvements such as CCTV have made a huge difference to passengers' sense of comfort and personal safety on our railway network. In addition, we have done a great deal of work on access to the rail network, particularly through  park-and-ride schemes. The best park-and-ride schemes now fill up quickly. We face the challenge of how to target small amounts of money on schemes that link in to the railways. Now that more people use the railways, we need longer trains and platforms—that was another of our early priorities. Apparently simple things have not been simple to deliver on the railway network. One of our biggest collective achievements is the fact that we now have a range of powers and a more integrated network, which gives us more opportunities for the future. The expansion of freight transport by rail is a huge achievement by the Scottish Parliament, but we are still at an early stage and a lot more can be done. I hope that Tavish Scott will examine that during his time as Minister for Transport and Telecommunications. We used to have almost abandoned railways in Scotland, but we now regard the rail network as a core part of the country's transport network. There are key pinchpoints on the rail network. Although I am glad that members have mentioned Waverley station, we need to mention Haymarket station in the same breath because, uniquely, it is national, regional and local. Phase 1 of the Waverley redevelopment is to be welcomed as a superb step forward, but the increase in capacity that it will produce is marginal. If we are to realise the aspirations to which Murdo Fraser referred and those that were discussed in last week's debate on the Forth road bridge, we will need more access at Waverley and Haymarket. Work has already been done, such as the engineering project to increase capacity, but the fact that Waverley still needs to be transformed is a measure of how much more we need to do. Tavish Scott talked about what we want for the future. A key priority should be targeting commuting routes where motorways and other roads are massively congested and where we know from our national planning framework that more houses, businesses and other developments are planned. That is crucial. It is important to make best use of the existing network in doing that, but we must consider expansion, too. We are experiencing a renaissance. In the summer, I unveiled a small plaque to John Miller, the bicentenary of whose birth we were celebrating. It was stunning to consider the huge expansion of the railway network that took place 200 years ago. Our railway network is undergoing a more modest but equally significant expansion. I need only point to the crossrail project in Edinburgh, whose three new stations at Brunstane, Newcraighall and Edinburgh Park have totally outperformed expectations, as has the Bathgate to Edinburgh line, and as I am sure the Bathgate to Airdrie line will do. People will use the  railways when they are available and of good quality. Nobody has mentioned this week's announcement about the Invernet services, for which existing track will be used to allow commuters to go between Inverness and Kingussie, Aviemore and Carrbridge. It is crucial that the far north line is also involved—that is a hugely significant step for people in the very small rural communities in mid-Sutherland. We need more such initiatives. When we consider the significant expansion of rail services, it is crucial to consider expanding the rail network. If I agree with one point that SNP members have made, it is the idea of examining pinchpoints at which the relatively minor step of doubling track in key areas could hugely improve service reliability. By not sorting out the situation involving slower freight trains that are not time critical and commuter services that are hugely time critical, we can create problems in the rail network. In addition to new railway lines, I would like close work to be done on the pinchpoints around the network. As our lifestyles have changed, the world has shrunk and we are all prepared to commute much longer distances. That means that a more flexible and integrated railway network is needed that pulls in not just cars, but buses. We could usefully consider that as part of the process of letting people use the railway network. We have a huge opportunity. I hope that the minister will accept my invitation to speak a bit more about Haymarket and Waverley stations. We should continue the debate and consider how to expand use of the railway network and make the most of the renaissance that I truly believe is happening on it.

Will the member give way?

All of us on the Labour benches are keen to support the bill. It will help us to deliver joined-up thinking and will put our aspirations for sustainable development into practice. The legislation is important. It will mean that all decisions made by Government in Scotland will have to include a more robust consideration of the potential  environmental impacts. Such consideration will have to be integrated; it will not be an add-on at the end. Labour members are especially keen that cumulative impact and environmental justice should be considered properly. Decisions have to be shaped and mitigation has to be planned in right at the start. The bill is about good practice. We have the techniques, but we must ensure that they are applied thoroughly and throughout the decision-making process. The process must be carried out with transparency and openness—key principles of this Parliament. Large parts of the debates in the Environment and Rural Development Committee at stage 1 and stage 2 were about how we could develop an open and transparent system. I welcome the minister's amendments on pre-screening and on ensuring that the bill does not create loopholes. Labour members agree that the measures in the bill have to be proportionate. The responsible authorities will have to have a degree of flexibility, but they will have to be accountable for their judgments. The Scottish Parliament should be in no doubt that the bill will require a major culture shift from all our public authorities. Regulations have been in place since July 2004, and experience is being gained from the analysis of pilots that are under way. That experience will have to be built on and developed. The bill goes beyond the European directive that Alex Johnstone mentioned. The bill deals with plans, programmes and strategies. It would not be appropriate to exclude those from consideration. The bill requires explicit analysis and new expertise; we think that it will lead to a higher quality of decisions. That does not mean that environmental considerations will override our objectives for economic development or social justice, but those considerations will become part of the process of decision making. That will lead to better understanding. We already have such a process in the land-use planning system. Again, we have better-quality decision making. The Tories have said consistently that they do not want us to go beyond the regulations, and Alex Johnstone has made the arguments again today. At stage 1, John Scott argued that the bill would lead to double the work and double the expense. I believe that that was an exaggeration. There has been no such doubling in the land-use planning system. Mid-career professional training for land-use planners has been required, and that is the kind of training that we will need for people throughout the public sector. However, that will not mean double the effort or double the cost; it will mean a culture shift and it will mean improving on what is happening.  The gateway will be vital in spreading best practice and helping to provide an efficient way of delivering training throughout the responsible authorities. It is important that the consultation authorities have been part of the pilots. That has helped to ensure that the system will work in practice. I am confident that it will. A key issue will be the level at which SEA takes place. Monitoring of decisions will be important. I very much welcome the minister's commitment in the amendment that responded to the committee's opinion that, in order that we could learn lessons, some form of annual review of the process would be required in the first few years. The bill strikes the right balance. The important thing is that—through parliamentary scrutiny, through support from ministers, and through the gateway—it is implemented successfully. Annual reporting will help the Scottish Parliament to take ownership of the issue and not see it as being owned by somebody else. Post-legislative scrutiny of bills passed by the Parliament is a vital part of the process. Alex Johnstone talked about gold plating. I refute what he said. The bill is not about gold plating; it is about best practice, and I warmly welcome the minister's decision to go beyond the regulations. The regulations have been in place for a year and a half and soon the bill will be enacted. We should be absolutely clear that if we do not go for the bill, a number of Government strategies will not be covered by SEA. It would be a great pity if that were to happen. If a member is against the bill, they must be able to argue successfully that environmental assessment should not be built into the national waste strategy, the architecture policy, the harbour plans on the management of recreation and the use of boats in our harbours, the strategy for Scottish tourism and the transport delivery report. It would be ludicrous if such Government policies did not have proper strategic environmental assessment built into them right from the start. If policies and strategies such as the social justice strategy and Scotland's health strategy are reviewed, they will now be subject to strategic environmental assessment. That can only be good for government in Scotland. If we agree to pass the bill, the prospect is one of joined-up thinking, better decision making and, at the end of the day, better government for Scotland. If a member is against the bill, they will have to be able to justify why such strategies and policies should not be subject to strategic environmental assessment. The argument is a difficult one to make. The Executive has got it right. The bill is a good example of committee discussion being used to improve the bill. We have had lots of discussion on the detail of the bill and lots of amendments, and  the bill is all the better for that. A debate on the regulations would not have let us flag up the issues. Crucially, it would not have let us flag up the concerns of businesses. I hope that we have been able to reassure them on their concerns. If a business or a company is carrying out work on behalf of the Executive, it should be subject to strategic environmental assessment through the policy process—that is the right thing to do. At the end of the day, the bill is not about creating greater costs for business but about getting better value for money. That is why we on the Labour benches strongly support the bill. We are delighted to see it reach stage 3 today. We will all be voting for it.

I welcome the amendment in Rhona Brankin's name. Other members of the committee have referred to the fact that there was extensive and detailed debate about the subject and the committee split between those of us who did not agree with having any pre-screening at all and those of us who felt that the idea was important, as part of a proportionate act that will cover every issue under the sun, and that the responsible authorities have to be prepared to be accountable. For those reasons, I am glad that we are now much clearer about what to expect. If an authority decides that it is going to pre-screen something, it has to come out and say what its decision is and make that decision available  publicly. There must be openness and transparency in the process. I note that this amendment is welcomed by Scottish Environment LINK and I acknowledge the constructive comments that Rob Gibson made when he was speaking to his amendment. I think that we can all agree on this subject and that the fact that we have scrutinised the amendment carefully at stage 3 will reassure people who had concerns about the situation. The amendment will ensure that the rules in the bill are straight and that we will have proper openness, accountability and transparency, which is what everyone wanted.  Amendment 7 agreed to.  [Amendment 1 not moved.]

I want only to make a brief point. We discussed the issue at great length at the Environment and Rural Development Committee, principally to air the discussion that has been put in front of the chamber today about when it is appropriate to carry out environmental assessment. Committee members wanted to reassure themselves that before something goes into a budget or when it is being considered as a project, there will be an SEA process. The majority of us thought that the applicability of the bill to plans, programmes and strategies adequately covered that point. The bill's measures did not slide through without scrutiny at stage 2 but were debated extensively.  The examples that Mark Ruskell gave, such as the rail freight grant, should be picked up through the development of the rail strategy for Scotland and the national transport strategy. We expect such things to be properly analysed under strategic environmental assessment. In addition, we expect the planning system to pick up individual projects and perform detailed environmental impact assessments on them. It is all about ensuring that the hierarchy works. For those reasons, the majority of us were persuaded that the amendment is not required.

To ask the Scottish Executive what monitoring it has carried out of the implementation of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 since its enactment one year ago. (S2O-7931)

Will the minister join me in welcoming the success that we have had in Edinburgh? As a result of joint work under the act between the City of Edinburgh Council, the police and local residents, we have been successful in achieving our first closure order, which means that a private household has been closed. It had been used for drug dealing and there had been behaviour that was abusive and threatening to local residents. The order sent out a clear message to residents in the city that antisocial behaviour will not be tolerated and that where there is evidence the law will back up their rights. I welcome strongly the fact that the minister is monitoring the act, because we have a lot more to do to ensure that everybody knows about the powers and how they can help communities.

I agree strongly with the points that Colin Fox makes about the need for an integrated improvement in public transport across the bridge and the need to pick up on the journeys round and about not only the city of Edinburgh but the Lothians as a whole. Will he join me in condemning the suggestion from David Davidson that a new bridge should be built at the expense of the tram routes in Edinburgh? That is an outrageous suggestion.

Will the member take an intervention?

It would be quite helpful to find out which members' bills would pass the complexity test and which would fail. After all, we are all trying to work out which bills will be very complex and which are quite straightforward. Although we do not want to  have massive bills, we also do not want to be forced to introduce one-liners. How do we strike that balance? What criteria will NEBU use to make that decision?

First, I congratulate the ministers on their decision to give us a debate on planning reform before we get into formal scrutiny of their proposals because  that gives us a chance to reflect on how well we think the proposed bill will fit the challenges of the 21 st century. We have waited a long time for a planning bill and it is worth getting it right. I welcome the ministers' engagement over the past few months. They have clarified their views on matters such as the national planning framework, on which Malcolm Chisholm has helpfully confirmed that there will be some form of parliamentary scrutiny. He had already made a commitment to ensure that the framework will be subject to a full strategic environmental assessment. I strongly welcome the fact that policy is being made in consultation. The framework will be crucial for Scotland because many of the issues that we face are strategic rather than small and parochial. It is vital that the two big city regions of Edinburgh and Glasgow have a coherent national planning framework. We need to revitalise the strategic decision-making process so that we can find the right areas for the significant new housing developments that we need and for the expansion of our business communities. I welcome, in particular, Malcolm Chisholm's response to John Home Robertson's intervention, in which he said that he thinks that local authorities have a role to play in identifying land for the development of affordable housing. That would be a huge step forward that would complement the many other initiatives that the Executive is taking. I look forward to finding out the details of that commitment. Part of the challenge is how we service and accommodate development. It is vital that we think strategically about water issues, public transport and the scale of developments. Karen Whitefield's comments about waste management were spot on. We must think about human and environmental capacity when we think about the expansion of services that we desperately need. In addition, we must factor in issues such as flooding and climate change and work out how the planning system can be part of the solution to those major challenges. The ministers' proposals give us the opportunity to do that. The fact that there is no statutory purpose for planning is an omission and I would like the ministers to return to that. Given the complex range of objectives that we have for the planning system, in my view it would make a great deal of sense to include sustainable development as the raison d'être of the planning system in the 21 st century. That would ensure that at the same time as getting social and environmental justice, we get economic prosperity, which is crucial. That is the trick that we must learn in all our long-term developments.  I welcome the proposed introduction of a requirement for consultation and a requirement that development plans be produced and updated every five years. That will lead to better local accountability and to more relevant local planning frameworks that reflect local needs and aspirations. Local authorities will need to have a better management process. It is key that they will be required not to produce perfect plans, but to produce plans that are fit for purpose and are still meaningful by the time that they have been adopted. I still have concerns about the fact that the Executive has not developed a consistent approach at every stage of the process. I warmly welcome the increased emphasis on early consultation and participation, but what will happen if a local authority decides to override a local plan after it has been consulted on and put in place? That is not unheard of. What will happen if the community is led to expect that a site will be protected or developed in a particular way but finds that the local authority ignores that expectation? It will be able to do nothing, unless some form of community planning rights is introduced. The minister who is responsible for planning will have no recourse to the decision makers, nor will locals or those who will be directly affected. The only people who will be able to appeal are the developers and the only people who will be able to seek a review from the minister are quangos such as Historic Scotland. I ask the Scottish ministers to review that decision and to consider the matter in more depth. There are solutions out there that would deliver the certainty that is essential for developers—of course, they do not want uncertainty and a longer process. However, I just do not buy the simplistic suggestion that a limited right of appeal would necessarily lead to a longer decision-making process or would be destructive to our economic development. I think that there is a way to fix the problem that would make sense for everyone. Such problems do not arise in other countries that have some form of community planning rights, such as Australia, New Zealand and Ireland. There is a way forward. I want the ministers to examine how we draft the criteria and to fit community planning rights into the process before decisions are signed off and people make legal commitments. It is possible to do that, and that would be entirely consistent with the excellent changes that the Scottish Executive has suggested for the rest of the planning process, which I strongly believe will make the system much more effective. I refer in particular to early consultation and public participation, to which ministers say they will give practical support, and to the initiatives that will make the system more accessible, including e-planning.  I congratulate the ministers on many of the changes that they propose. A huge amount of progress has been made. I welcome the changes at national level and the new development plan proposals, which will not mean that one size fits all. Some intelligent suggestions have been made, but more work needs to be done on the subject, and that is the main reason for welcoming today's debate, as it lets all back benchers put our issues on the agenda. I hope that, by the time we come to debate the general principles of the bill and consider the bill in more detail, more light will have been shed on the issues and some solutions will have been worked out. As Karen Whitefield said, although it is impossible to please everybody with every decision, let us at least make the process as transparent and as fair as possible.

I congratulate John Home Robertson on securing the debate and thus enabling us to discuss the subject in Parliament. I strongly support his emphasis on the planning system. The debate is important not just in East Lothian, but across all of rural and urban Scotland.  Some of the most heart-rending visits that I receive from constituents centre on the lack of affordable housing and on people's sense of powerlessness and of being trapped in inappropriate properties with inappropriate neighbours. However, neither I nor the local council can solve the problem with a simple fix. Members have already mentioned young couples who want to start families. I should point out that older people who need a ground-floor property can also wait years to get one and, when they do, it is unlikely to be located where they currently live. They are most likely to be forced out of decent areas where they have lived for the past 30 or 40 years. I have heard from nurses, national health service staff, shop workers and bus drivers. In fact most working people in Edinburgh cannot afford regular house prices—£90,000 for a one-bedroom flat in Gorgie tells us what a problem we have. Virtually no three-bedroom properties in the city are available for families. There is huge competition and very few appropriate houses are available. Many of the antisocial behaviour problems that people bring to our door are exacerbated by the lack of options for where councils put people to ensure that we get the right housing mix. The problem is huge and is worsening all the time. The cost of land is a key part of the problem. If the public sector puts land on the market, it has to accept the district valuer's estimate, which means that it will be used for private housing for sale. The response of the City of Edinburgh Council is to require that on all sites of a certain size—if there are to be 25 to 40 units—25 per cent must be sold as affordable housing. That means that there are tortuous site-by-site negotiations and that there is less scope for other community benefits to be drawn out of sites. It is slowing down the rate of development in the city and what is worse is that it means that often the affordable rented housing is built at the end of the project in the last phase of development. That is the case with the waterfront development. I agree with the City of Edinburgh Council that we need regulation and partnership with the private sector if we are to have the affordable housing that our constituents need. The land use planning system is a vital part of that process. We need sites allocated specifically for affordable housing and we must be able to apportion a proportion of bigger sites. We need mixed developments because they are desirable, but not every site will be big enough to accommodate such developments. We need to change the rules so that capital receipts do not force councils down the route of having to allocate sites that are inappropriate for private housing. I ask the minister to consider the matter. If we  bring planning into the equation, it will open up new opportunities. Currently, councils cannot allocate sites for affordable housing for rent, even though they know from research that there is a crying need for affordable rented housing. We, as representatives, and our councillor colleagues know that there is a huge problem. The advantage of the planning designation will be to reduce the over-inflation of land values, about which John Home Robertson talked, and enable affordable housing to be developed. At the moment, housing associations and councils have to dig into their much-needed funds and pay over the odds for land that should be affordable. I agree with John Home Robertson that we need to ensure that councils have a range of options. I do not think that merely considering the planning system will solve the problem, but it will help. I return to the point that when the cheapest one-bedroom flat in Gorgie is £90,000, who will be able to afford the £250,000 new build in the city? We need a mix of options—private rented, public sector rented and private for sale. Private houses for sale have to be affordable as well. If we do not change the planning system, we will not give councils enough tools to tackle the problem. I support John Home Robertson in his bid.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member is a substitute on our committee at the moment. One of the recommendations in the report was that we should take a social justice perspective on transport. We accept that it is not a case of one size fits all, but we are trying to focus on where we can make savings. We did not want to penalise people who live in rural parts of the country—we were keen to emphasise that—but we wanted a much harder look to be taken at emissions throughout the country.

First, it will not be possible to do justice to a wide-ranging report and an incredibly complex topic in seven minutes. However, I thank the committee clerks and the staff of the Scottish Parliament information centre for their invaluable help in assembling a powerful range of witnesses and experts, who gave our inquiry an excellent start. The Environment and Rural Development Committee also thanks the organisations and members of the public who contributed generously to our discussions. The committee started the inquiry with the result of our sustainable development research, which we commissioned some time ago. We questioned whether the Executive was taking an integrated approach to sustainable development across its range of functions. We also looked at the Parliament in that context. We considered climate change to be such an important and urgent topic that we wanted to test the Executive's commitment to sustainable development and assess how its climate change review process stood up across the range of Executive departments. In my seven minutes, I want to talk about the context of our report and our key conclusions, and about where we think we should go next. The context is that climate change is happening now. We have time to tackle its impacts before they become irreversible, but we must shift away from our current levels of carbon consumption and emissions, which cause climate change. As the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution put it: "If we go for business as usual ... we are destined for something unimaginable."—[ Official Report, Environment and Rural Affairs Committee , 26 January 2005; c 1545.] Earlier this year, the G8 summit focused on aid, trade and debt in developing countries, but climate change is hovering in the background for all those countries and it has the capacity to make life even worse for millions of their citizens, particularly those who live in low-lying coastal areas, who will be extremely affected by rising sea levels. Climate change has an impact on flooding, even in our own communities. There is also the potential for climate change to link disastrously with the food  chain as the climate heats up over the next few decades. We call on other countries to do more, but we must be prepared to do more ourselves and to raise our game. The committee believes that that is a huge task, which will require radical change. The United Kingdom signed up to the Kyoto agreement and Tony Blair has now signed up the UK Government to a 60 per cent carbon reduction by 2050. As the RCEP said, business as usual is not enough because it will not get us to our targets. After taking evidence, the committee was unanimous in the view that climate change is happening. The evidence is there for all to see across the world, including Scotland. The last time that we discussed climate change in the chamber, the Western Isles tragedy had just occurred and the dreadful impact of the storms there was at the forefront of our minds. Since then, other catastrophes have happened around the world. We believe unanimously that we must act now. We know that extreme storm conditions will be more frequent and we know of the regional weather differences in Scotland, to which we must adapt. The committee was unanimous in its view that we must think about how we act to slow down climate change and try to stop it. We were similarly unanimous about the need to prepare now for the impacts of global climate change, because they are happening now. The committee considered the Scottish Executive's climate change programme. We felt that it did not go far enough or fast enough and we were concerned that the minister's review later in the year must provide a route map—not only to set out the Scottish Executive's leadership, which we regard as crucial, but to provide information for Government agencies, for local government, for the national health service, for every business in Scotland, and for all of us as individuals. We all need to know how to respond to climate change. That is why, if I can advertise the prop that I have with me, the committee has produced a report of its key recommendations. I will not be able to go through them all in my seven minutes, but I hope that my colleagues will pick up on the key issues. The report will go to every member of the Parliament and copies will be available for people who want to provoke a debate in their communities. We examined the key sectors that are still adding to climate change emissions. We considered energy; agriculture, land use and forestry; transport; and business. Those are the key sectors that we have to turn away from business as usual. We are concerned that not  enough is being done on energy efficiency—and that is the easiest place to start. We want to see more of the Scottish energy efficiency strategy; we want the Executive to give it higher prominence and we want members throughout the chamber to take it on board. We welcome the renewables targets that the Executive has set and the huge expansion that is in train. However, we want the Executive to develop a range of other renewables technologies as well, beyond wind and wave. We want biomass and biofuels to be considered, and we want mass-scale micro-renewables to be considered. I am delighted that the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning has today announced an expansion of the funding for the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative. In my constituency, there is a scheme that would not have been possible before that initiative, and there had to be lobbying to get the Solar Twin technology included. There is huge untapped potential. I have spent the summer talking to people about how we can go beyond the pilots and get projects into the mainstream. One of the key recommendations of our report is that renewables are not to be seen as just something innovative. We want there to be projects throughout the country. I know that there is an appetite in our committee for more radical proposals and I look forward to future debates, particularly on such issues. We want the Scottish Executive to work with the UK Government on an energy strategy for Scotland that tackles climate change. That is a crucial conclusion in our report and we feel that it has to be acted on. When we considered agriculture, forestry and land use, the committee was surprised by how high up the list that sector was when it came to increasing emissions. None of us expected that; we all expected transport to be number 2. However, there has been a huge expansion of emissions and there are distinctive Scottish issues that we have to tackle. The committee was therefore disappointed that the new land management contracts have been given such a low profile and such low consideration. Climate change issues have not been reflected, but we think that they have to be integrated into all our policies on land use. The committee accepts that there has been a huge expansion in public transport. However, even today a newspaper headline shows that aviation emissions are the fastest growing source of emissions. Also, we are still not dealing with the increase in road transport. We need interim targets. We know that, up to 2021, road traffic vehicle miles are set to soar by 27 per cent, but what are we going to do about it? The committee does not think that a strategy is in place to reduce  those emissions. We were told by the then Minister for Transport that road user charging had, in effect, been ruled out for a decade. We do not think that that is good enough and we want more urgent action. We want the Scottish Executive to set targets across every sector so that we can begin to look at where we are going. We noted the First Minister's summer announcement that the Scottish Executive would set sectoral targets for each area of Scottish life. We want that announcement to be built on because, in future, it will concentrate minds. It will let us explore what Scotland's equitable contribution to UK commitments should be. That is meant to be at the heart of the climate change strategy. We need information and we need to generate both energy and the resources to tackle the climate change challenge. The committee chose its words very carefully. Membership of the Environment and Rural Development Committee covers the range of political parties in the chamber, and getting agreement among those members is no easy task. I hope that the fact that we achieved unanimity on such a lengthy and complex report sends a message to the Executive. The Executive has the support of the committee—and, I hope, the support of the Parliament—to be more radical when it comes to the review of the climate change programme. We hope that the Executive will consider our recommendations. We accept that an awful lot is happening in the Executive and we welcome a huge amount of it. However, we do not believe that it is all being done because of climate change. Some of the things that the Executive is doing are sensible and are good environmental policies, but we must ensure that there is action across every Scottish Executive department. We want the Executive to take the lead by moving away from business as usual and considering what Scottish companies can do to tackle climate change. That is crucial. If we can only target green energy and think about how to green our economy, we will be in a win-win situation. Our economy must use significantly less carbon and we must consider how our businesses can respond to that. On climate change, there is no single fix or simple solution. We know that the Executive has many difficult decisions to take. In preparing its report, the committee wanted to say to the Executive that it needs to be more radical and to act more urgently, because climate change is already upon us. Some members have already had experience of the devastating and tragic impact of stormier weather. All of us can expect more of that throughout Scotland. On the east, winters will be drier and, in the west, there will be a lot of rain, which unfortunately will not be spread  throughout the year. That is what our country faces. In other parts of the world, the challenge will be immense. Let us do our bit—let us agree as a Parliament that there is much more that we can do. It is crucial that we do not forget about climate change after today's debate, but come back to it. Our committee has already decided that it wants to explore more of such issues in future. When we scrutinise Executive legislation and conduct our inquiries, we will ensure that consideration of climate change is key. I hope that the Executive will do the same and that the minister will be able to respond positively and to flag up more radical action for the future. I move, That the Parliament notes the recommendations contained in the Environment and Rural Development Committee's 5th Report, 2005 (Session 2): Report on Inquiry into Climate Change (SP Paper 342).

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the First Minister what contribution the Scottish Executive will make to the G8 summit's discussions on climate change. (S2F-1772)

I welcome the First Minister's very strong commitments. Many of us fear that the G8 might not make the radical breakthrough that the world needs, so I particularly welcome the First Minister's new commitment today on setting targets to tackle climate change in Scotland. I ask the First Minister to take early action so that Scotland takes a lead on climate change, as he desires. I suggest that he might start with energy efficiency and renewables, particularly in urban Scotland, where we might deliver both social and environmental justice, as well as tackling climate change.

To ask the Scottish Executive what impact major events such as T in the park and the Edinburgh festival have on the economy. (S2O-7345)

In Edinburgh we are well aware of the economic impact of the festivals, which also bring social and cultural benefits to the city and its residents. Will the minister say what work has been done on the wider, regional impact of festivals such as the Edinburgh international festival? Will she also say what scope there is for spreading those benefits not just throughout the region but throughout the year, in relation to the promotion of tourism?

Bruce Crawford might be interested to know that cycle use has been going up in Edinburgh through  the council's policies. Had we been able to employ congestion charging, we might have been able to tackle the issue with even more vigour, as they have done in London.

I welcome the minister's commitments on the national planning framework being subject to consultation and strategic environmental  assessment, and on the statutory requirement to have up-to-date local plans in order to increase accountability and effectiveness. Will he clarify how he intends to take into consideration community planning rights at the application stage? Will he commit in principle to parliamentary debate on the whole package of reforms? Many of us have not been able to absorb the entirety of the proposals. Will he also clarify who will have the right to notify the Scottish Executive of controversial major planning applications? His remarks today indicate that he is reserving that right to local authorities and that he is not widening it out to communities that are unhappy at certain decisions. If he does not do that, we will have to review the situation over the summer.

Does not the member agree that when the committee got the answer to Richard Lochhead's written question, it was extensive and absolutely clear about where the different environmental impact assessments would be carried out, and that it helped all of us in the chamber regardless of our view on the border?

Labour members warmly welcome the bill and the objective of having the public sector take proper account of the full environmental impact of all new strategies, programmes or plans when it is preparing them. We do so because at the moment we do not have an explicit, rigorous approach. It is not good enough to assert that policies are good for the environment, without evidence or proper consideration. It is not good enough to assume that policies are good for the environment. We need to be able to demonstrate the impact that they will have, to know how to deal with any negative impact and how to maximise positive benefits, and to think through the trade-offs that can be made. We do not live in a world where we can happily box up different issues. The big issues that we consider will impact on one another. We must see strategic environmental assessment in the context of our overall objectives on sustainable development. If we are to deliver economic prosperity as our top priority, at the same time as delivering social justice and ensuring that our environment is protected, we must ensure that we join up thinking across government. That means that we must be much more coherent and systematic. The bill was welcomed by the vast majority of people who gave evidence to the Environment and Rural Development Committee. The objections of those who were less keen on or not convinced by the bill were based partly on the belief that strategic environmental assessment is about giving primacy to the environment, which is not the case. It is about ensuring that we consider the environment and that it is at the top table with other issues and is part of the decision-making process. At times, it may be inconvenient if a policy is identified as having a detrimental impact on the environment, but surely it is far better for us to know that up front and to begin to deal with the  problems than to brush them under the carpet and leave them until later, when repairing the damage will be much more difficult. Strategic environmental assessment is also about transparency. People should be confident that decisions that are taken have been thought through and are rigorous. Hopefully, the bill will increase accountability. That is why Labour members really welcome it. If local authorities are to be allowed to screen out particular issues, plans, policies or strategies that they do not believe will have a major impact on the environment, it is entirely appropriate that those decisions should be registered up front. I welcome the comments that the minister made to the committee on that issue. The information should be publicly accessible, so that we can have the accountability and transparency that the bill potentially provides. We do not want to create a loophole that would allow responsible authorities to avoid SEA when it should be carried out. However, we must also ensure that the impact of SEA is not disproportionate. We should not insist that absolutely every project is considered, regardless of its impact. If the bill is to be a success, the biggest issue will be to ensure that the people involved in implementing it take real ownership of the process and embrace it, rather than see it as a threat. For that reason, I was disappointed with some of Alex Fergusson's comments.

I am sorry—I meant Alex Johnstone. I will have to grovel for that later. Both members are sitting at the top table. Phil Gallie's comments suggested to me that he has not read the bill. All public authorities, rather than just local authorities, will be responsible for environmental assessment. That includes the Executive and quangos. The issue must be central to all public policy. I disagree strongly with the comments that Alex Johnstone made about gold plating. The term is usually employed as a way of objecting to high environmental standards, but let us be clear about the aim of the bill: it is about taking better-quality decisions. The CBI sees it as detracting from attempts to make the economy our number 1 priority, but that is to consider the economy in isolation from its wider impact and without thinking about the global challenges that we face. How will we deliver economic prosperity in this country if we ignore the impact of climate change? We must think through decisions in the round. In particular, we must think through the opportunities that may arise. Assessing environmental impact will not be all about identifying problems. There will be some big opportunities for us to grasp.  Alex Johnstone's comments on the brilliant environment that we have in this country and the few environmental problems that we face betrayed a very complacent attitude. There was much in his speech with which Labour members would take issue. I will concentrate on how we make the legislation work. The SEA gateway is crucial. It is important because it will provide guidance on best practice, it will enable capacity building and it will be a source of monitoring to ensure that the bill is implemented effectively. The gateway will change over time, but committee members were convinced that we will need it for the long term. It must be flexible, but it will not enable the Scottish Executive to adopt a hands-off approach. The Executive will still need to be involved and it will still have to take an overview. One of the most striking aspects of the evidence to the committee was the nervousness—a lack of confidence—about the ability of local authorities to cope with the bill. That was the message that we received from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, which was worried about timescales and resources. That contrasted with the evidence from academics and practitioners who, having considered the evidence and examined best practice from other countries, were confident that if there is effective management and ownership of the legislation, it could be highly successful. Committee members believe that the lessons learned after the introduction last year of the Environmental Assessment of Plans and Programmes (Scotland) Regulations 2004 give us a good platform for the future and enable us to move forward. I hope that the Scottish Executive will take the lead in providing training to ensure that people take ownership of the issue. The minister's speech acknowledged the fact that training is required and some has already been carried out. Having heard the tone of the evidence that was given to the committee, I was struck by how far away the practitioners are from the aspirations of the bill. Much work requires to be done. A combination of guidance and an initial top-down approach to let practitioners know what is in the bill and what it means for them is required. Engagement in a discussion about how resources can be directed effectively will go a long way towards making the bill effective. The Scottish Executive has a particular duty to lead by example and help people through the culture change. I make a plea to the minister to continue to use scrutiny of the bill at stages 2 and 3 to focus on what the bill means in practice. My colleague, Maureen Macmillan, will pick up on points of confusion that have been raised with the committee about who does what at what level,  particularly in relation to public sector projects, as more clarity is required. One issue is the interface between strategic environmental assessment and environmental impact assessment. If we get that right, we will take decisions at the right level and avoid the kind of bureaucracy that Alex Johnstone is worried about. There are issues about what the bill describes as "minimal" and "significant" environmental impacts. It would be helpful to have examples put in front of people to enable them to concentrate on what the real issues will be. Many concerns exist. I hope that we can use parliamentary scrutiny positively and that the Executive will provide leadership to enable the bill to live up to its promise, which is to secure a better environmental outcome and a better quality of life for us all and to ensure that better decisions are made. I will finish on a slightly controversial note. I suspect that we all agree that the bill should be passed, although we might debate some of the detail. However, I wonder how equipped the Parliament will be to monitor the implementation of the bill. I hope that members will not see it as being only the Environment and Rural Development Committee's job to ensure that the bill is being implemented. That view is shared by my colleagues. The whole of the Parliament, as well as the whole of the Executive, must take ownership of implementation of the bill. I note that there are not as many members in the chamber as there would be for debates on other issues. I am not saying that the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development will be able to solve the problem in his summing-up. There are questions not only for the Executive and responsible authorities but for politicians in the chamber about the extent to which we think the bill will make a big impact. That is a challenge across the political parties. I notice that there are many empty rows of seats in the chamber, although not on Labour's part as there are one or two Labour members here. There is an issue about the importance that members place on the implementation of the legislation. I hope that we get political action from all parties in the chamber and that, by the time that we get to stage 3, the Conservatives, in particular, will be a little bit more enthusiastic about the bill and the opportunities that it may bring.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take following the publication of the "Report on the Inquiry into Climate Change" by the Environment and Rural Development Committee. (S2O-7042)

I welcome that unusually positive response, which will be logged for the future. What plans does the minister have to promote action on climate change by the business community and to make that community see carbon reduction as an opportunity rather than a threat? Does he have thoughts about how Scotland might gear itself up to take advantage of any deals that may be struck on climate change at the G8 summit? I am thinking in particular of opportunities for Scottish businesses, such as those in the renewables industry.

I welcome this Executive debate because it gives us the chance as campaigners and legislators to focus on what we in Scotland can do to raise the issues of global poverty, action in Africa and tackling climate change. It is worth recording the fact that campaigners have already had a huge influence on the direction that our Government is taking. We need to ensure that we keep up the pressure. It is clear that our Government is leading the way in the G8 and at European level on issues such as debt relief. We are trying to wipe out debts that cripple economies across Africa and which prevent the development of necessary health and education services that would save lives. The Government is also seeking a massive increase in aid—without the kind of strings being attached that have not helped the development of local services—and fairer trade rules. Labour members, in particular, support the reform of the common agricultural policy, in order to end the massive subsidies to the west that have held back African economies for decades. I want to reflect not just on what we can do in the run-up to the G8 summit, but on what will happen afterwards. I am proud of the huge range of events that will take place in Edinburgh to involve people and to raise awareness: the conferences, the theatre productions, the debates, the schools events and the huge make poverty history demonstration that I hope we will see. I hope that they show huge public support for radical action by world leaders and that we can feed in the debates that we have had in this Parliament to those discussions. I know that Irene Oldfather wants to talk about work in Malawi. We can give long-term support, finance and practical assistance to a country such as Malawi, which is one of the poorest in Africa. It is important that our investment in Africa is steady and that it will be there for the long term; it is crucial that it is not just emergency aid in response to adverts on television. The conference that was held in the chamber on Monday made two points clear to me. First, the money that goes to Africa must be spent to make  a difference locally. It must be accountable locally and it must be about improving local infrastructure and services. The second point that came across strongly was the need to address public health and women's rights. Thousands of children die in Africa every day because of poverty and lack of health care, and 5,000 women die in Africa every week during childbirth. It is estimated that 80,000 women's lives could be saved if effective family planning systems were in place. Save the Children points out in its briefing to MSPs that mortality rates among children and mothers are still increasing. The problem is not going away: it is getting worse. We must ask hard questions about women's rights and education as part of the debate about action on proper family planning and action on the HIV and AIDS crisis and we must tackle those problems together. I hope that the conference in Edinburgh on 23 June will enable African women's voices to be heard as part of the G8 debate. Parliament can make a difference on two other issues. First, it is necessary that we put practical pressure on global companies and corporations through the establishment of fair trade. We can buy goods as individuals or collectively and thereby exert pressure on companies and make a difference. For example, institutions such as the University of Edinburgh have decided to source coffee from fair trade connections. The City of Edinburgh Council also promotes Fairtrade products in businesses and schools in Edinburgh. I remember that in the early days of our Parliament I wrote to David Steel to ask why we did not even take the token step of using Fairtrade coffee. Such initiatives make a difference, but this is not only about symbols: it is about provision of tangible support for local food producers and local co-operatives to ensure that they are not at risk of huge fluctuations in commodity prices on the international markets. It is necessary to ensure that when they make money from the goods that they produce and send to us, they get some of the profits so that they can invest in water systems, in education and in health facilities for their communities. We can hear about such developments and pass the message on. I hope that in future debates we return to Jack McConnell's proposal that Scotland should become a fair trade country. That is something in which we can all be practically involved. The other issue that I will talk about, because it has received less media coverage although it is one for which we have real responsibility, is climate change. Scotland and the UK are again leading the way at world level, but the Environment and Rural Development Committee's report highlighted the challenges. We were very  critical of the Government because we think that opportunities are not being taken and it is necessary to go further. The fact that our Governments are setting the agenda shows how far we have to go in persuading other countries around the world to sign up to a fairer and more ethical approach. Climate change will have a brutal impact on developing countries in Africa. It will be harder to grow crops there and it will be harder to sustain human existence across major tracts of Africa. The developed countries are responsible: our carbon emissions are causing the problem. Do members know that each person in Scotland generates 12 tonnes of carbon use every year? The equivalent figure for India is one tonne and for Kenya it is 0.2 tonnes, so there is no fairness and no global equity in that. That is why we must not let the US walk away from the issue when the G8 comes to Scotland. The issue must also be on our agenda. We must export renewable technologies to developing countries and we must ensure that we maximise renewables and energy efficiency in Scotland. A radical idea, which I will leave with members, came up at the conference on Monday. The UK proposes that we put a levy on air fares throughout the EU to reflect the true environmental damage of such travel. The levy would not apply to our lifeline services in Scotland, but it would cover commercial air flights, which are increasing significantly. It was suggested not only that we should levy that money but that we should divert it to Africa and send it as part of our trade contribution. We all know that we will not stop using aeroplanes, so that is a practical way in which the UK could take a lead that would make an impact in Africa. We need to do all that we can to keep up the pressure over the next few weeks, but we also need to think about what happens afterwards. The G8 summit will be a huge issue for us during the next month, but the real test will be what happens afterwards. The rich developed nations have a responsibility to increase aid, to wipe out debt and to develop fairer trade. We must also set tough targets on climate change and emissions reductions and we must implement measures that will enable us to meet those targets. Let us get that message across to the world leaders when they meet in Scotland next month.

What discussions is the Scottish Executive having with the City of Edinburgh Council, Lothian and Borders police and event organisers in connection with the G8 summit to ensure the safety and security of local residents and businesses and visitors to Edinburgh? I thank the First Minister for his previous commitment of financial support, but does he agree that we need an urgent review of the city's capacity to accommodate people who have a legitimate desire to protest, given the city's prominence as one of the world's capital cities?

I want to make a helpful intervention. The minister is right: the powers have shaped the framework for voluntary partnerships. However, I wonder whether he will commit to setting as a priority targets for increasing bus use with the new transport agency and to offering assistance to local authorities on how to use bus contracts and partnerships. From reading the report and talking to authorities, I sense that authorities find those things too complex. They are necessarily complex, but perhaps an approach by the national transport agency with the minister's lead and local authorities would help to crack some delivery mechanism issues. The committee has not suggested an alternative, so the issue is  how to make what is there work. Would the minister be prepared to take on that work?

Is the member aware that Lothian Buses is a public company that pays dividends to the council? It operates in a marketplace with other bus companies, but it is a public sector company. The member seems to think that it operates as a private company, but it does not.

I want to pick up on that point. I have travelled around the country and it strikes me that much of the soft passenger information is much better and that, as a result of the best practice that the Scottish Executive identified on timetabling information and information at bus stops and of new stock regularly coming through, the service is much more attractive than it was a few years ago. To what extent should best practice be encouraged throughout the country? We now have Traveline Scotland and people can telephone or go on to the internet to find out when buses run. Reliability, information at stops and ideas such as texting information to people's mobile phones are important.

I congratulate Shiona Baird on securing this members' business debate. I realise that the debate is probably not the most hotly contested, but it is certainly well attended, which reflects the fact that we are all interested in farmers markets. I should say that I have nothing to declare. I have never produced anything for such markets and I suspect that I never will; I am a simple consumer of their goods. However, I appreciate the opportunity to buy the goods that are sold at farmers markets. Indeed, in my constituency, the market in the Grassmarket in Edinburgh city centre has become a very popular institution that regularly takes place and attracts people. Not only is the market popular with many city residents, but visitors to Edinburgh find it to be a very good advert for Scottish produce. The Edinburgh city centre partnership supports the market because it represents something different that adds to the city centre's vitality. Farmers markets raise a number of issues, some of which are covered in Shiona Baird's motion. For example, one unique feature is that farmers are able to market directly to consumers. Another important aspect of the relationship with  consumers is the stewardship of land. We expect to be told where the meat has come from and exactly how long ago the vegetables were grown. We also expect somebody to be able to tell us how long it will be before they are past their best—not a sell-by date, but when it is best to use them. Awareness about healthy eating could come from farmers markets. The motion mentions seasonal produce, which is an idea that many consumers have lost touch with. When we buy something that is cling-wrapped and has a sell-by date on it, the point in the year when it has been produced and the place where it has been produced are not so important. We would do well to build a better relationship with food producers to promote healthy eating. I know from friends who have allotments that their perspective on vegetables is totally different from mine, because they know what is available when. Farmers markets could be part of a wider movement to encourage people to think about what they are eating. The Scottish Parliament should definitely encourage that. How does the minister see farmers markets as part of the Executive's strategy for agriculture? We have debated the issue of organic produce many times. A high proportion of the produce at farmers markets is organic, and I would like to see how the Executive is taking on that issue, because it is some time since the strategy for agriculture was published. Common agricultural policy reform poses a lot of challenges. Again, it lets us think about the quality of produce and the environmental implications of produce being brought to us. Marketing is critical; quite a few members have mentioned that. A small local co-op may not have access to the expertise or marketing that big farms can take for granted. I am keen to hear what the Executive is doing to promote better marketing and better support for farmers as part of a whole approach to supporting rural communities. The CAP reform issues that the Environment and Rural Development Committee discussed were about the use of food co-ops, access to farmers markets and diversification. We considered how rural development instruments could be used in a more proactive way. Members have mentioned abattoirs and finishing produce locally; we could tap into that. The committee looked particularly enviously at some of the farmers co-operatives in Germany, where farmers have managed not only to produce the food in reasonable quantities for a reasonable price but to market it effectively. There is a lot that we can learn. We should not think of farmers markets as being only for agricultural produce. One of the things that makes the markets interesting to consumers is the  range of rural projects that turn up, such as crafts and cosmetics made in Scotland. Such things add interest and value to the markets. The debate is about how we support smaller producers, and farmers markets are a tangible and effective way of bringing the issue to our attention. Colleagues have reflected on the issue of economic scale, and I believe that that is an area in which the Executive can step in. The support of the city centre partnership in Edinburgh has helped the farmers market through some of the hoops and difficulties that Donald Gorrie described. We need a proactive and supportive approach, and the Executive could send a positive message through a refreshed strategy for Scottish agriculture. I would like very much to see support for smaller producers, so that they can access not only farmers markets but our supermarkets and shops.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it intends to finance continued investment in public services. (S2O-6589)

Will the minister confirm that proposals for a £35 billion reduction in spending on United Kingdom services would have a massive consequential impact on the Scottish Executive's public service investment programme, which he ably outlined? In Edinburgh, for example, there is unprecedented rebuilding and refurbishment of schools and the largest-ever expansion in the number of child care places, as well as big reductions in hospital waiting times, particularly for heart, stroke and cancer patients. Will the minister recommend to us how we can  guarantee continued investment in those vital services?

It is difficult to work out what to say in three minutes, so I will cut to the chase. Des McNulty's motion gives us a superb opportunity not only to acknowledge the points that he passionately and articulately put on the agenda tonight but to think about what we can do next. That is the key challenge. When I met South Africa's Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry yesterday, it put into context the debates that we have about Scottish Water and the problems that we face in Scotland. Her challenge is to bring sanitation and drinking water to 15 million people. I was quite proud that she was visiting Scotland to look at our technology and to discuss what support we can provide. Our problems pale into insignificance beside those that South Africa faces. That kind of thing brings home to us what we can do, both as individuals and as a Government or Parliament. In that context, I want to highlight two issues: fair trade and the importance of education. I am extremely proud of what we are doing to develop fair trade. Edinburgh has become a fair trade city; colleagues from around the chamber will be able to mention other fair trade villages, towns and cities in Scotland. The fact that we are to become a fair trade country is important for the long term. It is not just about individual consumer choices. It is about changing people's lives by giving them fairer trade opportunities, so that we know that we have paid a fair price for our goods, that the workers will not be exploited and will not work in environmental degradation, and that there will be investment in local schools and hospitals. The debate must be about what happens in July, but it must also be about the long-term links that we can develop. I am very impressed by what has been done in our schools. In the run-up to the G8 summit, the City of Edinburgh Council has a huge programme of cultural, political and educational events to get people involved, so that we can build long-term links and build on the superb work that is being done, to which other members have referred. The summit should be not something remote that happens in Gleneagles and its impact should not be limited to a demonstration. I went to Stenhouse Primary School for the First Minister's Malawi launch, at which he awarded an Orkney school the opportunity to go to Malawi. Stenhouse Primary School has had a five-year link with Malawi, which is a practical link. Schools across the country need to have such links, so that our young people can understand what they can do to change the world. Des McNulty was right to say that our generation can make a difference, but there must be long-term movement.  The last point that I want to make is about climate change. Richard Lochhead was right to raise the issue. Climate change is not just about flooding. Evidence that has been given to the Environment and Rural Development Committee's inquiry into climate change indicates that it will transform harvests around the world. The problems that countries have at the moment will be dwarfed by the changes that will come in the future. It is difficult to get one's head round those changes, because they are so significant. There are changes that need to be made at national Government level, but there are also issues that we need to raise at the G8 summit. If we are to make poverty history, we must address some tough questions: climate change, cutting our carbon emissions and changing the way in which we do things. We have started to think about those, but we are only at the starting point. There is a huge agenda that I hope will be part of our long-term programme. The trade agenda and the trade justice movement are vital, but we must also examine our economies and change the business-as-usual rules, which will not allow the world to operate. Making poverty history must be linked to addressing climate change.

I welcome the minister's commitment to local investment. I invite him to ensure that local authorities consider the use of the public-private partnership process to streamline existing schools and build new schools that are of high standards, particularly for pupils who have different physical needs. I ask him to ensure that we have modern accessible schools and that, when local authorities review their school estates, they are committed to investigating the opportunities that exist to improve buildings, as well as to examining crucial staff issues.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken under the fresh talent initiative to maximise the number of international students remaining in Scotland after graduation. (S2O-06384)

I welcome the minister's commitment and ask him to ensure that the new scheme is marketed properly through universities and local enterprise companies, so that students and employers know what opportunities the fresh talent initiative will bring. I ask the minister to redouble his efforts with the United Kingdom Government in respect of visa costs. The scheme was free to students two years ago but now costs £500. We must tackle that because we have to get international students here in the first place.

I wish to make the First Minister aware of the genuine concerns of local businesses, community representatives and shopkeepers in the area around the Parliament and throughout the city centre about the potential disruption to their lives and the potential damage to property that they read about in the newspapers on a regular basis. We have already had lessons in disruption to people's lives in this area, including, for example, to pensioners who were not able to access local services, and to bus services when Canongate is closed. Will the First Minister meet me to discuss what we can do to reassure local people that their needs and concerns will be taken into account in the important planning that he has talked about being done by all the authorities? We need to ensure not only that the agencies talk to each other, but that local people also know what is happening.

I welcome that positive response from the minister and the good examples that she gave of practical schemes throughout Scotland. Given the positive benefits of such schemes, does she agree that we should ask Communities Scotland to consider the provision of appropriate renewable energy schemes throughout Scotland—whether using  solar heating panels or thermal energy—so that every housing association property that is built benefits from the new technology? That would create lower heating bills and affordable warmth and, crucially, it would contribute to tackling the climate change challenge.

I welcome the minister's range of initiatives to tackle this problem. I want to ask about proof of age. I welcome the commitment to a no-proof, no-sale policy, but does the minister accept that we should consider a national proof-of-age scheme? I am told by those in the know that, although we have many small local schemes, some people are able to forge the cards. A national, validated scheme might help to deliver the minister's policy objectives.

I was going to open by saying how constructive all the previous speeches had been, but Mr McLetchie has sorely tried that comment. If I had half an hour to spend, I would enjoy dissecting his speech. Jackie Baillie commented on the approach and the procedures by which we have to abide. I do not think that any of us thinks that the current process is the best way in which to consider such proposals, but we are stuck with it. Having said that, I believe that the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill Committee has done an outstanding job in addressing the detailed, complex and lengthy submissions that it received. In particular, I thank the committee for its efforts to engage with and listen to people who were unhappy or who wanted to object formally to the proposal in principle or in detail. Everybody in the chamber accepts that Edinburgh has a major congestion problem and that we have real challenges in expanding our  public transport networks. No easy solutions sit in anybody's bottom drawer. The proposals for tramlines 1 and 2 must be considered in the context of every other European city that has light rail, a suburban railway network or an underground system, which Edinburgh singularly lacks. I suspect that if one issue has been raised with every member who represents the Lothians in the past five years, it is our inability to transform Edinburgh's transport opportunities. Today, we have a chance to help to get part of that system right. The consensus is that we need alternatives for people who travel into and out of the city in cars, but the choices must be of high quality. The distinctive feature of trams is their capacity to move many people efficiently and with few environmental problems of emissions or noise. Crucially, trams can contribute to modal shift, so they must be part of the system in Edinburgh. The proposal must be part of wider public transport investment. Investment by Edinburgh, with the Executive, in rail and buses has generated big improvements in passenger use when high-quality services are put in place. I would not argue that constructing tramline 1 or 2 will be like waving a magic wand to tackle congestion or economic problems in Edinburgh, but the lines are part of a wider longer-term strategy and it is important that they are part of the mix. The proposed development for Granton and the waterfront is, in effect, a proposal for a new town in the north of the city. Without a light rapid transit system, the city will experience a huge economic downside. I will focus on three key issues that the committee raised, on which we will need much more debate at the consideration stage. The integration of buses, cycling and concessionary fares needs to be addressed. I would like a guarantee on the design manual issue; Edinburgh is one of Europe's most high-quality and historic cities, so we must have a tram that is not only modern, but appropriate to Edinburgh's design quality. Route issues must also be considered in depth. Matters that relate to the Roseburn corridor and the wildlife impact must be examined in depth. Access to the Western general hospital must also be considered. Neither matter has an easy solution, but I ask the committee to explore in depth those matters, on which I have received more letters than anything else that relates to the trams. The practicalities must be examined in detail—that is what the consideration stage is for. We should proceed with the project to get things moving and the committee should consider all the issues in depth at the consideration stage. In  detailed discussions, some objections will be negotiated away, but others will remain until the last day of consideration of the bill. Anything that the committee can do at the consideration stage to examine objections and see what can be taken on board will be welcome. A balancing act will need to be performed between financial resources and the routes but, on the basis of the preliminary stage report, I am confident that the committee will achieve that. By considering the objections, I hope that we will develop a scheme with which people in Edinburgh will be happy. I am asking not for every citizen of the city to be happy, but for most of us to be happy.

In the business case, maximising the routes is important for the tram project's long-term financial viability. I hope that members will support the motion and allow the detail to be examined at the consideration stage.

I congratulate Alasdair Morrison on the motion, which is well drafted and highlights the way forward. His eloquent speech gave us a sense of  how awful it must have been to be part of one of the affected communities, to live in the aftermath of the awful storms and to deal with the immediate human cost and the longer-term realisation that the clear-up would be a massive task. Alasdair Morrison is right to bring the issue to us so that we can think about how to respond. Clearly, the response from communities, agencies and individuals was incredible. The Executive went up there early to talk to people about their experiences, which was vital and was also the right thing to do in the short term. Alasdair Morrison was right to spend most of his speech talking about such issues, but for the rest of us, there are other difficult issues. One or two members mentioned climate change, which we debated in the days after the storms in the Western Isles that made many of us pause for thought. The Environment and Rural Development Committee has been considering climate change for more than a month. All the scientific evidence shows that climate change is happening now; it is not something that might happen in the long run. Two matters that we have been considering are how to stop climate change and how to adapt to it. Most of our high-level discussions have been about how to stop climate change—we have discussed reducing traffic congestion, more efficient energy use and cutting carbon use in society, but we must also focus urgently on adaptation. The communities that have experienced the problems of stormier weather need to take immediate and difficult decisions about repairs—we must have a dialogue with them about that. Uncertain and severe stormy weather will become a problem for more and more communities. One point that was raised in committee last week was that a similar storm in other parts of Scotland would be even more horrific, given the number of people who would be affected. We must learn difficult human lessons. We are not equipped to cope, which poses difficult issues about the location of buildings such as health facilities, schools and houses. Alasdair Morrison's communities are thinking about whether to rebuild in the same places the buildings that were lost or to rebuild them elsewhere. Another issue is that of the construction methods that should be used to replace buildings. Earlier, Alasdair Morrison and I were talking quietly about the fact that older houses that were built using stone and traditional methods and wooden houses that were screwed together survived, but that houses that were made from breeze blocks or precast concrete did not—some roofs were blown completely off. When we rebuild the houses and support the communities, we must work with the building and insurance industries to  ensure that we do not just rebuild what existed previously; we need more resilient buildings and higher standards. Information on such matters is available and I hope that the Executive will stimulate urgent discussion of the subject. The problem is terribly difficult. Much of the money that we will need to repair the houses, roads and causeways that have been talked about will have been committed already to something else. In deciding how to make the urgently needed repairs to infrastructure facilities, we must think carefully about the quality of the replacements and the priority that should be attached to them. Those are difficult decisions, because some of them will mean that other measures are not taken or will not happen as quickly as was intended. We need discussions among local authorities, the Executive and the construction industry. The issue is not only about spending more money, but about ensuring that we spend money properly for the long term so that the communities that have been devastated have confidence in their new roads, schools, hospitals and houses. That is an important point, not just in relation to the Western Isles, where the recent storms took a terrible human toll, but in relation to areas throughout Scotland, including the Highlands and Islands, Argyll and Bute and the central belt, because we do not know where storms will happen in the future. I hope that the Executive will take those points on board.

I am glad that we have reached the point that we are at. Like Susan Deacon, I have followed the debate from the sidelines. I am not a member of the Edinburgh Tram (Line Two) Bill Committee because, as a local MSP, I cannot join it. I have two views about that and they are totally contradictory, as would be expected. In some ways, I am relieved not to have had to undertake the process. I do not envy the committee's job, but it is vital. Susan Deacon is right to say that we need the right system. Perhaps the present system is not the right one. However, we still need proper accountability and scrutiny of the process, so I welcome the hard work of the committee and of all those from the promoter's side, the local community and businesses who have appeared before the committee and taken part in a process that is  confusing because it is unlike the traditional land-use planning approach that most communities and businesses are used to. The process has been difficult. The big picture is that we are in a serious catch-up situation. Our agonising choice over trams or the Edinburgh airport rail link reflects the fact that we are far behind all our major European competitors, which did such work years ago. Most of the other major European capitals, their airports and their growing financial sectors already have such infrastructure in place. Most of them are modernising their existing equipment; they are not debating where lines should go. We are playing catch-up, but we must still get the projects right. I represent many constituents who have many detailed questions, comments and objections that it is right for Bill Aitken and his committee to deal with at the consideration stage. The process is not transparent for my constituents because we have not followed the process before. Tramline 2 is important because it links some of Edinburgh's key growth sectors. Edinburgh is a compact city, but it is also a growing and successful city. We must be able to link people up without having the huge congestion that comes with more cars coming into the city—I mean not just into the centre but around the suburbs. The tram proposal will not fix that problem, but with better buses, the south suburban railway and park-and-ride facilities around the whole city, it will begin to help us to fix it. Therefore, the proposal is important. It is crucial that the tram should link in with other forms of transport—colleagues in the chamber have made spot-on comments about that. The National Audit Office report recommended that that point should be properly considered. The timetabling, ticketing and concessionary fares schemes of trams should link in with those of bus services. We must ensure co-ordination of routes and I think that there will be scope for reconsidering Edinburgh's traditional bus network. There is an opportunity to rethink whether every bus should be forced to go along Princes Street. Park-and-ride routes on the outskirts of the city and access for car drivers will be fundamental to the project's success. We have seen the demand across central Scotland and Fife for car drivers to go part of their routes by car and other parts by high-quality, affordable and comfortable public transport. Furthermore, we should not forget pedestrians and cyclists, for whom part of the route will be critical. The process is difficult. To some extent, my constituents have found the fact that we are having an hour-long debate on the bill's principles to be difficult to deal with, as the issue is so big. It  can be seen from the background reports that a huge amount of work has been done. However, we are in a position to accept the committee's work and to look forward to stage 2, which will be critical. I share Susan Deacon's concerns about whether we are doing things in the best way in respect of setting a framework for compulsory purchase orders, detailed planning issues and the critical issue of getting the design right. Edinburgh is a world heritage city and trams will offer huge social and economic benefits. We must ensure that they also offer design and environmental benefits. Labour members fully support the principle of improved public transport and the bill is an important part of that process for Edinburgh. It is also important for Scotland, given that Edinburgh is Scotland's economic driver. I hope that members will support the process and look to stage 2.

I welcome the minister's positive replies. Is he aware of the concerns of those who promote biomass that our environmental regulations may be slightly out of step with our aspirations for biomass energy? Will he talk to his colleague Ross Finnie, the Minister for Environment and Rural Development, about ways in which the Executive can promote the biomass industry? We need both to act in an environmentally responsible way and to ensure that our environmental regulations deal with the current generation of biomass developments and not previous, old-style developments. There is a real fear that, without a bit of joined-up thinking, we may not be able to take full advantage of the great opportunity that biomass energy offers. I hope that the minister can give me a positive response.

Will the minister clarify the process of co-ordinating new investment through the land-use planning system? How will the line be drawn between  strategic and local investment? Does he believe that Scottish Water is funded sufficiently to engage in the process and to carry out the additional background research to ensure that we get the right investment throughout the country?

I am pleased to support the bill, particularly as I am following Alex Johnstone. He said that the bill is political. It is indeed political, and we are very proud of that—we think that the bill does the right thing. Labour members are clear that we need a stable framework for investment for the water industry in Scotland, both to tackle the backlog and to set out a new framework for the future.  We need to maintain safety, to ensure that human health is a core principle for Scottish Water and to be confident that public health standards are met, regardless of where people live. We are also clear that it must be possible to retain social justice principles in the system. There are issues around affordability, which we debated at length in committee. That is why people need the framework and the protection offered by the bill. I am delighted that we have reached this stage, and I am not at all surprised that scrutiny of the bill has been relatively straightforward. I am sure that this will be a brief debate, as only the Tories stand out against the consensus. It is right that we pass the bill today. The Environment and Rural Development Committee had much discussion about the bill at stage 2 and we welcomed the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development's contribution and his ability to engage with the issues that we raised with him. On every occasion, we got the right answer—we cannot always say that, judging from some of the difficult debates that we have held in the chamber in the past. The provision of water services is vital to us all, and the regulation of that needed to be modernised. The minister focused on how complaints are properly dealt with, which is vital to the bill, and I hope that the clarity that the bill will bring in that regard will help domestic and private Scottish Water customers. It is important that we now have a clear framework. As consumers, we expect that, if we have a problem with the facilities that are provided to us, we will know to whom to complain, that our complaints will be dealt with effectively and properly and, crucially, that they will monitored. The new title of waterwatch Scotland, which the minister established today, is welcome. It is straightforward and easy to understand. I hope that, once the bill is passed, there will be publicity that people can relate to and follow. It is important that people complain first to Scottish Water, but the new framework will give them a backstop of somebody else to take on board their concerns. Scottish Water already monitors its own complaints process, but the third-party approach is important in raising standards. We spent a great deal of time debating that in depth in the committee and I am glad to say that, in effect, we all supported the minister's proposals. The other big thing that the bill does, which was subject to amendment at stage 2, is address sewage odour. We know that that is not an easy problem to fix. My colleague Susan Deacon will speak on that at length, but she is not the only member who has had problems reported to her. We received a series of petitions from areas throughout Scotland where sewage odour is a  problem. That is partly to do with the historical location of our water and sewerage facilities and the expansion of our villages, towns and cities. The problem needs to be addressed now and the committee welcomed the statutory provision to do so. The other important aspect of the bill is that it gives us a stable platform for future investment. I hope that the minister's statement later this afternoon will highlight future opportunities, but we need to ensure that the industry is stable for the future. The challenge is to make the whole system work in all our interests. The bill is vital to Scotland's future in terms of our economic prosperity, social justice and ensuring that we set high environmental standards. The biggest element of our water bills is the fixed costs, which are determined largely by the investment programme, which in turn should be determined as a public resource for us all. That investment programme should be determined after consultation between ministers, local authorities and the businesses that are able to deliver for Scotland's economic future. The bill will give us the framework. What we need next is the minister's statement. Without the bill we would not have the proper framework for investment that I hope the Executive will set out clearly in the statement. We on the Labour benches support the bill fully and we are glad to be debating it at stage 3.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in providing disabled access at Haymarket station. (S2O-5119)

I very much welcome the minister's commitment to help that work to proceed. He may be aware that last week the First Minister kindly offered me a meeting with him to discuss the detailed timescale for the work. Can he announce today a timescale, to avoid the problems that occurred last year when Waverley station was shut for essential works and people were diverted miles from Haymarket? We have waited more than 20 years for lifts at Haymarket. I am glad that the money is coming, but will the minister give us a much firmer timescale, so that we can get the work done?

At least we can cut to the chase and state that in this chamber we believe that climate change is happening. It is much better to describe it as "climate change", because although bits of the planet will warm up, "global warming" does not convey the full force of the changes that will take place. Across the globe we will have a much greater malaria problem. We still have not tackled the problem in sub-Saharan Africa and the prospect of it growing across the globe should worry us all. John Scott made points about water shortages, particularly in the subtropics, which will have a huge impact on the ability of countries in the region to grow crops and feed themselves.  Countries in the region already have unstable Governments and huge poverty problems. It is estimated that tens of millions of people will be affected by rises in sea levels and flooding. The issues are difficult. Recently, I was dismayed to read advice given to Tony Blair by a respectable journalist in one of the respectable Sunday broadsheets that he should deal only with the problem of global poverty and not try to tackle climate change as well, because that would be too difficult. The complexity of climate change is a difficult issue to deal with. It will hit every bit of everybody's lives, regardless of where they live in the globe. That is why we need a coherent approach to climate change. There will be lots of difficult issues and I will try to focus on them, rather than on the consensus, although the right starting point is the fact that we agree that climate change is happening. We in the rich, westernised countries are responsible for 60 per cent of greenhouse gas emissions, yet we represent a small percentage of the world's population. We have a serious responsibility to tackle the situation. We will not escape the problems ourselves. I ask members to look at the west coast and imagine a 40 per cent increase in rainfall during the winter. That is not a happy prospect. The fact is that that increase will probably come in extreme storms; it will not flow gently throughout the winter. Householders on the west coast will have huge problems, not just with flooding, but with insurance. There will be much bigger insurance bills and huge problems with household damage. The horrendous weather that we have seen in the past few weeks will become more normal, which is another huge problem. This is not a criticism, because six minutes each is no time at all, but members have not said that we have to deal with climate change now as well as think about what we can do to stop it. The 40-year lead-in that people have spoken about is probably beginning to hit us now. If there is a big disagreement among scientists, it is about how fast the change will happen. None of us really knows the answer. We are not experts—we can only read the evidence. However, it appears that some scientists think that the process is happening faster. There are some much more short-term questions that should concentrate our minds. This is not just an issue for the next 30 years; we cannot put off considering it just because we have four-yearly elections. We will encounter some of the questions now, and some of the problems that we will have to deal with might be quite unpalatable. Shifting resources from priorities to which we are already committed to dealing with the impact of climate change is not something that any member will relish discussing.  It is not just the Parliament that needs to discuss climate change; it is also a big issue for local authorities to debate, as they are the bodies that currently deal with flood prevention schemes. I repeat that there are short-term issues and that we should not just think of climate change as a 40-year or long-term issue—we should not focus on the fact that the climate will be different in 2100, as change will take place a lot faster than that. We have debated energy today, and I know that the Tories are holding a debate on the subject next week. Labour Party policy is still in favour of a moratorium on nuclear power until we sort out the issue of nuclear waste. John Home Robertson is right in so far as nuclear power is part of the discussion that needs to be held in relation to the aim of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 60 per cent, but it is not the easy, quick fix that some nuclear engineers describe. John Home Robertson acknowledged that to an extent, at least, although he was a bit unfair to call those of us who are not persuaded of his view extreme environmentalists. Some of us think that we are sensible to be a bit cautious, and a lot of Labour members would agree with me about that. The short-term issue that we really need to focus on is energy efficiency. It is not sexy and it does not get people out of bed in the morning, but it has kept a lot of people in Scotland alive since we started our heating programme. If we link short-term energy issues into social justice, we begin to get win-win situations, which could make some of the harder decisions that we have to take in the Parliament a little bit easier. The issue of building standards is a no brainer. We have already raised them and we need to keep raising them over time. It is easy to talk about doing so in the Parliament, but actually raising them is hard for the building industry. People in the industry know that their consumers like fitted kitchens, and if any of us went out and bought a house tomorrow, we would be attracted by the fitted kitchen, rather than by high energy-efficiency specifications. I would like the minister to spend a couple of minutes of his winding-up speech on the issue of air transport. The fact that we are finally getting half-decent air links from Scotland has been a liberation for many people in Scotland and is hugely beneficial for Scotland's economy. However, there is a downside, which includes the fact that millions of people now drive to airports by car and the fact that we are possibly replacing rail travel with short-haul air travel, which simply does not make sense. I will give members some information that I checked out on the web last night. If an individual wants to go to London from Edinburgh or Glasgow, the train will cost them at least £30 to  £50 each way, with a journey of four and a half hours or five and a half hours, depending on whether they go from Edinburgh or Glasgow. However, they could go by plane for £13 to £30 each way, including tax. The equation is not a clever one: this is not about stopping people using their cars or getting on planes; it is about beginning to think through the implications of using our cars all the time and of choosing to take cheap flights even though the train probably offers the better journey. The economics of that choice are crazy. We must keep up the push on the big investment in public transport. This is a good week to say that, because we know that big money is going into rail, but we must keep up efforts in that area in the long run. We will have to deal with some difficult issues in the Parliament and I hope that the inquiries that the Executive and the Environment and Rural Development Committee are undertaking will let us take them a bit further.

This week, the First Minister announced welcome long-term investment in Scotland's railways and in phase 1 of the vital project at Waverley station. Will he address Haymarket station? Will he assure me that works at Waverley will be co-ordinated with Haymarket station improvements? I am sure that he does not want the disruption that was caused to disabled passengers from throughout central Scotland when Waverley station was shut last year. Will he give me a timescale for improving Haymarket? I understand that we do not yet have an agreed scheme for the works.

If today's debate shows anything, it shows the extent to which we should be examining some of  the science and engaging with the difficult issues in front of us. Scientific analysis is difficult, because we must ensure that we are not just looking at a snapshot from two or three years ago. We need to look for a long-term, sustained approach. If we are to take the precautionary approach—it is difficult to deny that that is the right way—we must get the science right. That will lead to difficult discussions among people who are much more expert than some of us on exactly what is happening to our fish stocks. I accept that it is hard to get the balance right and to know which parts of the scientific advice are the most important in a given year so that we can decide how to take a long-term approach. Richard Baker made some thoughtful comments about the need to juggle our economic interests, the interests of the fishing sector and the interests of the different geographical areas that some members round the chamber have talked about. Fergus Ewing made comments about the north-west and Richard Baker talked about the north-east. The ministers have different issues to juggle up. The other perspective is biodiversity and the marine interests in the North sea.

No; I am just getting started. Our challenge is that it is quite complex to work out what is happening. It is clear that progress is being made in the stocks of haddocks, saith and prawns. Cod is beginning to recover, but it has not yet recovered. At the same time, there is some very bad news out there, on which members have not focused so much. One of the issues that the Environment and Rural Development Committee considered this week was the impact of industrial fisheries on sand eels. Although those industries have quotas, they are nowhere near being able to fish those quotas because the sand eels are not there. I am almost trying to lower the temperature of the debate, but when we examine the real problem, we see that it is not just overfishing and heavy industrial fishing. The scientists are beginning to identify that rising sea temperatures are hampering the recovery of stocks.

That is an interesting point. We are focusing on the responsibility of our fishing industry to abide by the measures to which Ross Finnie signs up, when we should be considering  what other fishing nations are doing. We should be critical if they are going beyond the targets that have been set, whether they are Norwegians or Danes. There is a need for transparency and fairness in the process. That takes me to my next point, which is about negotiations in Europe. I have sat through the debate in the same way as other members have done. The process is not perfect and the outcomes are often not perfect either, particularly from our perspective. However, I do not see that there is a serious alternative to that kind of negotiation. It does not matter to me whether the discussions are held in December or June; at a certain point in the meetings, someone has to draw a halt. A decision has to be made and the challenge that faces Ross Finnie and Ben Bradshaw is to argue our case as effectively as possible. To call the process unfair and to say that it is a ridiculous diversion is totally unrealistic. The alternative proposition that has been put to us today by the SNP is to remove us from the CFP and have a Scottish management regime. The Tories would remove us from the CFP and have a British regime.

I will not give way. Ted Brocklebank has had an opportunity to speak. Neither the SNP nor the Tories have gone into the issue in detail and told us exactly how different the regime that they propose would be. There is no way that we could take a responsible international approach without talking to other countries. At least the CFP allows us to sit down to discuss and hammer out the issues. The challenge for the chamber is to be clear that changing the nature of, and the players in, the negotiations would not absolve us from having to work with our fishing industries and communities to ensure that, when measures are imposed, they have the ability to implement them, and that, crucially, other nation states are doing the same and acting fairly. As Mark Ruskell and the minister indicated, part of the solution is the long-term development of the regional advisory councils. The councils allow us to have input from communities that are involved in fishing and to have detailed debates with those who carry out monitoring.

No. I am in my last minute and must conclude. Today's debate has shown us that in some ways we are poles apart. If we let the constitutional issue get in the way of discussing what is happening in our oceans, we will get headlines and great soundbites. However, that will help  neither the fishing industries nor the communities that depend on them. Nor will it address the fact that we know that difficult things are happening to stocks in the North sea. Some stocks are getting better because of past effort, but some are still getting worse. One of the problems with the evidence is that it does not give us easy answers or solutions. I wish Ross Finnie and Ben Bradshaw all the best in the negotiations. I hope that when they return we will receive a report from the minister, either in the chamber or in the Environment and Rural Development Committee, and that we will be able to examine the solutions that have been identified this year. This is a difficult question. Focusing solely on the constitutional issue is an abdication of responsibility for dealing with the real difficulties that the debate throws up.

I am delighted to have been given the chance by colleagues to put the motion in front of members and to have the opportunity to debate such an exciting report. The whole tenor of the Community Service Volunteers Scotland report, "Retire into Action", is worthy of debate. Members have the opportunity to discuss the report's conclusions and to acknowledge the superb local work that is done on behalf of our constituents. Later, I will refer to a number of groups in whose work around the Holyrood area members might be interested. However, I want to say at the start that the debate should not be touchy-feely or vague. Volunteering can sound like a warm and lovely idea and we might think that we should all just say that it is a great idea that we should support. However, difficult political issues are buried in the subject and I want to pick up on one or two of those in my brief few minutes. First, there is the demographic time bomb. Then I want to talk about resources and community capacity, and volunteers' rewards. When we talk about the demographic time bomb, it is usually explained that a big problem is coming: that we are going to have more older  people in society. However, the debate should turn that attitude on its head. We should consider the fact that there will be a wealth of talent and experience in our older community. The vast majority of people in that community do not think of themselves as older. That the CSV report talks about the over-50s is interesting. It does not talk about people automatically being retired, but about viewing people as a resource. The rewards for people who are over 50 in getting involved as volunteers was one issue that emerged powerfully from the CSV's research. There is the sense of purpose and self-respect that comes from making a socially useful contribution that is valued by the people with whom they work. There is the opportunity for self-development. Many people stay in the same job for years and retirement offers them a superb opportunity to do different things and to use skills and talents in a different way in shaping themselves, and possibly to diversify into totally different activities. A person might have been a bank manager and might end up driving a truck to take around food for the Crisis FareShare project. There are many opportunities out there. People's sense of achievement and the strong personal satisfaction and personal motivation that come from deciding how they want to contribute comes through in the report, and I certainly get that sense from talking to people. We are not talking about an employment situation in which a person signs a contract and has a duty to do things. It is about personal choice. For many people, volunteering gives a structure to life that is not like the treadmill of work. It is not a 9-to-5 job; it is not shift work of 12 hours repeated several times a week; it is about choosing when and how they want to contribute. There are also many social benefits for people who get involved in volunteering or campaigning work in the community. The research shows the benefits to people's health of the motivational experience and the confidence that comes through such work, highlighting its positive impact on the volunteers, never mind the impact on the huge number of people whom they help by volunteering. We might also consider the economic benefits of volunteering. The CSV's statistics suggest that more than £1 billion goes into the Scottish economy every year through the work that volunteers do. We should be celebrating the work of older volunteers, not regarding an ageing population as a big problem that is coming down the tracks. Society as a whole should seize it as a big opportunity. I have mentioned the different ways in which people can contribute to society, through voluntary organisations, churches and local groups that would not be able to operate without the free  contribution that is made by volunteers. I know that eradicating homelessness is part of the task of the Minister for Communities—I said that this would get slightly political—but in my constituency we have a number of groups that support homeless people. Many people volunteer to help the Cyrenians, the Ark project and the Salvation Army to ensure that people receive support. I have mentioned the fact that we have volunteers who drive vans; we also have people who serve in cafes and other people who support those groups. There is the work of Sister Aelred and the nuns who support people by giving them food. There is also the work that is done to resolve debt problems in my community by the citizens advice bureau at Gorgie-Dalry, and there is the work that is done to support our local schools. I have here a wonderful quote from a volunteer that was part of the research that was done by CSV. The person says: "It gives me a buzz to read to the kids. I'm giving something back the kids appreciate and learn—I can give some specialist input." There is a real sense of achievement and of personal contribution there. The wider community learning agenda is a huge issue for all members. There are projects for older people—the trendy name would be silver surfers—that are about giving people access to the internet and computers. That is something that most of us are beginning to take for granted, even if we are not sure about how we do it. Older volunteers themselves are helping people to get access to the internet, and there is a huge personal liberation for the people who are supported in that way. There are a number of community centres in my constituency—as, I am sure, there are in other members' constituencies—that would not exist without the work of older volunteers. Those are local citizens who stand in to do the work in health initiatives, hairdressing projects, leisure and arts projects, sports and social activities for young people—a whole range of work. Without certain key people, many organisations would simply collapse. I am thinking of Mary Whitfield and Liz Walker in the Dumbiedykes; Gladys Purvis and Margaret Flynn at St Ann's community centre; Jean Donaldson of the writers group; Anja Amsel, who runs a number of civic groups and is on the new Canongate Community Council; George Pitcher, who is one of our community activists who gets sent in to stop things falling apart and to give the council a couple of months' grace; and Audrey Cormack of the Grassmarket area group. I could probably spend another 10 minutes naming the key community activists in my constituency. Tonight, I acknowledge their work. They support me in my work as a constituency  MSP, but they are also good as local volunteers who, on occasion, apply pressure where it hurts and—crucially—when it matters to ensure that we MSPs work with the council and with voluntary groups to make things happen. There is such a thing as society, and it is often our older volunteers who hold society together. They hold our communities together and create community well-being. This is a time of opportunity, and I look forward to the Executive's response. I am glad that it is the Minister for Communities who will respond to the debate. The message is that people can retire into action and support their communities. There is a massive resource out there. The Parliament should celebrate the work that people do and look forward to helping to sustain that work and those communities. Crucially, we must ensure that the voluntary sector and people who volunteer are supported. They do a tremendous amount of work, and we should hope to see many more people enthusiastically retiring into action. I look forward to hearing colleagues' comments.

I thank the minister for making a positive commitment to work with the City of Edinburgh Council and I re-emphasise the points that Mike Pringle made. Recently, the council approved the project to which Mike Pringle referred, which is supported by both Labour and the Liberal Democrats. We are all keen for this important but relatively small piece of transport infrastructure to be added to Edinburgh's suburban railway network. Anything that the minister can do to ensure that the council and the Scottish Executive take a partnership approach to the project would be hugely appreciated. In what areas might the Scottish Executive assist with the funding of this crucial but relatively modest transport proposal?

It seems that there are two debates in the chamber today, one of which is taking place among Tory members. If we were a junior debating society, I would give Brian Monteith 10 out of 10 for his speech. The rest of us are having a serious debate about how we can make a difference to Scotland's economic prospects for the long term. We need green jobs and we need sustainable jobs. The Executive's green jobs strategy gives us the chance to debate the different types of job that the country needs. We must invest in green jobs so that we can make the most of the huge environmental opportunities that exist in Scotland in waste, energy, transport, agriculture, forestry and tourism. There is also an opportunity to make all the other jobs in our economy more sustainable. That must be good for business. The issue is about making our businesses more efficient through the better use of resources and the better management of production systems. That is good news for the workers in those industries, as their jobs will be made more secure in the long term, it is good news for the businesses themselves, because their costs will come down and they will become more competitive and, crucially, it is good news for our environment. By using scarce resources more wisely, we will reduce the adverse impact on our environment. That is not a question of adopting a morally superior approach; it simply makes good business sense. I am disappointed that the Tories are not even at the races in this afternoon's debate. All the big companies around the world market themselves by explaining how they try to deliver economic development and to live up to their environmental responsibilities at the same time. We must push that sustainable development agenda by focusing on what is a win-win situation. That way, we will have a strong economy, we will look after our environment in the long run and, crucially, we will think about social justice issues. A huge amount of progress has been made in this country over the past few years. At United Kingdom level, there is a focus on environmental incentives through our taxation system. Tony Blair has demanded a green industrial revolution and the amazing target of reducing our carbon use by 60 per cent by 2050 has been set. We face difficult challenges, but progress is being made. Carbon emissions trading is happening throughout the UK.  The nationalists and the Tories must look at the global challenge and the changes that are taking place at European level. To get a level playing field of tougher environmental regulations that everyone must live up to, we must acknowledge that we are part of a global, interdependent economy. Jim Mather's fairy dust will not be sufficient to fix our problems.

No, thank you. We must think about the long-term issues.

On this occasion, I was not attacking Richard Lochhead. I was making a debating point with Jim Mather, to which we will return. I agree with the nationalists that we should tally up the number of practical jobs that we have created in Scotland. I think that we would find that the figure was pretty impressive, both as regards the jobs that Jim Wallace has already created and the opportunities that are still to come. We should examine the situation sector by sector. We should tell industry and businesses about the huge investment opportunities that are available. Jim Wallace's speech gave a snapshot of some of the superb opportunities that are being picked up on in the waste and energy recycling industries. All sorts of comments have been made about renewables developments, on which we are beginning to make serious progress. Christine May spoke about training. If I want to employ someone to install a mini-wind vane in my flat or to put in solar heating or solar power, there are few people in Scotland, never mind Edinburgh or the Lothians, who could do those jobs for me. Part of the Executive's green jobs strategy must involve a link with training. The enterprise companies must be got round the table and the further and higher education sector must be talked to. Although the Executive is to be commended for the exciting progress in research and development, that is not the only issue. We must examine the detail of who will install such facilities. That way, we will create good, local, high-skill jobs for our constituents, which, crucially, will be long-term jobs. Many of them will be in the small business sector, which we must support. There are many opportunities. According to Friends of the Earth, the investment that we are making in public transport throughout Scotland will produce huge job opportunities. We should tally up the progress that is being made and identify future opportunities. Although we are moving in the right direction, we could do more, especially at Executive and local authority level, by using the  power of public sector purchase. The Executive's green guidelines on procurement are a superb start, but we need ownership in every local authority in Scotland. The knowledge, expertise and enthusiasm to put those guidelines into practice must be developed. That is perhaps what is missing. We need champions throughout the procurement sector. The Executive can give the lead on paper, but perhaps it needs to talk to people to identify the blockages and the obstacles to implementation. The prize for getting things right is huge. Earlier this month, I attended the Dundee sun city conference. The people who are involved in the sun city initiative have, off their own bat, got the council, the local enterprise company and a huge number of local businesses to come together. They are asking, "What can we do to develop solar power in our city?" After all, Dundee, as one of our south-facing cities, is Scotland's sunniest place. People in Dundee are looking at practical opportunities. Edinburgh is also using its building and planning system to look for opportunities to do more. We want to keep our high profile as one of Europe's top capitals—a place where people want to live and work. Other members have mentioned the PPP projects that are being built across Scotland, including our new hospitals. A massive public building programme is underway at the moment and lots of houses are also being built. The green jobs strategy offers a wonderful opportunity to think about life cycle costs, the creation of green jobs locally, making an investment in the Scottish economy and—crucially—the role of the public sector in giving confidence to suppliers and local businesses. That is the message from London where the micro-renewables agenda has been taken on board. The Government is now requiring that that agenda be followed as a matter of course in all its building developments. Although the prize of creating new green jobs is out there, we need to transform the opportunities for companies in Scotland. The Executive should be commended on the work that it has done so far, but it must have a twin-track strategy: it needs to ratchet up the measures it is taking. We need to think about all the positive opportunities that are open to us. Although there is a real debate in the chamber and the majority of members are engaging in the opportunities that green jobs offer, we need to reflect on the blockages that must be overcome. Let us be clear about the political consensus that exists across the chamber on many of the issues. We can debate the ideological issues about whether Scotland should be independent or interdependent, but progress is being made and  people need to know where we stand. They need to know that we have confidence in green jobs and that the Executive will support them. I support the Executive motion. The green jobs strategy is an exciting opportunity for Scotland; it is an exciting agenda. If members think about the progress that we have made in the few short years of the Scottish Parliament, I think that we will all see that the next five to 10 years could be even more exciting. Once the green jobs strategy is published, let us have more debates about the progress that is being made. After all, we are talking not about theoretical jobs, but about real, practical jobs. The green jobs strategy is a massive opportunity for all of us.

I take the point that we cannot all be experts, but it does not take a huge brain to work out that dumping paper in landfill sites throughout the country, rather than recycling it, is not good for Scotland's environment or its people.

I am delighted to repeat the point. I fully accept that we do not have to be experts on all aspects of the debate and that we need to draw on academic expertise. However, if we do not recycle our paper, we will dump it in expensive, unpleasant and environmentally dangerous landfill sites, which are filling up. We need to take a much more rounded view than is given by one report in isolation.

I draw to the minister's attention the fact that the City of Edinburgh Council is seeking to progress two essential flood prevention schemes on the Water of Leith and the Braid burn. Will the minister assure me that sufficient funding will be in place to fund all the flood prevention schemes that have been identified and will he confirm that local authorities will be able to fund their proportion of the costs through the prudential framework?

We on the Labour benches welcome the bill, because it gives us a clear framework for the provision of high-quality water services in Scotland. It is important that we have cost-effective provision that will enable new development to take place—I will talk about that later in my speech—because we think that that should be a top priority for the Executive. We must enable householders on low incomes to afford the water that they use. We support the bill because it provides the potential for us to have a stable water industry with accountability in the provision of this essential service. Crucially, it also builds in a commitment to social justice. It is important that the bill is capable of delivering on both public health and environmental standards. Only Scottish Water should be permitted to use the public networks to carry out the physical  supply of water and sewerage services. In the consultation exercises that were carried out by the Scottish Executive and the Environment and Rural Development Committee in advance of the preparation of the committee's stage 1 report, there was overwhelming support for the Executive's approach. As Alex Johnstone made clear, only the Tories fundamentally opposed the principle of ensuring that we have high-quality public sector water services for domestic users. It is critical that we have a policy position that protects people on low incomes. Competition in the domestic market in Scotland would lead to the cherry picking of properties and to people in the high bands leaving the Scottish Water network, which would leave the rest of us to pick up the tab with increasing bills for the rest of the customers. Given the geography of Scotland and the opportunity to cherry pick, we have to protect those customers.

No; the member's party has already made several interventions. Labour MSPs believe that low-income and vulnerable households—for example, single parents and families—need the protection that the bill will bring about. We also need to protect our long-term ability to deliver cross-subsidies and discounts. The evidence that we saw was persuasive.

I could not disagree more with Alex Johnstone's comments. We pay for our water through charges, and the Executive puts in extra investment from the public purse. One of the key things that emerges in the Executive's consultation paper, "Investing in Water Services 2006-2014", is that, where new and additional infrastructure is to be put in place, there is a role for the private sector to build on facilities that it will need for its developments. I think that the Executive has got the balance absolutely spot on. One of the key things that we need to do is to ensure that the transition to the water industry commission, which we fully support, is brought about effectively. We need to keep a focus on driving down costs in the industry and on ensuring efficiency. The Scottish Water organisation is accountable to the Scottish Parliament through ministers, but we must ensure that the way in which the water industry commission works, and  the pricing and licensing regime that is adopted, is examined extremely carefully. One of the key criticisms that was raised in the committee was the issue of getting the pricing correct under the new regime. The evidence that we were given caused us to understand that, if the price were to be set too low, domestic customers could be left to pay higher Scottish Water costs. I ask the minister to ensure that the situation is absolutely correct in that regard before the bill is passed. The issue relates not to what is in the bill, but to what happens in terms of the financial memorandum. Des McNulty will address the financial memorandum later. I welcome Ross Finnie's commitment to produce a new financial memorandum before stage 3. In the evidence that we took, many criticisms were made about the financial memorandum and it is right that the situation be addressed properly. We want to come back to that issue again. Labour members had a number of concerns about the detail of the bill. We are keen for robust systems to be put in place for future investment and it is only fair that developers pay a contribution for new additions to the network. One of our concerns relates to the need to ensure that the priorities that are set by Scottish ministers' directions to Scottish Water will give us the investment that we need around the country. There are huge challenges across Scotland at the moment and the position that was outlined by the Tories would make the situation worse. We would end up with no forward planning, no capacity to plan new developments across the country and chaos in our communities. We want an assurance from the Scottish Executive that, once it has identified the investment strategy, robust mechanisms will be put in place to ensure that local authorities consult on their development plans and Scottish Water consults on its implementation plans. Once those plans are in operation, monitoring and review of investment programmes and development plans must take place. There is a danger that such plans might get out of synch, and a question arises about contingency planning. I am concerned to hear about local authorities approving proposals for development where there is no agreement or commitment in place for water and sewerage services. That will not help anyone in the long term and it certainly does not help to give certainty in the development industry. We are all concerned about how the issue affects rural housing—Maureen Macmillan will speak about that—but it also has an impact on investment for housing and affordable development throughout Scotland. Communities Scotland faces a real challenge in relation to picking up the tab. The issue is not one for the ministers to consider, but is  one that must be considered in both the rural and the urban context. The final issue that I want to focus on is odour. We have had petitions in the Parliament on that subject for years. Local residents and MSPs have identified problems in Seafield in Edinburgh, and in Kirkcaldy and Methil in Fife. We know from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency that it faces a challenge in measuring and identifying odours. I am sure that Susan Deacon will testify, once she has made her bid to speak in the debate, that the residents in her constituency do not have that problem in their communities. Surely it is common sense to address the issue of odour up front when new sewage works are being designated and designed, rather than having to make expensive adaptations afterwards. I cautiously welcome the minister's statement—I say "cautiously" because I would like to see the fine print. One thing that the Environment and Rural Development Committee is very concerned about is the lack of progress. We know that there is a voluntary code, but we think that it will not be followed by Scottish Water or by the companies that are bidding to do work for Scottish Water unless it is underpinned by statutory force. That issue must be addressed urgently. I have not covered all the issues that the committee dealt with in its report. I am sure that other members will raise issues relating to the complaints procedure, ministerial accountability, and the water industry commission's consideration of sustainable development requirements. I hope that the Executive will take on board many of those issues when it responds fully to the committee before we reach our detailed discussions at stage 2. There are details that we must get right, but the bill is fundamentally good. The principles are right and we can get the detail right at stage 2. I call on members to support the bill at stage 1.

To ask the First Minister what benefits the proposed rail links to Edinburgh and Glasgow airports will have for the tourist industry and our economy. (S2F-1193)

I welcome the First Minister's positive reply. However, does he acknowledge that it is vital that we invest now in new rail, tram and station developments to ensure that people throughout Scotland and in Edinburgh and the Lothians in particular have access to high-quality  public transport choices that will allow them to access the new air routes and the major office developments without the whole area grinding to a halt, with the serious consequences that would result for business and the environment?

I welcome the minister's positive answers to these questions. In the initial question, Robert Brown asked about the promotion of domestic urban wind turbines. Does the minister acknowledge that we are in a win-win situation, because renewable energy brings climate change benefits and manufacturing and construction jobs? His department will have a role in promoting mini wind vanes in urban areas through the green jobs strategy.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it has in place to reduce greenhouse gases, in particular by reducing energy consumption. (S2O-3699)

In reviewing the climate change programme, I ask the minister to emphasise the importance of energy efficiency and to put in place a comprehensive energy efficiency strategy to help Scottish businesses, the public sector and individuals. What part will the £20 million that he has allocated to energy efficiency play in that process?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in providing older people with home care services. (S2O-3694)

I welcome that increase in support for older people staying in their homes for longer. What work is the minister doing to ensure that we have enough qualified staff to provide an enhanced level of service throughout Scotland, particularly in places such as Edinburgh, where there are severe employment pressures on the national health service?

I very much welcome the debate. The quality of the Enterprise and Culture Committee's report has already raised the quality of debate in the chamber. The committee should be congratulated on pushing the debate further ahead. The report is important and has identified key issues. The overarching issue is our need for a  mix of renewable energy. It is not good enough to rely on one source of renewable energy. The key issue for the Parliament is not how we get to the 18 per cent target by 2010, but how we build a bridge from 2010 to 2020. How can we reach the aspirational target of 40 per cent and not increase our energy demands at the same time? There are fundamental issues. Countless members have talked about the fact that marine energy must be part of the process. There is a real opportunity for Scotland, which we must grasp, using the work of the research institutes in Orkney and Aberdeen and the new Pelamis project. Marine energy is hugely exciting for Scotland and we must ensure that the technology stays in Scotland and that we get the benefits, the jobs and the energy that can be produced. I would have liked the committee to spend more time on other forms of energy. I take the points that Alasdair Morgan made; if the committee was going to get into any of the issues in depth, it had to focus and prioritise. I welcome the work that the committee did, but I would like there to be more debate in future on the potential for micro-renewables and more consideration of solar heating issues, photovoltaic technology, mini wind vanes, biomass, which Alasdair Morgan talked about, and combined heat and power. Around the world, the technology has been proven, but how to do things in Scotland has not. Other parts of the United Kingdom are beginning to bring the technology into being—for example, parts of London that are part of the mayor's energy plan. Every school, office, house, hospital and all new buildings should make the most of the new technology now; let us not wait until 2010 to start that work. We have to build on the grant system that has been put in place by the Executive and to learn the lessons. I welcome the Executive's commitment to renew national policy planning guideline 6 on renewable energy next year. Today's debate has started the discussion. I make a plea for a much higher profile for micro-renewables so that every householder and builder in Scotland knows about them. We need joined-up government and we need building regulations, procurement, the planning system and the Executive's green jobs strategy to kick in so that we do not miss out. When preparing for the planning review next year, I ask the ministers to focus on capacity and expertise in planning authorities. That issue comes out loud and clear in the report. We need the expertise to deal with all renewables applications, from the micro-scale developments to the larger ones. Before I came here, I used to teach town planners. I did not teach them about renewables developments, because they were not even on our  agenda five years ago. We face a huge challenge in getting expertise and capacity into local authorities.

Does the minister wish to intervene? If he has a good answer, I would love to hear it.

I was going to welcome the minister's announcement and his appointment as Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning. I was also going to ask him to continue the work that he has been doing in the environment field and, when he establishes the advisory group, to ensure that it joins up with industry, local communities and environmental groups, all of which have expertise that must be plugged into the debate. We have some cracking examples of best practice throughout Scotland, but we need to move them into generalised practice. That is the genuine challenge over the next few years. We need to ensure that planning departments have the capacity to debate and negotiate with the RSPB and the Scottish and Southern Energy Group, both of whom have expertise, so that local people have confidence that the issues are being played out in full. It is important to consider the national framework and the experience of the past five years, but let us not kid ourselves that there will be easy answers—there will always be difficult debates. What we need is confidence that the choices are being considered properly. Today's debate has been good; let us now proceed with it. Let us consider how we get from the 18 per cent to the 40 per cent—from 2010 to 2020. That work must start in this chamber—parliamentary scrutiny and engagement are vital. I would like the new minister to come back to us on some of the questions that were not answered, because those are some of the difficult issues. We need to focus on them and find answers.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making with the implementation of its environmentally sensitive procurement policy. (S2O-3644)

I welcome the minister's positive reply and the importance that is attached to the policy in "Building a Better Scotland: Spending Proposals 2005-2008: Enterprise, Opportunity, Fairness". What monitoring does he intend to carry out to ensure that the policy is driven forward? Will he set targets so that real efficiencies are encouraged throughout the public sector? Does he believe that the efficient use of resources and the procurement policy will raise standards in the private sector through companies that provide the Executive and other public bodies with services and goods?

I congratulate Margaret Smith on securing the debate and getting all of us to stay in the chamber at this time of night. The debate has been quite reflective and mature, and if we can conclude one thing from it, it is that there is no easy solution to the issue. We are trying to have a debate on what we think Edinburgh airport might need to look like in 20 years' time, which is a difficult debate to have. I was brought up in the west of Edinburgh and if I had been told when I was at school what the west of the city would look like 20 years later, I would have found it difficult to believe, because that side of the city has been totally transformed by new  housing, economic and even transport developments. I suspect that what we really need to do is think about the key principles that should guide future decisions. I think that that is what the debate was meant to be about. We have left behind the old idea of predict and provide that used to characterise British road and air transport policies. We can no longer act as if we can simply write down a formula, feed some figures into a sausage machine and get an answer about what the situation will be in 20 years' time. Policy decision making is much more complex now. If we are trying to weigh up environmental benefit, social justice issues and economic progress, there are no easy solutions. The debate is not about the idea that we could sit down tonight and say that, in 20 years' time, Edinburgh airport will need an extension and a new runway. We are trying to determine how we think the relationship between the city and the rest of Scotland will develop in the next 20 years and how we can ensure that we do not rule out opportunities that we cannot yet predict will arise. Margaret Smith is right to urge a note of caution—it is true to say that we might not need that extra runway.

The point that I was just about to make was that the key thing that we should be doing just now is getting the best use out of the existing airport infrastructure. From what Margaret Smith tells me, I gather that BAA is considering that approach and that work is being undertaken in that regard. The difficulty lies in determining the necessary public transport mix that will enable people to use the airport when that is the best way for them to travel and also to have better choices of ways to travel. A lot of work is being done at the airport. Ironically, the first project that has been completed is the new multistorey car park. It is always difficult to work out where to get a bus or a taxi at the airport—although the issue of taxis is one that we will not go into tonight, for obvious reasons. However, there has been a debate about how we can better access the airport, which has to be important. Over the next few months, west Edinburgh bus services will be improved with the establishment of the fixed bus service. That is something that seems simple but has taken a long time to deliver.  Further, there is an on-going debate around trams, which I hope we will get soon. Mark Ballard spoke about grandiose rail improvements. The problem is that improving heavy rail in any way is not cheap. It does not matter where the improvements are carried out. The idea that we could simply improve Waverley as an alternative is wrong. The Waverley upgrade will itself be a huge issue. I have spoken in Parliament more times than I can remember to demand that Waverley be upgraded. The key thing is that there needs to be a range of public transport improvements.

I am sorry, but I am in my last minute. Perhaps five years ago, it was possible to travel by train from Edinburgh city centre to London city centre in three hours and 59 minutes. Not many trains were involved, but there were a few and we all thought that there would be an increasing number. Now, the fastest train takes four hours and 19 minutes and most trains take four and a half hours or four hours and 40 minutes. Those are less attractive journey times. If there is a reliable Edinburgh to London service that takes around four hours, people will be attracted on to the railways because travelling by train is more comfortable and less stressful than going by plane and allows people to get some work done. The problem is in ensuring that we have a practical alternative to air travel. The issue is not even about building a new high-speed rail service between Edinburgh and London, good though that would be; it is about making the existing services more reliable and faster. I ask the minister what will happen in the short term to journey times on the Edinburgh to London line to benefit Scotland. That is the key issue in relation to the competitiveness of the rail network in comparison to air travel. We need to improve the airport and the transport links to the airport, but we also need better choices for people. That is the context in which we need to think about what we want to happen to Edinburgh airport. We all want it to be successful, but it should be so as one part of a range of choices for travellers in Scotland.

I am delighted to be able to speak in the debate, because I think that it marks a new step in investment in Scotland. There is a huge amount of money and it is vital that we get the maximum benefit from all that investment. The taxpayers whom we represent demand that we give best value for the future investment that will come from today's budget, and we need to look not only at  the short-term impact of the investment but at its long-term impact. Most members would acknowledge that we are able to make that investment because of the stable economy that we have at UK level and because we have the highest employment rates that we have had for 40 years. We have nearly full employment in parts of Scotland, and part of the budget's aim must be to deliver full employment throughout Scotland. I want to reflect on that achievement, because it gives us, as politicians, a golden opportunity to shape priorities and investment in our country over a sustained period. The budget is not just for the short term; it is about long-term investment. The challenge is to get the maximum benefit for everybody in Scotland, and we need to ensure that we get best value. The range of transport projects that is under way is hugely exciting; the minister did not even get to mention all of them this afternoon. We have railway lines that would have been seen as pipe dreams pre-devolution and pre-Labour Government. We have airport links, the Larkhall to Milngavie line, the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line and trams in Edinburgh. Those are hugely important investments for Scotland.

No. I need to get on to my next point. I would like to hear more about investment in public transport in the detailed plans that I hope the Minister for Transport will launch. In particular, I am thinking of Waverley station, which is critical to the expansion of railway services in Scotland, such as the Bathgate and Borders lines. If we are to have real expansion in our railways in Scotland, Waverley station needs to be modernised and I hope that the Executive is working on that. Moreover, this week, when the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 kicks in, plans for the installation of lifts at Haymarket station will have been on the table for 20 years, but it has not happened yet. I hope that the Minister for Transport will be able to announce progress on that work when he makes his detailed statements. It is important that we have detailed projects. Brian Monteith's comment on that was utterly bizarre. We should treat with contempt the idea that our ministers are suggesting infrastructure investment on the basis that it could be cancelled in the future should, horror of horrors, a Tory Government ever be elected. I could not see any member make the connections in that statement, which demonstrated that the Tories cannot believe that we have such an amount of resources to invest and that we can do so wisely for Scotland.  I hope that the ministers will continue the push for public transport and resist calls for a new Forth road bridge, which are utterly premature given the major challenge of improving public transport across the Forth estuary. There are lots of exciting plans and huge opportunities in public transport, and I hope that they will be realised in the future. We need to focus on best value, because one of the key challenges in transport is that almost any project increases dramatically in cost the minute that the minister announces that he or she will give approval for it. That is the case not only with trains but with roads, and there is a problem with engaging expertise. Ministers need to make progress on learning some of the Fraser report's lessons on procurement for the civil service transport resources. The prospects for transport are exciting, and the announcements on higher and further education and new school facilities are crucial to high-quality investment and Scotland's economic future. I hope that when the Executive considers local authority investment in particular, it will apply higher standards of efficiency to the projects. I give the example of three secondary schools in my constituency, all of which the council plans to replace. Two of those schools are Victorian; they are excellent schools, but they operate in totally out-of-date buildings that will be replaced by the Executive's investment programme. The third school, which is also due to be replaced, was built in the 1970s. We cannot afford for the investment that we are making to be out of date in 20 or 30 years' time. Our investment must be for the long term and it must be sustainable. It must produce buildings that can be maintained and heated in the long term and which meet our wider sustainable development objectives. There is a section in "Building a Better Scotland" that talks about that, but the Executive needs to send a clear message to the local authorities that not meeting such targets will not be good enough and that excellence in our schools also means high quality and value for the long term. I hope that the inclusion of the greening Government policy in "Building a Better Scotland" will link into the strategic environmental assessment process for the whole of the Scottish public sector, which could lead the way. Explicit consideration of green criteria—transport costs and energy costs—is vital. When we consider the huge amount of money that is being spent, we must consider the efficiency measures that the Executive is considering in labour costs and the process, but we must also think about the costs of energy and transport. That must be built into the process. Some authorities are beginning to do that with, for example, renewable energy and new school buildings, and the Executive has a programme to make efficiency savings in  hospitals. That is hugely important in ensuring that the money is used as effectively as it can be. The political choice, which is clear, is between continued progress on our services and infrastructure and long-term certainty on the one hand and, on the other, the cloud-cuckoo-land or doom and gloom of the opposition parties, which will not engage with what the investment will mean for Scotland and have not set out their alternatives. The spending review is a clear set of proposals and I look forward to the future announcements from ministers. Today is a good day for Scotland, because it is about record investment. We need to ensure that the proposals become reality and make the big difference that they can make.

Does the minister acknowledge the importance of tackling CO 2 emissions in urban environments? What work is his department doing to ensure that the next review of building regulations by the Minister for Communities and the Deputy Minister for Communities will fully address improving energy efficiency by requiring the use of renewables technologies in all new Scottish buildings?

It would not have been possible for the Scottish  Parliament or the Scottish people to move on without listening to the Fraser inquiry—watching it on television or reading it in the newspapers—day after day. The final report makes depressing reading. However, as colleagues round the chamber have said, it is important to learn lessons from mistakes that were clearly made over a frustratingly long period. I agree with others that we should accept the recommendations in Lord Fraser's report in full. Today's motion should be supported. We welcome the completion of Lord Fraser's inquiry, and we should invite the corporate body and the Scottish Executive to consider the report. As people have said, reforms in the civil service, in financial practices and in procurement systems are vital for all future public procurement policies. No one could dispute that the cost escalations, and public concerns over the management of the building process, have cast a huge shadow over the work that we have done in this Parliament for five years. However, we should not let that shadow obliterate some of the very good work that has been done on new bills, on new policies and on new investment. Having said that, Lord Fraser's report contains some important lessons. As the local MSP, I was particularly interested in the sections of the report on how we ended up in Holyrood. Before 1999, many of us campaigned for a city-centre site for the Parliament. We wanted the Parliament to be in the heart of the city, visible and accessible. We wanted it to stand as a national statement—our new Scottish Parliament after 300 years. We wanted a landmark building that reflected the importance of the new Parliament and the new era that it would usher in. We could hear the gasps around Edinburgh when, suddenly, it was not Calton Hill but Holyrood that had been selected. It has been fascinating to read the text of the Fraser report, and the background papers that were presented to the inquiry, to see how the selection was made. The decision is not surprising when we can see all the background information. The fact that we now have all that information will let us learn lessons and move on. If we consider the evidence on the selection of the site, it is absolutely clear that the evidence presented to ministers was that Holyrood was the less expensive option. However, Lord Fraser's critique—in paragraphs 3.24 to 3.43—is devastating. Although it looked clear on paper that this was the best site financially, there was a lack of rigour in the designs from which to produce a realistic budget. Key costs were omitted for all the different sites. The design guidelines were far too rigid and left little scope for future change.  Like all previous speakers, I feel that we have to take responsibility for the way in which we voted over the past five years. However, I do not share the confidence of others that, if we had cancelled at any of the key stages, we would automatically have achieved a cheaper building and a cheaper project. The essence of Lord Fraser's report is that the structures that the building was procured on, and on which any of the other buildings would have been procured, used a method that would not have led to cost control or to a process that could be sensibly managed. That is one of the hardest lessons for everybody involved in that process to take on board and to put into effect in the future.

No, I want to move to a different point. Robert Brown was right, at the start of the debate, to describe our new complex as iconic, but that is not enough. It is not enough for us to look at the building as something that is worthy for the future. As local MSP, I am conscious that, whatever problems we have had in the past, now that we are here, we must make the building work for Scotland and for Edinburgh. I can see the dramatic change that has been made to the area in the urban regeneration that has happened on the back of this building. Almost no one I have met is impressed by the look of the building from the outside. That is often the way with new buildings; it takes a long time to get used to them. However, people whom I have brought into the chamber, the meeting places and the MSP lobby are stunned by the feeling that they have for the building as a meeting place and as an open place for people to come to debate the politics of Scotland and by the accessibility of the building. Having learned the lessons of the Fraser report, we all have to work extremely hard to ensure that our constituents, people in Scotland and tourists from abroad can come to see what work we do in the chamber and play a part in that work. Rather than just view us from the galleries, they should come to our committee meetings and take part in consultations on difficult issues such as whether we should ban smoking in public places. We must connect with people. The tragedy is that the process has alienated people in Scotland from the democracy that this place was meant to make theirs. We must turn that around. That will not be easy, but we need to think back to the aspirations that people voted for in 1999: openness, transparency, the sharing of power, and equality. That is why we established the Parliament. We must learn the lessons that Lord Fraser has identified about openness, transparency, the rigour of the process and using procurement effectively. Susan Deacon is right to  say that it will be challenging to work with the civil service to change its culture over the decision-making process, but that is why we are here. We are here to open up the decision-making process in Scotland and to make the governance of Scotland work in the interests of the people of Scotland. That is, fundamentally, what we have to take out of the Fraser report. We are all responsible, but we are more responsible for ensuring that decision making does not happen in that way in the future and that the Parliament delivers for the people of Scotland.

I am delighted that the minister has got a fix for us in the bill. The installation of entry systems is a  practical issue and something that many of my constituents have problems with, particularly in the old town of Edinburgh and the city centre, where people have lots of amenity problems and where there are security and safety issues. It is a practical problem that people cannot currently get resolved, so I am delighted that amendments 61 and 64 will be made to the bill, if everybody supports them, which I am sure will be the case. Door entry systems are crucial to improving people's quality of life as well as their personal security. They are also an important way of maintaining the quality of the tenement and of ensuring that maintenance is not continually interrupted by people doing the most appalling antisocial things in people's tenements. That is a real problem and something that we can solve today by voting for the minister's amendments. I am absolutely delighted about that. Many tenements have multiple owners—not just individual owners, but the City of Edinburgh Council and housing associations—and people have been unable to get progress because at the moment everybody needs to sign up. By moving to a majority system, we are going to improve thousands of people's lives. I am pleased to support the amendments. There are people who will, in the next few months, achieve a real improvement in their quality of life. That is one of the improvements that we have brought about through the Tenements (Scotland) Bill, which I warmly welcome. Like other members of Parliament, I went along as an interloper to the committee to plead with committee members to be interested. The committee was supportive and I am delighted that the minister has been able to find a technical solution. Sometimes a technical problem can remain a technical problem. Getting a solution is something that we should be grateful for.  Amendment 56 agreed to.  Amendments 57 to 71 moved—[Mrs Mary Mulligan]—and agreed to.

Will the member take an intervention?

My point is about transport. The Executive has more than doubled the amount of money that it is putting into transport and 75 per cent of that expenditure will be on public transport. The idea that climate change is being ignored is  just not true. We are not going far enough, but that is partly because we need to change a culture. Surely the Greens would be better off working with us than constantly dismissing the facts.

I have been at public meetings at which Greens have said that they were in favour of road improvements on safety grounds. Safety was the only reason why the roads in question received such improvements.

Is the member aware that, in many countries around the globe, a huge amount of the renewable energy resource is provided by the sun, through solar power, solar heating and so on? We are now making that happen in Scotland, too, so his doom and gloom is inappropriate in this debate.

David Mundell talked about the impact on members of the Scottish Parliament who have to deal with a relatively cumbersome procedure. Does he have any views about members of the public being involved in the procedure? Might the public inquiry process also be more straightforward?

I welcome the minister's commitment to consider the issues raised by Nora Radcliffe. There is a perception among some housing associations that, although there are many benefits to be gained from an integrated approach to energy efficiency, tackling fuel poverty and the use of small-scale renewables, some of them find it hard to work such an approach into their financial planning. A strong political lead and guidance from ministers would be welcome, because the few housing associations that are involved in such work in my constituency are making a big difference to people's lives.

I take a slightly different tack from most members who have spoken. Like Pauline McNeill, most of my constituents live in tenements. I have lived in a series of tenements for most of my life. The absence of legislation on the matter has caused huge problems for thousands of people. Much of my casework as a constituency MSP involves difficulties with people resolving disputes and dealing with the fact that their properties are becoming damaged through lack of maintenance and repair. For me, the test of the bill will be the extent to which it helps to resolve some of those problems. I give a commitment to traipse along to the Justice 2 Committee at stage 2 to test out some of those issues during the detailed line by line consideration of the bill. I read with great interest the minister's comments to the committee and the committee's discussions at stage 1. I agree with nearly all the committee's conclusions, but I want to put other issues on to the table for discussion. I welcome the proposals for majority voting, which will mean that maintenance work will not be held up for years. However, one of the biggest problems is finding out who the owners are. There can be trails of people because of subletting or because private landlords are involved, which means that it is not easy to get everybody round the table.  I can give examples of tenement properties where it has taken more than five years to resolve issues. Even the statutory notice procedure that is used in Edinburgh is not able automatically to resolve some issues. There are major problems in knowing who owns a property. When discussing the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill with the Communities Committee, ministers referred to a statutory measure to allow people to find out who an owner is. Such a measure is important and I hope that it will be examined in detail at stage 2. The definition of maintenance is linked to antisocial behaviour, which is one of the core problems in tenements in my constituency. One of the biggest maintenance problems is the lack of control over access to stairwells, which affects new properties, Georgian tenements and even older properties. The lack of control over access can lead to residents being intimidated and attacked and having their stairwells and doors destroyed. It is a serious issue that is difficult to address, because it is not always possible to find out which owners are responsible. In addition, from my reading of the bill it appears that entry phones will not automatically be included in the maintenance provisions. I had a brief discussion about that with the Deputy Minister for Communities, who is conscious that the issue needs to be addressed. If we do not deal with it, owners will be left with the unpalatable choice of letting their stairwell deteriorate or stumping up disproportionately and letting other people off the hook. Often in such situations repeat damage is caused, so there is a link to antisocial behaviour, about which I know Mary Mulligan is aware. It all comes back to the issue of responsibility. I am keen to see all the issues being tackled. At the moment, some of my constituents' lives are hell because there is no legal framework. The bill will make a difference to people's lives, and I very much welcome it. I also welcome the fact that the Justice 2 Committee and ministers recognise that there is no one-size-fits-all solution, because we have lots of different types of tenements. I could take members to tenements that have problems—even when they have management schemes—whether they are in the old town of Edinburgh or new tenements. I know that the subject is dry and technical, but there is a lot of human misery out there because the bill's provisions are not in place. My concern is to test at stage 2 exactly what some of the bill's provisions will mean in practice. I am also keen to determine what is covered by the definitions of tenement and common block. Over the years, I have had experience of different statutory notices with different owners. I know that members have talked about chimney stacks and water tanks, but in Edinburgh we also have statues. I see a lot of wry smiles around the chamber, but replacing a  statue that could fall over and kill somebody is a big public-safety issue. These are technical issues, but they are important if we are to resolve the disputes that are caused by the absence of the provisions that the bill will introduce. I am also interested in joined-up government. I would like energy efficiency and renewables schemes to be examined to see where the boundaries are. I know that ministers are examining building regulations in which there are—again—issues around the definitions of maintenance and enhancement. In the interests of people who want to get ahead and apply new technologies to their properties, I am keen for those issues to be considered at stage 2. Ministers might want to comment on whether they see such measures appearing in the bill or in another piece of legislation. If the latter, I would be interested to hear from Mary Mulligan which bill she expects the measures to be in. I welcome the bill. It may seem like a dry subject, but out there in the tenements in my constituency the issues are live. I welcome the fact that the bill will take us into the 21 st century.

I welcome the debate; it should be used as an opportunity to reflect on the importance of major events and festivals to Scottish life economically and to our cultural life. It has been taken for granted by some members that we should bag the fact that festivals are good for us and move on to something more exciting and more interesting. However, we should reflect on how festivals can be used as an economic tool in transforming economies. Consider the impact of the Glasgow garden festival. It had a huge impact on Glasgow's perception of itself; it led to a lot of economic development; and it helped Glasgow to make vital economic transitions to become a new global city. The same is true of festivals in Edinburgh. It does not surprise me that last weekend The Observer mentioned Edinburgh and Glasgow as the top two destination cities for people in the UK. We should celebrate that in this chamber. Edinburgh and Glasgow have achieved that, as Kenny MacAskill said, not only by being good destinations, but because of long-term investment in the culture of both cities. There has been  proactive and strategic use of festivals to promote those cities, not only to people who come into them but to the people who live in them, to transform their feelings for and confidence in their cities. It is not possible to list the many events that Edinburgh had last year—there were 50 of them. Everybody knows about the Edinburgh festival fringe, the Edinburgh international book festival, the Edinburgh international festival, the Edinburgh international film festival and the Edinburgh jazz and blues festival, but there have been 50 events in total in the past year. Such events are really important to the city—they generate approximately £200 million a year. In response to Chris Ballance's comments about the MTV awards, I point out that a detailed analysis of the impact of the MTV awards was presented to the City of Edinburgh Council this week. The analysis not only examines the impact on the city but considers what type of people came and where they were attracted from and includes hard-headed thoughts about where the city needs to go on future awards ceremonies such as that. There is analysis of how festivals take place. As Frank McAveety and Kenny MacAskill said, they do not take place by accident; they are part of a long-term strategy. In Edinburgh, the Labour council has had a long-term strategy to promote Edinburgh as a city of international scale to get all the cultural and economic benefits that come from that. It is about promotional activity and it is about developing the city's infrastructure. Co-ordination between the City of Edinburgh Council, the local tourist board, the local enterprise company and all the local tourist industries around and about the city has been critical to that success. I hope that the minister will give a reassurance in his winding-up speech that the very welcome reorganisation of the local tourist industry will not be allowed to disrupt the superb momentum that has built up in the city—particularly in relation to the future of the Edinburgh Convention Bureau. Success is not built only on marketing the city; it is also built on developing our cultural strengths. There have been years of investment by central and local Government. I do not think that the Tories' comments about Labour's commitment to the arts were fair. For the past 20 years, the City of Edinburgh Council has consistently invested in the arts. It has invested not only in big flagship projects, but in community arts and in developing the ability of young people to develop their artistic potential. We need to support not only the flagship cultural icons. We must also underpin support for innovation and creativity in schools. That is why I welcome very much the reference to young people  in the Executive's motion today. We must give young people the opportunity to get involved in arts in the future, to use the arts facilities that are available and to take part in the festivals that are on now. It is also about investing in the future. We should not take it for granted that we will always have the festivals that we currently have and that they will always continue. For us in Edinburgh there are key issues about the public transport infrastructure and about developing a strategy to replace the Ross bandstand—if the minister would like to devote a minute of his final remarks to the way forward on that matter I would be delighted. The new national theatre is also coming along. That should benefit the whole of Scotland and should enable our producing theatres to take their productions around the country and abroad. There is a lot more that we need to do, and it is a question of leadership at both local and national levels. That is why I welcome the fact that we have EventScotland. If we are to be a country that thinks big on arts, tourism and festivals, we must back up that big ambition with practical work. It is not about bureaucracy; it is about co-ordination, focus and putting in the resources to make it happen. Only this week, the City of Edinburgh Council has decided to set up an events unit because it recognises that doing things on a wing and a prayer and trying to be supportive are not enough. We have to be focused, develop a strategy and look to the future. The Executive's motion sets that out and we should support it.

This debate marks another step forward in thinking about how we can modernise the legal framework and the promotion of a long-term sustainable Scotland. We should look at our marine environment not as a resource to plunder, but as a potential resource that is capable of sustaining a rich and varied natural environment and of enabling economic development and supporting local jobs across Scotland. Sometimes those interests will be in conflict, but the whole point of the debate should be about how we manage them in the long term, for local communities and for the wider national interest. I could not believe Alex Johnstone's opposition to an integrated approach. The whole point of the debate about sustainable development is to flush out the arguments. Sometimes there are trade-offs and sometimes we have to say no to people, but we must at least flush out the arguments and have a proper debate about them. We must consider issues such as tourism and nature interpretation, fishing and aquaculture, transport demand, renewable energy and projects around our towns and cities—which nobody has really talked about today—in relation to ports or coastal developments, which are essential for our economy. We need a framework in order to consider those issues. The challenge is to get the right framework in which to hold that kind of debate, to get the right economic development in the right place at the right scale, and then to monitor the carrying capacity of our marine environment so that we can assess the cumulative impact of change. Robin Harper was absolutely right to say that we cannot have development without considering long-term environmental protection in the seas and oceans. It would be irresponsible to look at the two things separately. We are at a starting point in trying to deal with the longer-term challenges of climate change. We must consider what areas of Scotland we want to preserve for all time, what areas of land we will build expensive coastal defences to defend over time, what areas we think should be allowed to go back to the sea and what areas we should manage to allow them to become salt marshes again. Those questions raise many community and society issues, but we do not have a governance structure that allows us to hold such debates and to consider the costs involved. Some members have mentioned renewable energy, which represents a huge opportunity for us. However, the issue is not about setting out a framework for how things will happen in 10 years' time. Proposals are coming forward now, so the debate on how we can grasp the opportunities  needs to take place now. We must have in place a strategic environmental assessment that ensures that such developments are long term, viable and good for the country. There are challenges and opportunities, but our problem is that we have a raft of pieces of legislation from different eras. Over time, the legislation has been amended, so it now contains many different processes. We will never be able to reduce complex decisions to a simple process, but we should be able to simplify the way in which we deal with these issues. The Executive's consultation will let us have that debate. It will allow us to consider what the right framework is and how we should consolidate the legislation on our marine areas to take the debate forward. The consultation paper identifies the many problems that we face—pollution, the loss of biodiversity, coastal erosion, the impact of unregulated tourism—and the many reasons why we should concentrate our minds now on framing new legislation and creating a new national framework. We must also recognise the good work that is taking place. It would be wrong if we used today's debate just to moan about the imperfect legal framework that we start off with. A lot of good work is happening in our coastal communities, in developments such as the coastal partnerships and in fishing and aquaculture management, which I know Alasdair Morrison will mention in the context of the Western Isles. A lot of good work is being done, but we need a coherent, overarching framework. The briefings that I suspect every member received show just how much good work is going on and explain the on-going debate. In particular, I draw members' attention to the joint paper from the Royal Town Planning Institute and RSPB Scotland on spatial planning. We need to consider in detail some of the issues concerning the boundaries between planning on land and planning at sea. We need to ensure that we get that right. We have also been given a lot of evidence about the good work that the coastal partnerships are doing. Before deciding how to vote today, I read through all the amendments. I agree with the sentiment behind the Green amendment. I also agree with Robin Harper on the need for local community management and integrated management of our fisheries. However, I honestly cannot support giving ourselves a deadline of one and a half years to achieve the target of establishing a marine national park. Back when the Parliament was first established, we debated whether one bill should cover both Loch Lomond and the Trossachs and the  Cairngorms proposed national parks. Even though a national park for Loch Lomond and the Trossachs had been debated for a decade or so, we decided to give attention to both proposed national parks, despite the fact that they involved distinctive groups of local stakeholders and different arguments. We should do the same with marine national parks. Instead of having a one-size-fits-all solution, we need to think about the issue a bit more carefully. The more Roseanna Cunningham explained the SNP's position, the more she tied herself in knots. There is a fundamental contradiction in the SNP's argument. Having one border will never fix all the problems in our marine areas. We need to deal with the issues at European, United Kingdom, Scottish and local authority level.

Exactly. I just do not understand the obsession with removing the English from the equation.

Why should we not involve the Welsh, Northern Irish and the English as part of the UK? There is a big argument in favour of the need for UK involvement. I do not sign up with the nationalists on that. Disappointingly, the Tories, too, displayed a lack of understanding of what is meant by good governance and sustainable management. The point of today's debate is to bring people together so that they are not excluded and have a meaningful involvement in how we shape Scotland's future around our coasts and seas. The Executive's consultation paper gives us a chance to do that. The motion is concrete and people should support it.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to combat climate change and protect biodiversity, in light of recent research results on the early arrival of spring. (S2O-2259)

Is the minister aware of the concerns of many wildlife and nature conservation groups, particularly the Woodland Trust, that some natural habitats are being lost through climate change and that we need urgent action, which I hope will happen through the biodiversity strategy? Can the minister assure me that the new biodiversity strategy will be published at an early opportunity so that nature conservation groups, local councils and a range of other organisations can start the battle to tackle climate change and protect biodiversity?

I welcome Margaret Curran's response and I look forward to her support for a new framework for planning. We have a framework in Edinburgh, and it is working, with the involvement of the City of  Edinburgh Council. The supply side—the public subsidy to which the minister has referred—is also important. Will the minister and her department work with the City of Edinburgh Council to tackle a problem that bedevils every MSP's surgery: that local people cannot afford to buy new houses, and that those who are in the rented sector cannot get a trade with other rented sector accommodation, because there is simply not enough affordable accommodation available? I welcome the commitment that the minister has already made today and I ask her to go further in future.

This is a landmark day for nature conservation in Scotland. I hope that we will pass the bill—perhaps even unanimously. The bill is stronger as a result of the parliamentary scrutiny process and the comments that we have received from many organisations. The Environment and Rural Development Committee was able to develop consensus, but only after many discussions and arguments and much detailed consideration of the evidence. Organisations will now act on the provisions in the bill and we will see an improvement in our natural heritage and in our wildlife across Scotland. The bill has the potential to introduce a much more joined-up approach to nature conservation; people have said that we need such an approach. From this bill will come many opportunities that we have not had time to explore this afternoon. For example, opportunities will come from reform of the common agricultural policy and they will have to be considered alongside the provisions in the bill. In the Labour Party, we believe that the bill offers a golden opportunity to improve on our existing agri-environment schemes and to implement new schemes that will deliver greater public benefit from farming to Scotland's environment. Much of what the bill does is to modernise the framework for the conservation of SSSIs. The bill offers greater opportunities for consultation among people who live locally and among key stakeholders. Such consultation will, I hope, lead to more open processes. In Scotland, we take it for granted that we have an excellent natural environment of uniform quality, but that is not the case. During the passage of the bill, we learned about the poor state of many of our SSSIs. Attention must be given to them. Nora Radcliffe spoke about the importance of tourism and the economy. The natural heritage is one of Scotland's key assets and we need to protect and enhance it for the future. The Environment and Rural Development Committee considered many issues in great depth, but we do not have the time to discuss them today. Maureen Macmillan spoke about fossils; we must ensure that our natural history is properly interpreted and protected. We have not even debated today the issues that surround many of the wildlife species that are better protected as a result of the bill. Birds of prey, badgers and  dolphins are now better protected from wildlife crime. I will finish by talking about the parliamentary process. The committee was expertly supported by hard-working committee members, clerks and researchers from the Scottish Parliament information centre, and by all those who submitted evidence and amendments that helped to shape the bill. We were also supported by the minister's relatively positive approach, which was not to knock out every amendment automatically but to consider the merits of each argument. Although the minister resisted some amendments to the bitter end, he took others away and came back with reworked amendments at stage 3. That, in part, is why the bill is a better bill; there has been a listening process and we have engaged in a dialogue. My final point is for the business managers. The fact that we have had much longer than usual between stage 2 and stage 3 has assisted that positive approach by giving the minister and his officials a little bit more time to breathe. It also gave us the time to talk to many organisations and to ensure that, by stage 3, we had made use of that space. I think that the result of that has been a better bill, which I hope that everyone will support.

The Environment and Rural Development Committee debated snaring extensively at stage 1 and took a range of evidence from many organisations. No one on the committee pretends that the issue is easy, and we did not want to have a fudge or cop-out that made it look like we had a solution when we did not. The issues are difficult. If we accept the minister's amendments 11, 12, 30, 13, 14 and 15, we will be in the right place, which, as Nora Radcliffe said, is to view snaring as one form of pest control. It is not pleasant, but neither are other forms of pest control, which impact on humans, the environment and animals. There is nothing pleasant about this discussion. As a committee, we had to make a reasonable judgment on the best way forward. The bill that was presented to us is not the bill that members have in front of them. The bill that is in front of members was amended by us at stage 2. Margo MacDonald's question to Rosemary Byrne on poaching was not answered adequately. We argued about such issues in depth at the committee. Rosemary Byrne would have benefited had she engaged in those discussions. The bill is better now. Snaring is not pleasant. We have tried to get better animal welfare standards, and I welcome Allan Wilson's amendments 11, 12, 30, 13, 14 and 15. One of the most powerful representations that me, Maureen Macmillan and others received was made by the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, which said that even if we keep snaring, we can do it a lot better than we do  it at the moment. We have a huge opportunity to improve best practice. As Eleanor Scott said, it was apparent from the representations that the committee received that some land managers think that we can do better. For example, the BASC codes provide a way forward. We must ensure that best practice is applied throughout the land management process. The bill can help to deliver that. I welcome Allan Wilson's amendments and the commitment to consider the detailed representations that Maureen Macmillan made at stage 2 about drag snares, the design of snares and how snares are laid. We have already agreed that snares should be monitored more frequently than they have been in the past to minimise animal suffering. More can be done and the bill provides an opportunity to do it. Members of the committee will agree that the issue is an easy one on which to grandstand, but we must reach a workable solution that promotes animal welfare, which the bill will do. I encourage the minister to take on board the comments that Maureen Macmillan and others made at stage 2.

Two sets of resources need to be applied. One concerns land managers. We hope that the bill and the new framework will raise standards of practice among land mangers and will make people think carefully about laying snares if they do not have the time to monitor them properly. That is a key issue. The other set of resources is those that will come from the bill's wildlife crime provisions. The committee argued that police resources should be applied in a focused way. Margo MacDonald is right that resources will be required, but part of the issue is about improving best practice and raising standards. Simply passing the bill will not achieve that; follow-up discussions will be required. Those discussions can take place when the subordinate legislation that may come about as a result of Allan Wilson's amendments is considered.

I disagree with little of what both Mark Ruskell and Roseanna Cunningham have said. However, given the extensive debate on this at stage 2, I believe that the key point is how the Parliament, local authorities and all Scottish bodies take ownership of what is in the biodiversity strategy. Only over time will we be able to tell how successful that has been. One of the key aspects of the bill is that we will scrutinise its implementation. We have the balance right in the bill, so now is the time to gear people up to implement the strategy and over time make them accountable to us by bringing them back to the Parliament. Amendment 2 is welcome. I am glad that the minister has thought it through and we should accept it and not back amendment 45.

Will the First Minister reveal what priority he has made tackling climate change—one of the greatest threats to the world's stability—for the Cabinet sub-committee in the week in which the climate group has been established to help the United Kingdom to meet its targets under the Kyoto agreement? Will he also say what the Scottish Executive is doing to turn round Scotland's performance in tackling climate change in the light of recently published evidence that shows that we are falling behind the rest of the UK in cutting our greenhouse gas emissions? I am particularly keen to know what the Executive is going to do on transport, energy and economic policy to turn the situation round.

Become obsessed with one type of renewable energy misses the point. Even with tidal power, there can be environmental impacts. Although tidal power is predictable, it is not constant so there still has to be a mix of sources. To rest on tidal energy would be a huge mistake for Scotland.

I want very much to support the Executive's motion; to endorse the targets that it has set out; to support the progress that has been made so far, particularly in hydro and wind generation; to identify the importance of long-term development of new renewable technologies; and to ensure that energy efficiency is part of the process. The importance that the Parliament has attached to renewable energy will be one of our big achievements and is one of the things that will distinguish the establishment of this Parliament. The renewable energy industry is good news for Scotland. It is good news for research and development in universities and companies. It is good news for manufacturing and jobs. It is very good news for social justice—one of the things that I would add to Jim Wallace's list of five objectives is that we should tackle fuel poverty and end the scandal of people in the 21 st century living in homes that are unfit for them. Renewable energy has something to add in that regard. The industry is also good news for the environment, a subject to which I will return. Renewables do not add to our climate-change problems, they do not create pollution and they do not create waste and security problems that last for many generations to come. For those good  reasons, we should think seriously about using renewables. We have made progress, partly because we have made renewable energy a political priority across the chamber. I hope that we do not lose that in today's debate. Work has been done at ministerial level on the setting of targets, new research technology is being developed in Aberdeen and Orkney, as Richard Baker mentioned, and the new FREDS has been established. However, we need to maintain overall political support. I accept absolutely that people do not have to sign up to every development regardless of their party, but we will take no lectures from the Tories on renewables. The suggestion that the current success in the development of wind power has been achieved at the exclusion of other types of renewables is ludicrous and totally wrong, and the facts do not bear it out. Let us not forget why the wave-power approach was abandoned—it was because the Tories withdrew support for it. They were in charge for 18 years and research into wave power was abandoned at the precise point at which the Danes developed a world-class wind-power industry. That is why Scotland is now playing catch-up and why we are way behind Denmark, Spain, Germany and Japan. We need to have ambitious targets and to give them political support. It is vital that we have a range of different projects. For example, our new and refurbished hydro power systems will mean that we will meet the 18 per cent target for renewables by 2010. We also have a series of biomass projects; although we do not have enough of them, we know that the technology works and that it can provide good power. Moreover, across Scotland, many small-scale combined heat and power and solar projects are being developed with practical financial support from the Executive. Let us not pretend that such work is not being done. There is a long distance between innovation and the mass application of some of the technologies and the Executive must focus its energies in that area. That is why the 40 per cent target is crucial. The target needs to be ambitious. After all, we need vision and big thinking if we are to lift off from our current position. On this occasion, the Executive is giving us that kind of thinking. I say to the SNP and the Tories that that does not mean that we will never have to make difficult decisions. Indeed, we cannot avoid such decisions. Wave and tidal energy developments are not without their problems and will have potential environmental impacts. As a result, we need an appropriate planning and environmental impact assessment framework.  Roseanna Cunningham's speech was much more measured than those that we have heard in the past from the SNP. However, I must tell her that we have concise and coherent guidelines that make it clear that the issue of cumulative impact should be taken into account in every decision. I welcome Scottish Natural Heritage's work to assist that process, because it will result in better decisions and more information. Local authorities have the democratic job of ensuring that their communities are fully involved in such decisions and are able to get into the detail of the projects. Central Government cannot resolve that critical issue. For example, although 17 wind vanes in an installation might be perfectly well located, the 18 th might be in the wrong place. Such a situation will be resolved not by diktats from ministers in central Government, but by the power companies, RSPB Scotland, the local authorities and so on sitting down together and bashing things out. We need that range of decision making. We must support the 40 per cent target, and some excellent work is being done in that regard. However, it is not enough simply to consider renewable energy; we must also think about the way in which we use energy and energy efficiency. In that respect, I was amazed to find myself agreeing with almost all of Alasdair Morgan's speech, which makes it clear that there is consensus across the chamber. Having said that, I disagree with Alasdair Morgan on one point. There is no reason why PPP and long-term contracts cannot include provisions for energy efficiency and the use of renewables. Not including such provisions is a cop-out for companies and local authorities and the Scottish Executive should be making them key. Such contracts, with their 30-year life span, could capture aspects such as reducing carbon emissions and energy saving. Indeed, provisions on those aspects should be embedded in the contracts for every school and hospital project. I hope that the minister will tell us when he winds up how the Executive intends to deliver on that issue.

Speaking as a representative of Edinburgh—but not, I hasten to add, Morningside—I suggest to the member that, if he were doing such a survey, it would be an awful lot more useful to offer people the prospect of photovoltaic cells and mini-wind vanes, which represent a huge opportunity that we have not even begun to explore in Scotland. That is where Labour members are putting their energy in urban areas.

indicated disagreement.

I welcome the minister's positive response. Will she consider making available simple and easy-to-copy versions of the consultation documents? I know that some people have had difficulty in getting multiple copies of them. We want to engage our constituents in the debate and the minister is right that we should have that debate through to the summer. That process would be facilitated by the provision of simple documents that we can access and then spread to our constituents.

I welcome the minister's answer and particularly his comments about not just developing the Waverley line but having somewhere for it to stop when it reaches Edinburgh. In the context of that answer, will he clarify whether the new platforms and train paths at Waverley station have the capacity to take the Waverley line, or whether other, much needed, central Scotland rail projects will be assumed in that welcome initial stage of the development of Waverley station?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will establish a scheme for housing key workers in areas of high economic pressure, such as Edinburgh. (S2O-1902)

I welcome the minister's commitment to address the issue. Does she acknowledge the crisis in Edinburgh, where ranges of key workers are now being excluded from the housing market and cannot afford to live in the city? Does she recognise that the extent of our problem is such that we must not just deal with the select few but meet the needs of 1,000 households every year in Edinburgh? That is a key problem that we must address urgently.

That is a bit of a poisoned chalice. I welcome the minister's statement and the various documents that have been issued this morning, which represent a big step forward towards a more streamlined and focused planning system. I particularly welcome her national planning framework and the four city-region planning documents, which are absolutely central. I welcome the minister's comments on a third-party right of appeal and ask her to take a genuine overview of the whole system. One of the main frustrations for members of the public is that they do not see the development plans. Many development plans are totally out of date and those that are up to date are often not taken very seriously at a political level by the people who make the final decisions that shape our  environment. I welcome the minister's acknowledgement that we need to improve third-party rights—that must be one of the ideas that she acts on in the summer. She has to make the development planning system much more meaningful and she has to give it political weight. I also ask her to ensure that we have appropriate staff resources and that management is improved.

I declare an interest as the constituency MSP for Standard Life. Also, like many people in the chamber and outside it, I am a policyholder in the company. I am bitterly disappointed to hear that 900 jobs have gone today and I am extremely concerned for Standard Life staff. I welcome the concern that the Deputy First Minister has expressed. I remind him that today's bad news means that nearly 2,000 jobs have been lost in Edinburgh's financial sector during the past three months. Will the Deputy First Minister convey the Parliament's dismay to Standard Life's management and tell it that many of us believe that this is a strange way to reward the staff and policyholders who have supported the company's mutual status? There is justified resentment. Will he tell me what he intends to do to stem the flow of job losses from the capital and to stabilise and support the financial sector, which is crucial both to Edinburgh and to Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made in developing markets for recycled materials. (S2O-1743)

I thank the minister for his reply and particularly commend the work that is being done by the waste and resources action programme. I am sure that he will know that WRAP has recently been working on developing market information for organisations so that people can collect and sell recyclables with up-to-date information via the web. Will the minister take this opportunity to encourage organisations such as local authorities throughout Scotland to take part in a pilot study and to help further to develop recycling markets in Scotland? Will he encourage them to use their own procurement policies to help to promote a long-term and stable market for recycled goods such as glass?

To ask the First Minister whether there is any threat to Scottish Water's public status due to the general agreement on trade in services. (S2F-769)

I thank the First Minister for his unequivocal reply. A clear majority of people whom the Scottish Consumer Council questioned still want a publicly funded water system. As a result of sustained campaigning, the European Union has already stated that Europe's health, education and broadcasting sectors will not be included in further GATS negotiations. Will the First Minister reassure me that he and the Scottish Executive will consider fully the implications of GATS on public services in Scotland and that he will make strong representations through the United Kingdom formulating process to ensure that we retain democratic accountability for our public services?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am very glad that we are having a debate on zero waste this morning. It is worth noting that it is our second debate on waste in the past couple of months. I hope that we can move forward a little today. Shiona Baird's speech contained much that I agree with. We should be examining in depth some of the examples from around the world that she and Nora Radcliffe cited. Canberra, Edmonton and California have been mentioned, as were other regions around the world that have signed  up to zero waste. New Zealand, too, has signed up to zero waste. Those places are not thinking about achieving zero waste instantly but about achieving it by 2015; they are considering how to change what they do now for the future. I agree strongly with the concept of using debates on zero waste as a trigger for action. I accept that we can move faster than we are moving at present, so let us use the debate to explore the options that exist. I listened to Nora Radcliffe's analysis of progress to date; she was spot-on. We have a national waste plan—albeit one that took a long time to get in place—that is a mix of bottom-up and top-down approaches. The waste plan is not just about how we dump waste and get it out of our horizons and it is not just about management of waste; it is about how we will reduce waste in the long run. At the moment, the pressure is on in respect of how we manage our waste, but the long-term approach must involve examination of resource use. That must be the focus. In that regard, zero waste helps, because it is a clever tag that makes us wonder whether we could have no waste at all. It is clear that that is a huge objective, but using our resources more effectively offers many benefits to business and to us all as consumers, residents and citizens. The result will be that we will not have unattractive landfill sites throughout the country. Quite a few members mentioned composting, which is one of the key elements of the national waste plan. We all create a huge amount of domestic waste, much of which is deeply unpleasant when it starts to biodegrade. It poses the greatest health risk when it rots and leaches from landfill. The cities that have adopted zero-waste policies have made a big change very quickly. High-achieving cities and councils have done the kinds of things that we are beginning to bring on-stream in Scotland. What we are now doing on recycling, separation of waste and composting is the right way forward. We need to progress the debate on zero waste, although we should acknowledge that progress has been made. I remember the last debate that we had on waste, in which Allan Wilson—in response to the Environment and Rural Development Committee's negative and positive comments—was very positive about the way in which zero waste could add to the debate. This morning, Lewis Macdonald has picked up that mantle. I turn to the amendments. I found the Tory amendment to be deeply ironic. The biggest setback to recycling in Scotland was the reorganisation—the Balkanisation—of our local authorities in Scotland. Recycling figures plummeted after the reorganisation of local government, so I cannot take a lecture from Alex  Johnstone on the need to have a bottom-up, rather than a top-down, approach. What the Tories did to Balkanise local authorities destroyed their capacity to make progress, to be innovative and to come together on recycling. The whole point of the national waste plan is that it seeks to harness the energies and the experience of local authorities and to put the matter in a regional context. The plan is allied to national targets, because without such targets we will not get anywhere. It is crucial that the plan is getting leadership and money from the Executive.

I do not accept that best value is about the lowest possible price: it must be about other social objectives and, under European procurement policy, bodies are encouraged to take account of those other objectives. As long as companies compete on a level playing field, environmental standards can be imposed. There should be no excuse for local authorities not to do that; Parliament should encourage them in that regard. The nationalist amendment is one of the laziest amendments that the Scottish National Party has produced. Are the other places around the world that are pursuing zero waste sitting back, navel gazing and complaining that they are not independent national states? Of course they are not. The last time I looked, Bath and North East Somerset Council was not an independent legislator on the world stage. Let us get real. I would not have minded if Richard Lochhead had even mentioned in his opening speech the fact that Europe is the driver in that it directs 80 per cent of our environmental legislation. There is the landfill directive, the WEEE directive and the work on chemicals and integrated product development. We must work in a global context on waste. It is no use pretending that we in Scotland cannot do anything. Richard Lochhead did not even provide an analysis of the most recent budget. If he wanted to get tough by saying, "Here's how we can change the fiscal mechanisms", he could have made the effort to examine Gordon Brown's recent budget to identify what opportunities were being missed from a nationalist perspective. Not an ounce of effort was made; the SNP wants to have the same tired old debate. We face some real challenges. I am glad that we are having a debate on zero waste and I think that the Greens' constructive approach is useful. A lot  more needs to be done on commercial waste, but some good work is being done by SEPA, the enterprise companies and the Federation of Small Businesses, which has an excellent environmental toolkit that assesses resource use. There is a job to be done in raising the bar and saying that we must do a lot more, but let us acknowledge the work in progress so that we encourage the champions out there that are doing a good job. Let us push them to do more and let us ensure that we raise the level of debate in Parliament.

I support the Local Governance (Scotland) Bill because it represents an opportunity to modernise local government in Scotland. It should deliver fairer voting, more representative membership of councils and better support for councillors. We  should grasp the opportunities that it presents us with. Contrary to what some members have said today, many of us in the Labour Party support the proposals in the bill. Our support goes back to our party's founding democratic principles, which date back 100 years. Our belief in fairer voting was a key issue in our support for the establishment of the Scottish Parliament and for greater democracy in the way in which its members would be elected. One of the opportunities that we should grasp is that which would allow us to ensure that a greater number of women represent their local communities in our councils. We did something similar in relation to the Scottish Parliament.

I agree that PR does not guarantee diversity in representation and that political will is the important factor. However, the bill presents us with an opportunity to ensure that there is fairer voting and fairer representation of communities. I hope that the Labour Party grasps that opportunity. Some 50 per cent of the members of this Parliament are female and both men and women represent our communities. I think that that situation should apply to local government as well. Only a fifth of our councillors are female. That is a disgrace and we need to tackle it. Voter confusion, which the committee considered, is a hugely important issue. We have a job of work to do in telling people how straightforward the system will be. The system is extremely simple for voters; the difficult bit is in the counting. For those reasons, I strongly support the committee's suggestions for electronic voting. The system must be simple and straightforward. I urge the minister to address issues of procurement to ensure that the right technical equipment is put in place so that the process works smoothly. I do not envy the electoral registration officers' job in that regard. However, I repeat that, as far as the voters are concerned, the system is straightforward. We need to have a national campaign to communicate that if the bill is passed. The committee got the issue of the size of the wards absolutely right. We have had some debate on that subject. Multimember wards with three to four councillors would deliver greater proportionality than we have at the moment and would still ensure that local communities are, and  feel that they are, effectively represented. Larger wards could begin to undermine local accountability and accessibility. Perfect accountability could be delivered by having a list for each local council, but that would not reflect people's local interests. The line must be drawn somewhere and I think that the committee has done a good job in striking the right balance. Its recommendations will ensure that we have fairer voting and that local communities continue to be represented effectively. The committee had to consider complex evidence about the boundary commission creating new multimember wards from scratch. It is important that we build on existing community identities. I know that there are concerns about community severance, which is why I think that the principles behind the proposals should be included in the bill so that everybody is aware of them when the new wards are being drawn up. Some thought needs to be given to that issue. I hope that the Parliament votes to support the bill. I would not pretend for a minute that it is the top issue for my constituents. That is not to say that I have not had letters about it—my constituents are good at getting in touch with me on a range of issues—but the top issues for my constituents are local transport, the new schools that will be built and Edinburgh's housing crisis. However, every opinion poll says that people want fairer voting and more democratic approaches. The proposal in the bill is the right thing to do, which is why we should support it. Some members have made politically opportunistic claims that their party is the only supporter of democracy and that other members are voting purely for party reasons. However, when the Labour Party supported PR for the Scottish Parliament, we did so not from narrow party interest—we could quite happily have had the bulk of the Parliament made up of Labour Party representatives who were elected under the first-past-the-post system. However, we acknowledged the desire in Scotland for fairer voting. We took the opportunity to get more women and young people elected. I would also like people from ethnic minorities to be represented in greater numbers in our local councils. The bill gives us the opportunity to provide for that, but it will not happen automatically. There are political choices. Similarly, the bill will not automatically ensure that more people vote in local authority elections. It is our job, as politicians, to get people interested and to persuade them to come out to vote. The bill provides us with opportunities. It will not fix local government, but it provides a framework for better support for the councils that we have elected, so that they can do their jobs properly, for  a fairer voting system and for a modernised system of local government in Scotland. It is not everyone's number 1 issue in terms of voter interest, but it represents the right thing to do and that is why the Parliament should vote for it today.

I was delighted that Rhona Brankin had not just lodged the motion but had been successful in having it debated. The comments that we have heard so far are absolutely spot on. We have to raise awareness of the issue. During the previous session, Rhona and I worked together on women's health issues and we were particularly keen to focus on the range of health issues for women over the age of 45, because some of those issues are not high enough on our political agenda. We should ensure that the Official Report records the point that the motion makes: "that musculoskeletal disorders are the most common cause of severe long-term pain and physical disability affecting hundreds of millions of people". Osteoporosis in particular is a major cause of disability in women. We know from research that 40 per cent of women over 50 will experience at least one bone fracture. The social and personal impact of fractures often sets people back dramatically. I used to work as a town planner, and the statistics on pedestrian activity problems, such as people tripping on pavements, were not prioritised. One could focus on people being killed in road accidents, but a small event such as someone tripping on a pavement can lead to that person being hospitalised, particularly if they are an older person, and it can be difficult for them to get back into an independent life. Such stories, which are not headline-grabbing, come under Rhona Brankin's motion. We do not always see them as big political issues, but it is important to take the issue seriously. Most of us do not give our bone structure a second thought. It is not something that we have to think about unless we are diagnosed with a problem or we know someone who has one. Awareness is critical, and that is why Rhona Brankin is right to bring the issue to the chamber today. We know that women are more at risk of developing osteoporosis and that the menopause can accelerate bone loss. One of the things that came out strongly in Rhona Brankin's speech is the importance of being proactive and not accepting the inevitability of the way in which such diseases impact on us. Awareness of what we can do is important for health, particularly in building strong bones. For example, it is important to understand which types of exercise, such as weight-bearing exercise, are the right ones to  undertake. It is difficult to persuade most of us to exercise, because we always put it off—we would rather do something else. However, the more information that we can get out to people about calcium, about being proactive about health, about not smoking and about trying not to become overweight, the better. All those things are important and the cost of not paying attention to them can be extreme. We should focus on what we can do as MSPs. I suspect that we are all consulted about local health plans. I am keen for women's health to be taken up in the local health plan for Lothian. Fergus Ewing mentioned scanning facilities. For us in the Lothians, the amount of time that it takes for people to get access to scanning is a particularly important issue. Again, that is not a headline-grabbing issue, but many millions of people live with arthritis and osteoporosis and those conditions damage their quality of life. A lot of people acclimatise to the pain; a level of pain that I would find utterly excruciating is taken for granted by a lot of people because it is less than the pain that they would have without painkillers. We should stop and think. We should consider the motion, and we should support Rhona Brankin's attempt to get the issue onto our agenda. We should make sure that the WHO campaign is taken seriously. I hope that the minister will talk in his summing up about the work that the Scottish Executive is doing to play its part in ensuring that health boards take the issue seriously. We must raise the issues of awareness and prevention where that is possible—that must be a high priority for us.

I welcome the minister's response to George Lyon's question. I also welcome the award that she made to the City of Edinburgh Council for its imaginative policies on the delivery of affordable housing through the planning system. Does she acknowledge that, in order to build affordable houses, our social housing providers in Edinburgh need the capacity to meet the scale of our housing crisis, which is currently running at the level of 1,000 new homes a year? Will she meet me to discuss how an integrated approach can be taken to tackling Edinburgh's housing crisis?

I welcome the lengthy Executive amendment and  will speak in favour of it. What is the starting point for the debate? We had a lengthy consultation exercise, which demonstrated public scepticism about GM technology as people understand it. It also demonstrated people's strong demand to be able to choose the kind of food they eat and the kind of food they see on their supermarket shelves.

No, thanks. I want to get going. Part of the reason for that scepticism is the over-inflated claims that were made by GM companies, and the sense that the big GM companies want to push us down the GM route regardless. The claim was made a couple of years ago that GM technology could at a stroke get rid of poverty and famine in developing countries. If it was that easy, it should have been done already, but it is not that easy and the issue is much more complex. There are a wide variety of concerns, particularly about the long-term effects of GM products, and there is unease about where the technology might lead and—crucially—about a lack of future choices for farming methods.

No, thank you. I want to get on. For those reasons, it is absolutely right that we should have a robust testing framework, so that we can examine the issues and have technical debates in Parliament. We have to raise our game and think about these difficult scientific issues. That is why I welcome last week's decision to rule out the commercialisation of GM beet and rape on the basis of robust scientific testing, which discovered evidence of a potential negative impact on our environment. That is not mentioned in the SNP motion. I am not surprised by that, because the SNP wants only to score political points, not to protect consumers or our environment. As Allan Wilson and George Lyon made clear, the reality is that under EU rules, if we did not have a robust approach to testing, we would not have a leg to stand on if we wanted to ban such crops.

We should be supporting the  Executive's decision to seek to amend the EU approval for Chardon LL maize to restrict its cultivation, as laid out in the amendment. More tests need to be carried out, not just on that maize, but on a variety of different crops. I return to my main point, which is that although choice is an issue for farmers in developing countries and in the UK, it is also an issue for consumers.

I have just taken an intervention. I agree with what John Scott said about having high-quality niche marketing for Scotland's crops. We have to address particular issues if that is to be a reality. The first issue is crop distances. I would like the minister to outline the timescale for and the nature of the consultation that he is going to conduct, because we cannot have genetically modified crops without having effective distances, with scientific backing, between crops. The EU agreed that products must be labelled if the GM content of non-GM products is greater than the threshold of 0.9 per cent, but we need a lower limit, particularly for organic foods. According to the Soil Association, that is critical for consumer confidence. We cannot have GM crops in Scotland until we have a proper liability regime. We also need to apply the precautionary principle. The polluter-pays principle means that biotechnology companies should be prepared to accept liability. We need to be sure that minds are concentrated in those companies. We have already had mistakes in the US, where mislabelled seed was provided to farmers, who unwittingly planted seed that had GM contamination. I would like the minister in summing up to address the need for an effective liability regime.

I welcome the minister's positive response. I should also say that the developments in Orkney and the work at the Robert Gordon University are also very welcome. We need long-term funding to allow the technology to be developed and its potential to be maximised. After attending this week's launch in Edinburgh of the Pelamis, which is a wonderful technological development, I am aware that, with all the developments in wind power and the massive potential of wave and tidal power, the issue of upgrading the grid will be critical. Will the minister commit himself to securing a positive response in negotiations with the UK Government on that matter?

I welcome the application of the precautionary principle, which means that GM rape seed and beet will be banned for good scientific reasons. I want to press the minister on his welcome acknowledgement that many of us remain sceptical about some of the over-extravagant claims about GM technology. Will the minister outline precisely how he intends to avoid cross-contamination from GM crops on conventional and organic crops in particular, so that we as consumers will retain a real choice when we buy food? Further, will he set out how he sees the delivery of an effective liability regime that will  ensure that conventional and organic farmers are not put at risk?

I welcome the minister's positive response. I suggest that guidance could set standards for the whole of Scotland, requiring every education authority to consider the opportunities that renewable energy presents, for example. That would embed renewable energy in all school projects at the start and would mean that the 30-year life cycle analyses would begin to generate the projects. That would happen only if the Executive required all local authorities to consider such matters in progressing that massive programme of public expenditure throughout Scotland.

As a Labour member, I welcome the minister's statement. This is the beginning of the end for the common agricultural policy, against which we have campaigned for years. Will the minister confirm that 10 per cent modulation will deliver £40 million of new investment for our rural environment in Scotland, which will bring huge public policy benefits across the country? What plans does he have to manage the transition period after 2007 to move us to a position whereby spending on agriculture is founded on the needs of Scottish rural communities? Will we deliver a much more integrated approach than the one that we have at the moment, so that we can link up a regional focus on the key priorities such as organic farming and forestry management and create much more environmentally sustainable and integrated rural development? Will he say something about the clear and measurable public objectives that will be needed if we are going to spend this public money in a totally different way?

I welcome the minister's first response and ask whether he supports the City of Edinburgh Council's initiative to work with Scottish Enterprise Edinburgh and Lothian and Scottish Financial Enterprise to tackle the challenges that are presented by the trend towards offshoring functions for reasons that are primarily to do with labour costs. Will he outline what work is being done with regard to the 2004 report that he talked about earlier today? In the meantime, what is being done to promote the advantages of Edinburgh to companies in the financial services sector that are comparing Edinburgh with locations in the far east? What can the Scottish Executive do to support that work?

Will Rob Gibson give way?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the bill because it will provide a new framework for energy policy. However, a couple of things must be said about areas in which I believe more work can be done. I thought that what Christine May said about the importance of our environmental principles underpinning the bill was right. It is critical for the regulation of electricity trading arrangements and for the operation of the nuclear decommissioning agency that environmental principles are written into the base of the bill. If we are to get the right  decisions for the long term, it is not good enough to have a best-value approach that adds on the environment after how things will be done has been sorted out, when only minor tweaks can be made. Environmental principles must be right up there at the front of the bill. I read the minister's comments to the Enterprise and Culture Committee—

No, I have only four minutes. I want the minister to state more strongly that he will ensure that if we approve the Sewel motion, he will put environmental principles on the UK ministers' agenda. Emphasising those principles is part of our job of protecting the Scottish environment, but I believe that they are utterly consistent with the UK Government's principles on the environment. The UK Government has done a huge amount of work to change UK policy on energy during the past six or seven years. The environmental principles must be in the system. When we come to deal with the regulation of nuclear waste, it is critical that the framework that is set up enables SEPA to continue to do its important work, which is based on the principle of protecting the Scottish environment. The bill will set up a framework for that. The key thing is to ensure that the detail of the bill is watched as it goes through committee. It is also important to set a framework for cleaning up our old nuclear facilities and sites and moving to a wide-ranging decommissioning programme. That programme has started at Dounreay under the existing regime. The discussions that have taken place between two grown-up Governments show the way that we must go in the future. The Sewel motion is part of that negotiated system for the future. It is vital for our economic and environmental future that the bill gets renewables right. I welcome the Enterprise and Culture Committee's commitment to ensuring that the Scottish Executive is fully aware of the representations from the Scottish renewables industry and the whole issue of how we develop the grid in the future. That is critical for the delivery of our target for Scottish renewables and the UK's global aspirations. I believe that the Greens' amendment totally misses the target. If they want to be critical, they should know that it is not the bill that is the problem but the nature of the BETTA system that is being developed outwith the bill. Changing the bill or refusing to pass the Sewel motion will not make any difference to that at all. What we need to do is to get stuck in and negotiate to ensure that our Scottish ministers are fighting our corner, as they have been doing. We have already had  changes for Ofgem on the issue and we want more of that work to be done. The cross-party renewable energy group is working on this issue. Jamie Stone's detailed comments on the expansion of the grid and on a fair financial regime that does not discriminate against the vast opportunities that we have in Scotland for renewables were spot on. It is important that Scottish ministers are at the heart of the process and the Sewel motion will let us ensure that. We will need to do other things in the future, such as managing intermittency so that we can deliver on the 40 per cent target by 2020. We must also look at the issue of small-scale and micro-scale renewables, which have not been mentioned during the debate but which are critical. It is vital that we have a regulatory framework that enables us to do that in Scotland, so I add that to the list of issues that I want ministers to take up with their UK colleagues. It is important that we take the benefits that will come from the bill—the new renewable energy zones and the opportunities for Scottish operators to export to the national grid—but only if we get the framework right through BETTA. That is not in the bill, but the bill enables it. However, the detailed work will come in consultation with Ofgem. Some progress has been made, but much more needs to be made. I ask the minister to address that in his summing-up.

I welcome the First Minister's support for the upgrade of Waverley railway station as a UK priority. When does he think we will reach the next stage of that proposal?

Let me start off by congratulating Christine May on securing this important debate. Like others, I want to promote Scotland's renewables industry's win-win potential that could create jobs and prosperity while safeguarding our environment. I know that the partnership agreement has a clear green thread that links commitments on actions with policy in order to create a clear framework for delivering sustainable development in Scotland. We need to embrace renewable energy if we are to get the economic benefits that it can bring. Christine May was absolutely right to highlight the potential for job creation, but I want to focus on the jobs that could be created across the whole of Scotland. It is important that the Vestas-Celtic project in Campbeltown is taking jobs to one of the most economically depressed parts of Scotland. In an area such as Campbeltown, the creation of 300  jobs has a massive impact. We need to see more jobs like that in fabrication and in the creation of renewables technologies across Scotland. We have a target that 40 per cent of all our electricity needs should come from renewable sources by 2020. I know that the Executive is looking at how we deliver that and how we might further increase the proportion of electricity that is supplied from renewable sources. Any increase in the targets requires parallel work to be done on the national grid now. Other members have already commented on BETTA, but a key point is the need to strengthen the grid in Scotland. Given that, as far as the national grid is concerned, many of our renewable sources are at the end of the tree, we need a prioritisation process to ensure that new wave and wind developments can be connected to the grid. There is also an issue about the renewables obligation. We need to ensure that we have long-term financial security to ensure that the financial sector is prepared to invest in renewables. I want to focus on something that nobody else has talked about yet. The motion is right to talk about the need to explore all forms of renewable energy and the one that I want to explore is solar energy in the form of solar heat and solar electricity. Scotland has a huge opportunity in that regard. Published research has shown that we have one of the best climates for solar power in Europe. That might not meet our expectations, but solar energy is a huge opportunity when considered in the light of our energy demand throughout the year and our cold climate. A domestic solar or air heating system in Scotland can provide massive carbon dioxide savings. Just 4m 2 of panelling can provide about half of the hot water that a house in Scotland will use in a year. Including installation, a domestic solar water system costs £1,500 and solar heating costs between £400 and £700. Once those costs have been met, the energy is free. I ask the Executive to build that into its procurement process for new schools and for the massive amount of public sector housing that will be built through housing associations. We should ensure that solar energy is built in with the bricks. This is a way in which we can deliver social justice, create new jobs, save people money and save our environment. Finally, these technologies are delivered in Scotland. Solartwin is a Scottish company. We should be including these Scottish companies in our procurement systems. We should set targets that ensure that we support the industry. I hope that the minister will specifically address the point about the opportunities that Scotland has with regard to solar energy.

I welcome the minister's explanation of how we can influence and shape the market in a mixed economy. I fully appreciate his point that the role of regulations, particularly with regard to this issue, could create a level playing field for companies. We are all striving to ensure that companies tackle the task of recycling and reusing more, but they must do so competitively across the whole of Europe to ensure that we are not disadvantaged. I should also reiterate the point in our report about procurement. As well as playing a leadership role, the Executive can establish a framework for public procurement across the whole public sector to influence markets and raise standards.

Will the member give way?

The member has asked one or two of us some pretty direct questions. If she read the report, she would see that we noted the success of the packaging recovery scheme in increasing recovery rates from 30 per cent in 1997 to 50 per cent in 2002, which means that 4.96 million tonnes less are going to landfill. Packaging regulations that work have clear impacts. They hit companies throughout Europe. Frances Curran has not talked about the waste electrical and electronic equipment directive, which will force companies to take back to source white goods, to ensure that they are recycled or reused more effectively.

The committee makes lots of suggestions.

We have had a large number of reviews of the planning system in Scotland over the past few years, but we have not had a new planning bill. As I understand it, the Executive intends to introduce a bill in this parliamentary session, so we will get action. The question is whether the bill will be right, but Alex Johnstone cannot say that there have not been any reviews.

Waste and what we do with it is a huge challenge, which is why the Environment and Rural Development Committee chose to examine the national waste strategy. First, I thank committee members for their energy and support on this issue, and all those people who came along and gave evidence to the committee, orally and in writing, including the minister Ross Finnie, whom I know lots of people will be thinking about today. We all wish him well in his recovery. I also thank the committee clerks for their sterling work in helping us to compile our final report. Our report shows what everybody knows: the plain fact that Scotland is way behind the rest of Europe in waste reduction, reuse and recycling. It does not have to be like that. Our challenge is to turn around current waste trends. In Austria, for example, 75 per cent of municipal solid waste is recycled. In a sense, our report is shocking. It identifies many points on which the committee considers the Scottish Executive has got it right, which is why, of course, we got no press coverage whatsoever. However, if members read our report they will see that we have identified quite a few areas in which we feel that faster action is needed from the Executive, and also areas in which the Executive needs to re-examine issues, where there are contradictions between what the Executive intends with the national waste strategy and the practical delivery implications. At the moment, we are all producing more rubbish every year. As an example, the residents of Edinburgh produce enough rubbish to fill up Murrayfield stadium six times over every year. In Scotland, the average home produces approximately a tonne of rubbish per year, most of which ends up buried in the ground. Our inquiry aimed to help develop the national waste strategy and to try to help turn around the legacy that the Parliament inherited. We are grateful to the minister for giving us a copy of the Scottish Executive's response in advance of the debate. Many of the comments in our report are positive, although I will be pressing the minister on several areas where we think that further progress is needed.  The national waste strategy was published in 1999 and that was the first time that waste management issues were brought together at a national level. We have 11 waste strategy areas where local groupings, combining the local authorities and other stakeholders, develop area waste plans and feed them in to the national waste plan. We know that European Union legislation has reinforced the political imperative of moving away from our outdated reliance on landfill. The national waste plan is not an implementation plan as such; it is a framework for action. It is shaped around the choices that are made in accordance with the best practicable environmental option. Last year, the Environment and Rural Development Committee decided that this should be our first piece of work. We wanted to evaluate the current position to see how far implementation of the national waste plan had gone. We wanted particularly to consider progress on achieving key targets, what money was available through the strategic waste fund, and whether the best practicable environmental option was being achieved in practice. We wanted to examine the impact of area waste plans on existing community and voluntary partnerships. We wanted to find out how the initiatives to develop appropriate markets for waste material were going. We wanted to examine developments in the management of non-municipal waste. We also wanted to decide whether the key targets and priorities in the plan are right. We wanted to examine the relationship between the Executive, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, the local authorities, the non-governmental organisations, community partnerships and local people—the other stakeholders in the plan. Finally, we wanted to see where the plan fitted with current European policy, best practice and where we thought that the EU was likely to go with its future obligations. That is the context within which we did our work. The national waste plan contains targets for municipal waste, but approximately 9 million tonnes of waste is produced each year by the commercial and industrial sector in Scotland. Three quarters of the waste that is produced in Scotland is non-municipal. The committee recommended that we should make urgent progress in setting challenging targets for the reduction of landfill of key non-municipal waste streams. That is not currently addressed in the national plan; we believe that that is a gap that has to be filled urgently. The Scottish Executive has acknowledged the committee's focus on integrating those perspectives and there is a commitment to publish a framework by mid-2004. We believe that that work is urgent and essential and we support the minister in making it happen.

I do not have any comment to make on the Ministry of Defence. I will address procurement later on, because there are huge issues surrounding reusing and recycling waste rather than dumping it in landfill. That applies to the Government as well as the private sector. The next key issue that the committee considered was that of land use planning. The committee urged the minister to produce as soon as possible an action plan and timetable for reform of the planning guidelines to ensure that all new housing includes provision for separating waste. In most houses at the moment it is not easy to do that. We also want the planning process to become more user friendly and we recommended that formal rights of consultation and other planning procedures should be modernised to ensure that key players can be involved in an equitable and just way. We do not believe that that happens at the moment. However, we welcome the Executive's commitment to studying waste in the planning system. The only comment I would make to the minister is that if that study is timely, it might be able to feed into the proposed planning bill that we know is coming soon from the Executive. It would be good to deal with both those issues at the same time. The committee believes that the Scottish Executive should consider how our waste infrastructure can be developed rapidly and appropriately, while still being acceptable to communities. The committee considers that that is a huge challenge and that unless we meet it we will not meet the national waste plan targets. The committee further considered funding. There is a key issue about local authority funding coming through the strategic waste fund. My knowledge of the fund is that there are significant delays in the system—that has certainly been the case in Edinburgh. The committee believes that the strategic waste fund should reach community groups, which do some exciting and innovative work in Scotland, particularly in education. The fact that such groups deliver added benefits locally, such as training, should be considered. The committee considered market development for renewables, which is a key issue in the provision of long-term stability for dealing with recycling properly. To return to the point I made to Brian Monteith: the committee also considered public procurement. The committee urges the  Executive and the enterprise companies to continue to support the work that is under way to develop the market for recycled materials and reused goods. The Executive is working to change its own purchasing rules to enhance the use of recycled products. The leadership that the Scottish Executive can offer other public bodies and local authorities is critical. However, the public sector potentially has a huge impact that goes well beyond the Executive. That procurement policy should be rolled out throughout the public sector so that that huge market begins to change and to demand recycled goods. The committee mentions at the start of its report the issue of non-municipal waste and its importance, but another perspective is the issue of business competitiveness. Businesses need to improve their waste management not just for environmental reasons, but to increase their competitiveness. When the committee questioned small businesses they said that they could not easily access advice on the matter and that they did not know how to make the changes that would save them money. We are pleased that the Executive has confirmed more money to two local agencies that provide advice to businesses. That is positive news—the committee would like that to cover the whole of Scotland. One group, the business environment partnership in Midlothian, was an excellent witness to the committee's inquiry. There is a lot of scope for the Executive to go further in considering how new business development opportunities, such as the recycling market, can be encouraged. The response from the minister on the committee's commitment to urge SEPA and the Community Recycling Network Scotland to get together to consider community representation has been very positive. When I look through the minister's response to our lengthy inquiry there is a lot that goes a long way towards meeting the committee's requests, suggestions and demands. However, there were a number of areas where, it is fair to say, the Executive could do better. I will concentrate my final remarks on those. I am sure that one of my colleagues will talk about composting. The committee thinks that how the targets are being implemented is potentially counter-productive. We also considered incineration and energy recovery. The committee was clear that incineration can be appropriate in some local circumstances, but it considers that there is a real danger that there could be an economic and contractual incentive just to feed an incinerator, which could override the push to recycle and reuse. That must be considered. The committee also felt that, where incineration of waste is carried out, it should be combined with energy recovery schemes such as district heating, so that there is a double environmental benefit.  The Executive's response avoids tackling that issue head-on. The committee considered landfill, and believes that the highest possible standards of management should be applied to both new and existing landfill sites. Karen Whitefield and Karen Gillon have strong views on the issue, which they presented to the committee. Groups such as the Greengairs environmental forum highlighted the huge problem with the local management of landfill. The evidence that we took was that the regulations on the table do not always work in practice. The Executive response perhaps sidesteps that issue. The committee has particularly recommended that landfill regulations should specify a minimum distance that should be maintained between new landfill developments and existing communities. The committee is not clear why that has been rejected by the Executive. It is already used for opencast coalmining, for example. The committee considers that it is a positive way in which landfill could be managed in a manner that is more environmentally acceptable and that is more acceptable to communities. We also picked up on the need to reduce the amount of waste that we produce. It is not enough just to recycle or reuse our waste; we should create less waste in the first place. That should be incorporated into the national waste plan as a matter of urgency. We have urged the minister to introduce at an early stage a detailed action plan and timetable for the consideration of waste minimisation audits, so that organisations might consider properly how they could change their current plans. It is fair to say that the Executive response to that is generally supportive of the committee's viewpoint, but the response is weak on specifics. We recommended a firm target, which I hope the minister will take on board. We welcome the minister's acceptance that the national waste plan provides a platform for a radical reduction in waste beyond our current ambitions and that work needs to begin on the practical implications of zero waste. It is great that the minister has accepted that. Developments at EU level on product design will clearly be important if we are to move towards such a concept, but it is clear that a lot of work needs to be done on that. I would be interested to hear the minister's views on that. As an aside, I might mention that we also asked the Presiding Officer that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body examine waste minimisation in the Scottish Parliament. I issue a gentle reminder that we would like some views back on that, as we have not had a response to date. I just want to put that on the record.  Committee colleagues will surely comment on recycling, landfill tax and community issues, but there are a couple of final points on which I want to wind up. The national waste plan is intended to reduce the amount of domestic waste that we send to landfill from 90 per cent to 30 per cent by 2020. One way in which that might be done is by reducing excess packaging and by trying to get rid of the irresponsible approach that is currently taken to overpackaging. We might take the chocolate box as an example—given the high dependence on chocolate that some of us may have been through over the Christmas period. Everybody knows the huge amount of waste that there is in just one box of chocolates. That is the kind of area in which we could make a huge practical difference with no adverse social or economic effect and with a big environmental benefit. We need to reduce the amount of waste that we create and the amount that we send to landfill. To deliver that, we need not only regulations but a change of culture. As consumers, we need to make different demands and, as organisations, we need to ensure that we reduce waste and recycle and reuse waste wherever possible. Much progress has been made, but it is fair to say that the national waste plan must aim for more than just compliance with EU law. It must be about realising the massive long-term potential benefits that would come from reducing our excessive use of resources. The national waste plan is a good start, but there is a huge amount still to do. To meet the many demanding targets will require a lot of persuasion and encouragement of business. We also need a huge amount of the right kind of infrastructure to be built in the right places. A lot of public education is also needed. As we go through the process and as we meet each target in the national waste plan, we will need to come up with tougher, more ambitious and more challenging targets. Our committee believes that the implementation of the national waste plan should be fully supported. Our suggestions, comments and recommendations on the medium-term challenges must be acted upon now if we are to improve our environment, make our businesses more competitive and avoid wasting the precious natural resources that we are currently dumping in our environment. I commend the report to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament notes the recommendations contained in the Environment and Rural Development Committee's 4th Report 2003 (Session 2): Inquiry into the National Waste Plan (SP Paper 47).

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans are in place to ensure that all railway passengers will have full access to rail facilities at Haymarket station for the duration of the temporary suspension of services at Waverley station from 17 to 19 January 2004. (S2O-1056)

The minister might not be aware that the former Lothian Regional Council approached British Rail 25 years ago about installing lifts at Haymarket station. Does he agree that it is simply unacceptable that, in the year that part III of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 comes into force, not all rail passengers have appropriate access to Scotland's busiest station? Will the Scottish Executive give clarity to stakeholders on exactly who is responsible for  taking the lead on the issue to ensure compliance with the act and to ensure that funds are available to deliver full access to Haymarket station? Not one of the railway representatives to whom I have spoken is prepared to take responsibility for such a vital improvement.

I welcome the First Minister's strong support for the long-term future of Scotland's financial services sector. Does he share my concern about the 900 staff in the Abbey Group who face an extremely uncertain future? Any change in location is disruptive for employees. Will the Scottish Executive explore with Scottish Provident the possibility, if not of retaining jobs in Edinburgh, at the very least of guaranteeing the security of the jobs that are being transferred to Glasgow? Will the First Minister give a commitment to ensuring that we have long-term investment in transport, in education and in our infrastructure in Edinburgh, which are the kinds of things that will attract the financial services sector not just to come to Scotland but to stay and to grow in Scotland?

I welcome the minister's positive response to the question, which raises the wider issue of the use of construction materials in building. Given the massive programme of investment that she is overseeing, will she examine the issue in a wider context, as part of Executive policy on making better use of materials that otherwise would go to landfill, be of no use to anybody and create an eyesore somewhere else? The project contains some exciting ideas. Will she consider the wider benefits that could be achieved by the Executive taking it on board?

I welcome the First Minister's commitment to full and proper consultation on this matter. The First Minister may be aware that I and others took part in blood testing for toxic chemicals last year. In the light of public health concerns, would he support a much wider programme of public information and research to test for toxins in our blood, so that we can get more accurate information on the long-term and cumulative impact of chemicals in our blood? In his discussions with the UK Government, will he commit to pushing the precautionary principle so that, when the new European legislation on chemicals comes in, we will have proper and effective regulations that will protect public health and our environment?

I wish to put on record that I am speaking as a Labour MSP and not as the convener of the Environment and Rural Development Committee. I congratulate the committee on its work on the issue, and I congratulate the clerks for producing an excellent stage 1 report. It is worth saying at the outset that we had such overwhelming support from all the political parties that are represented on the committee and from organisations from outwith the Parliament that were consulted that we were able to get into quite detailed scrutiny at stage 1. I welcome the minister's responses so far to our detailed recommendations, and I look forward to his written response to those recommendations. We will consider his response carefully before we deliberate on our amendments. The Parliament gives us the opportunity to improve nature conservation and our environment and to tailor our legislation to meet Scotland's specific needs. The first session of the Parliament legislated on national parks; this session will see the delivery of landmark nature conservation legislation. Our next priority should be to deliver legislation to protect our marine environment, which the committee considered at stage 1. We had particular concerns about how the bill related to the marine environment. I would like the minister to indicate a time scale for introducing a comprehensive marine strategy and to make a commitment to legislative proposals for such a strategy and to a bill on the subject. Another important issue that has been highlighted is the current fragmented state of nature conservation legislation in Scotland. The bill takes us a big step forward in addressing that issue. There is still work to do to on the clarity of the definition of biodiversity in the bill. The introduction of a statutory purpose for sites of special scientific interest is a big step forward, but a number of concerns have been raised about whether the definition of statutory purpose in the bill requires amendment. If we consider the impact of the bill on the delivery of nature conservation, another big issue that we must consider is the reform of the common agricultural policy. That reform is a huge opportunity to improve agri-environment schemes and to deliver new schemes that will result in greater public benefit from  farming Scotland's landscape. Labour wants Scotland to make the most of those flexibilities in CAP reform, and many of the bill's provisions will greatly assist that process. I will reflect on the wildlife crime provisions in the bill and then I will move on to the implementation of the bill's provisions and how that will be funded, as much work needs to be done on those issues. Snaring was one of the most contentious and difficult issues that the committee dealt with. The committee heard evidence from individuals and organisations with strongly held and differing views. I was disturbed by the pictures of maimed and injured animals that were circulated to us as evidence. The challenge for the committee is to try to be pragmatic on the evidence we received from the land management sector and from the animal welfare sector. The difficulty the committee faced is that there are no easy choices in relation to pest control. Shooting and poisoning can cause suffering and can injure or kill the wrong animals. Even without a full ban on snaring there is a lot more that can be done, such as stricter enforcement and tougher rules. The committee has recommended a number of changes to the snaring provisions, which we believe would make them more enforceable and would improve animal welfare. The new provisions that the minister is considering producing on recklessness and responsible management will also push land managers and owners in the right direction. Those are issues that we must return to at stage 2 to ensure that the detail in the bill is right. In addition to the snaring provisions that members have commented on, the bill improves on existing wildlife crime legislation on, for example, poisoning of birds such as red kites, egg stealing and dolphin welfare. If we take those measures and the measures contained in the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003, we will in future have strong and comprehensive legislation to tackle wildlife crime. We on the Labour benches welcome that. I want to concentrate on the issue of how the bill will be implemented and how the measures will be funded. Stakeholders such as public bodies and local authorities throughout Scotland will be working to implement the bill, but they will need clear guidance to ensure that they get it right. To deliver on the biodiversity duty, ministers will have to consider additional funding to ensure that public bodies undertake the biodiversity work that the bill should bring through. The minister told the committee that he believed that the current budget for the implementation of the bill was adequate. However, both the Environment and Rural Development Committee and the Finance Committee, along with a range of external organisations, are concerned about the  stretching of budgets to make the bill work. I remain concerned about the work of key organisations such as SNH. We know that SNH is being forced to relocate and the last thing that we want is budget displacement to take place, moving resources from other priorities to implement the bill. We need the minister to examine further the budget issue as the bill proceeds through Parliament. The Scottish Labour Party is committed fully to seeing the bill on to the statute book. Through committee scrutiny, we will work to improve the bill that the minister has introduced so that we can get on with the task of protecting Scotland's environment and wildlife. We support fully the principles of the bill.

I did not argue that the project would be 10 years from now—I said that we are 10 years from any such major public transport project starting. Such things do not happen overnight.

As Bristow Muldoon knows, I welcome the opportunity to debate the issue. His considered speech set a good tone for the debate. I did not agree with absolutely everything that he said, but he raised a lot of key issues that we must consider. There is agreement throughout the chamber that we need to do something—to do nothing is not an  option. We all agree that we need more public transport and we know that traffic will increase by about 20 per cent during the next 20 years. People have talked about how Edinburgh suffers and how Edinburgh is congested, but the 20 per cent increase will not only affect Edinburgh. From the mailbag that I used to get as a minister, I know about the key issue of people travelling in from Fife. The Ferrytoll park-and-ride scheme had to be doubled—it is a pity that Mr MacAskill has left the chamber, because he was against that scheme before we introduced it but is now in favour of it. The issues are difficult and it is difficult to get them right. If economic growth in Edinburgh cannot continue, that will be a key problem. Edinburgh's importance runs beyond the city boundaries. Its labour market is Livingston, Fife, Midlothian, East Lothian and the Borders, so traffic problems in Edinburgh affect the whole region. We will not solve the issue today, but we must explore the options—most of my comments will be focused on that. We are at the early stages of massive public transport investment, so we have a lot of choices about what public transport projects we want, where they should be and, crucially, how fast we want them to happen. I suspect that few people anywhere are enthusiastic about the idea of having to pay to drive into and out of an area. I do not know anyone who is genuinely enthusiastic about having to pay for parking. That applies equally to my constituents, who, under the proposals, will have to pay to cross the inner cordon if they come home from work before 6.30 pm. None of us likes the idea that we are restricted in our personal freedom of choice. The problem is that, when we all want to go to the same place at the same time, our roads cannot handle the congestion. The other problem is that our trains cannot handle the congestion, either—public transport is a serious aspect of the debate. Rhona Brankin said that her constituency does not have any trains or enough buses, which are also part of this agenda. We need to think about measures that we can put in place quickly. After all, it takes a long time to build a railway and one has to spend millions of pounds developing a railway project to the point at which one can look at the business case and decide whether or not the project will go ahead. For example, we cannot simply decide one day to have a Borders railway line and the next day it is up and running. Such projects take a decade to complete. It is easier to increase the number of train carriages and to lengthen station platforms and, indeed, such measures are being introduced. Furthermore, we have more park-and-ride schemes. In Edinburgh, the new schemes at Hermiston, Ingliston, Straiton, Todhills and  Newcraighall will have dedicated bus routes. Those schemes are all realisable in the short term and will all make a difference when they are introduced. Work is continuing on the Borders railway line and work is being carried out to deliver the Edinburgh tram project, which is something that the Parliament still has to debate. The debate on congestion charging not only opens up the issue of an Edinburgh tram system but raises the prospect of trams to Livingston and to Dalkeith. Would such projects top the list of priorities for the members who represent those areas? I remember that, when I was a minister, Rhona Brankin used to lobby me on one or two particular road projects. However, she has also highlighted big issues such as bus services in her area, trams to Dalkeith and the Borders railway line. The question is how quickly we can complete some of those projects. We all want more money and more major heavy rail projects. Members have not really mentioned bus services, which I think represent a core element of a sustainable, socially just transport system. Buses can reach places that heavy rail transport cannot reach, they can plug into heavy rail lines and they can give car drivers new choices. However, although the Ferrytoll car park is a brilliant example of how park-and-ride schemes can work, it took years to develop and is not big enough anymore. [ Interruption. ] Do I have a minute left?

You did not give me a one-minute warning, Presiding Officer. We will not crack the problem today, but this is not the end of the discussion. After all, the City of Edinburgh Council is in the middle of its first stage of consultation. The debate has a lot further to go. To everyone who opposes the current proposals, I say that we have an obligation to come up with systems that work. Someone at some point is going to have to say, "We are going to introduce this scheme." There is no perfect scheme; even the London scheme, which shows that such an approach can work, is not perfect. We are not there yet and I hope that people will take this opportunity to lobby the minister, not to rule the scheme out for ever. As I said, the debate still has further to run.

Does the minister agree that we are talking about a win-win situation, in which fewer chemicals are put on our fields, fewer chemicals are then washed into our seas and we spend less money having to clear them up? That is a really good win-win situation, which his motion should start to let us deliver.

rose—

Will the member give way?

In the past 30 seconds, the member has contradicted himself. He said that the debate is irrelevant and that the subject is not a matter of public policy, although we are spending £3 billion on Scottish Water to improve our sewage treatment works, yet he also said that the marine environment is one of Scotland's key assets. Richard Lochhead should think about inshore fisheries, on which he spoke articulately yesterday. The subject that we are debating today is a big issue. It is not attractive or sexy, but it is fundamental.

I know that the debate has been billed as an example of the dumbing down of the Scottish Parliament's agenda, but listening to the speeches so far, I am struck by the extent of the public policy choices that must be made on this matter. Although the issue is not a front-page one—unless beaches fail to meet standards—big public policy matters such as public expenditure and public health have arisen as a result of discussions in Europe on the new bathing water directive. Our involvement in the debate will not earn us any brownie points—perhaps that is an inappropriate phrase; I will say kudos instead—but members have already made some vital points. The issue centres on what we consider to be acceptable standards in the 21 st century for the beaches around our coast. As Nora Radcliffe pointed out, we are not the top choice for a two-week beach holiday. The Scottish weather cannot support that kind of tourism. However, that does not mean that thousands of people do not like surfing, windsurfing and sailing. Members who have tried such sports will know that the people who take part in them spend a large part of the time in the water. Furthermore, they do not go to designated beaches to engage in those activities. Although it is tempting to say that the illnesses that the minister mentioned are minor ones, they are still public health issues and we cannot dismiss them out of hand. I want to concentrate colleagues' minds on this issue. Members might not have realised that two weeks ago the European Union imposed a fine on Spain because it failed to meet the quality standards set out in the existing bathing water quality directive. We are not talking about a small punishment. Spain will be required to pay about €624,000 every year for every 1 per cent of inshore Spanish bathing waters that continues to fail to meet the quality standards. That is absolutely right. We admit that the rest of Europe has thousands more beaches than Scotland has, but that does not automatically mean that all those beaches meet the EU's standards. It is good that we are making much progress in Scotland and it is a real mistake to pretend that we are the only country in the whole of Europe that does not have decent bathing water facilities and that we are uniquely bad in that regard. There are some aspects that are of particular importance in Scotland. Although, as several members have mentioned, we have had very good weather in the past year, diffuse pollution is a genuine issue that we will have to examine. As the minister pointed out, the new bathing water legislation will force the Parliament to focus on  what has already been achieved in Scotland and to think about the standards that we want to ensure our beaches meet in future. We will have to focus on how much money we are prepared to spend on improving the water around our coastline. What are we prepared to do about that? What are we prepared to see in legislation? It is true that improvements to our waste water treatment works have had a massive impact on water quality in key areas. The fact that part of Portobello beach made the guideline standard is a massive achievement when one thinks that only 2km away there is a waste water treatment facility that serves half a million people. That must be cause for celebration. Although the Environment and Rural Development Committee has addressed other issues in relation to that facility, we should acknowledge the achievement at Portobello. It is right that a huge amount of taxpayers' money is being invested in higher quality sewage treatment. We now have tertiary treatment facilities around Scotland whereas, historically, it was all right just to discharge raw sewage into our environment. I know that the Tories focused on Scottish Water, but a bigger issue lies behind that.

Earlier this week, I met Scottish Water to discuss that very issue. If the member contacts Scottish Water again, he will find that work is going on with the local council to resolve the problem, which goes back to some of the historic planning problems that Alex Johnstone mentioned. I want to concentrate on diffuse pollution, which is much harder to control. That is where we could expend much more of our energies. We know that heavy rain causes pollution by washing away pesticides, slurry and chemicals from our farms, and that the run-off from roads, housing and industrial developments can become contaminated with pollutants such as silt, oil, metals and other chemicals, which collect in the sewerage system and end up in the sea; no one has discussed that issue at any length today. We need to pay much more attention to diffuse pollution. Recently, I took part in a WWF chemicals test and was highly surprised to find that I had a pesticide in my bloodstream that was banned 20 years ago. Pesticides run off agricultural land, move through our rivers and end  up in the sea, along with a cocktail of other pollutants. The quality of our bathing water is important, so I think that we need to do much more upstream and onshore. We must not only consider integrated coastal zone management and the need for a marine environment bill, both of which have been mentioned, but tackle the pollution at source. I am disappointed with the amendments. Although Alex Johnstone acknowledged the importance of planning in his speech, he was wrong to focus on Scottish Water. As well as examining the good things that have been done, we need to focus on the second half of the Executive's motion, which talks about the major challenge that we face. The nationalists made exactly the same mistake; their amendment would have been totally acceptable as an add-on—indeed, it would have been a positive and constructive add-on. It was a mistake to try to delete the reference to the challenge that we face, which is outlined in the Executive's motion. That is why I think that the amendments should be rejected.

The minister has almost answered my question. He talked about developing Waverley station "over the coming years", which will start alarm bells ringing for people who know that the station is already at capacity. He said that he will produce the proposals shortly. Will he publish details of the scope of the work that he wants at Waverley station? The key thing is not only that we start the work at the station, but that the work is of sufficient scale to cope with our radical ambitions, which are not only for Edinburgh and the surrounding area, but for the whole of the east of Scotland.

Does the First Minister agree that, in looking at the evidence on child obesity, it is absolutely vital for the next generation that we do not focus exclusively on what food our young people are eating and which diet they are following? We have to look at physical activity in school and in getting to school. Does the First Minister agree that the historic low rate of children walking to school is a national disgrace? Does he also agree that it is vital that we do everything that we can—for example, the twenty's plenty initiative and encouragement of safer routes to school, as is being done by my local authority—to tackle the appalling rate of obesity among the next generation?

I congratulate Des McNulty on getting the motion on to our agenda tonight. When I saw the terms of the motion, I was happy to co-sponsor it. Des McNulty put the global context of HIV and AIDS extremely effectively in his opening speech. The motion mentions that around 4,000 people living in Scotland have HIV and AIDS. In my few minutes tonight, I want to focus on the situation of black African people who have the virus and who are living in Scotland. Recent estimates from the SCIEH show that, of those diagnosed with HIV, two thirds are presumed to be from Africa. Black Africans throughout the UK are the group that has the fastest-rising rate of new HIV diagnosis. It is perhaps not surprising that Des McNulty and Richard Lochhead mentioned the huge number of people in sub-Saharan Africa who live with HIV and AIDS. The overall number of people who live in sub-Saharan Africa is more than 28 million. Black Africans living in Scotland are disproportionately affected by HIV. Many of them live in desperate circumstances. They not only face the stigma of the virus, but frequently experience racial abuse. The confusion that often arises in the press around terms such as "refugee" and "asylum seeker" adds further to the discrimination that those people experience. Many of them have been disowned by their families and abandoned by friends. Most of the African community in Scotland who live with HIV are here to study or to visit family members. They are not here as asylum seekers or refugees. Much of the anecdotal evidence shows that many are professionals such as teachers and nurses. Many of the Africans whom we know about in our communities in Scotland find out that they are HIV positive only at the point when they become unwell. At that time, they face tremendously difficult human choices about whether to remain in the UK and receive treatment or return home where they will receive no treatment whatever. That is a horrendous choice to have to make. Their situation can be further compounded by changes in immigration status that can leave them unable to work or study, without entitlement to benefits and sometimes absolutely destitute. I ask the minister to work with UK ministers to try to take some of the simple measures that could help people who are living in such circumstances. For  example, it would be possible to speed up the process by which people can apply to remain in the UK on humanitarian grounds so that they can receive treatment for their illness. I want to highlight some of the superb and vital work that is being done in Edinburgh by Waverley Care's Solas centre, which is in my constituency. The centre offers support services, information and an informal meeting place for people who are living with HIV. An African outreach project has been set up to research the health needs of Africans living in Scotland who have been affected by HIV and AIDS. I hope that the project will provide better access to health services for African people and raise awareness among the African community. The African support worker is able to give practical and emotional support to black African people in the Lothians. The growth in HIV, in Scotland and the rest of the UK, is part of the bigger picture that Des McNulty talked about. The mobility of many people nowadays is a feature of globalisation. We should not be surprised by the fact that many of the people in the UK who are HIV positive are black Africans. We need to ensure that a practical, effective and humane response can be made to their situation. We also need to ensure that people have support. I congratulate Des McNulty on bringing the issue to the chamber tonight. I know that we will have a good debate and I hope that it will provide encouragement to people who are working in the voluntary sector. I hope that today's debate will help to tackle the stigma and prejudice that people are experiencing and to ensure that the services that are provided will be better in the future.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it intends to respond to the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations' campaign for 10,000 affordable homes across Scotland. (S2O-798)

I am sure that the minister will be aware that Edinburgh is approaching a crisis with the lack of affordable housing. The City of Edinburgh Council has done pioneering work to link planning and housing policies, but we need 1,000 new affordable homes every year, and a modest increase in public subsidy could lever in significant private investment. Will she examine the case for sustained additional support to deal with housing issues in the city so that people in Edinburgh can have decent housing choices?

Does the First Minister agree that, if we are to deliver our policies in a more sustainable way, we need joined-up thinking between different bits of the Government? On issues such as tackling pensioner poverty and eradicating fuel poverty, we can see the benefits of doing that. Will the First Minister agree that the real challenge now is to make the policy links between economic prosperity and environmental and social justice? Will he have a look at this week's recommendations on waste management from the Environment and Rural Development Committee, which would let us do precisely that?

What about the SNP's polices—not a word about them?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way.

Fairtrade is a way in which we can all get involved in helping to provide direct support to reduce poverty in the developing world. I welcome the initiatives that have been taken by the City of Edinburgh Council to make Edinburgh a Fairtrade city, building on a lot of work by organisations such as Oxfam, the Catholic Agency for Overseas Development, Traidcraft and the World Development Movement. It is important to put that on record. Every one of us potentially will spend around £1 million in our lifetime. That is a huge amount of resources. If we can use some of that on products that carry the Fairtrade mark, such as coffee, chocolate, tea, honey and bananas, we will directly help to ensure that farmers in the developing world are paid a fair wage without exploitation. The Fairtrade mark guarantees a better deal for producers in developing countries. The Fairtrade Foundation's aim of tackling poverty enables disadvantaged producers from poor countries to receive a better deal. It means that they can afford to educate their children and that they will have better working and living environments. It also means that consumers know that they are buying goods the production of which has not used child labour. A Fairtrade city is one in which a community has signed up to support fair trade and to support disadvantaged farmers and workers in developing countries. Every community—whether it is a church, a school, a college, a university, a town or a city—can help to raise awareness and be part of the movement to support fair trade. In such a community, Fairtrade products will be widely available, bought and used. A commitment will  also have been made to build support through promotional and educational activities. I got involved four years ago to the month, when I wrote to the then Presiding Officer asking him to ensure that we had Fairtrade tea, coffee and chocolate in the Parliament's canteen. A lot of members will remember that we had a visit from representatives of the fair trade movement. They arrived with Fairtrade chocolate bars—which tasted excellent—jars of coffee and tea bags. Making a statement seemed like such a simple thing for us to do as Scottish parliamentarians in our own Parliament. I was delighted that Fairtrade goods were introduced to the canteen. I suspect that, since then, hundreds upon thousands of cups of tea and coffee have been sold and drunk in the Parliament. In the last session, we debated the progress made across Scotland in establishing Fairtrade towns. That progress continues and this debate marks the progress made with the sign-up of Edinburgh, our capital city. I will rehearse the five Fairtrade city goals. It is important that we recognise them, because everyone in the chamber can go back and encourage their local authority to sign up. First, the local authority must pass a resolution supporting fair trade, and must agree to serve Fairtrade coffee and tea at its meetings and in its offices and canteens. The City of Edinburgh Council passed a motion in support of fair trade at its meeting on 16 October, which had cross-party support. I am proud to say that the initiative was taken by the Labour party and by our executive member for finance and sustainable development, Maureen Child, but it had cross-party support. In a sense, signing up was the easy bit for Edinburgh. The hard bit is convincing shops to sell Fairtrade products and convincing cafes, restaurants and bars—of which Edinburgh has a plethora—to sign up to the campaign. It should be easy for local people in Edinburgh to find Fairtrade products as they do their everyday shopping in health food and wholefood shops, supermarkets and Fairtrade shops. In my constituency, the One World Shop in St John's church in Princes Street, the Palestinian shop Hadeel in St George's West church, and a number of supermarkets already stock Fairtrade coffee and tea. The third step is to get at least 20 other local businesses and organisations to sign up. Those can include schools, colleges, universities, large offices and organisations. The fourth step is to get media coverage. We need popular support for the campaign and we need the media to get behind it. The organisations that choose to sign up to the campaign will get  positive publicity, which is a key benefit of their involvement. One of the key things that we have to do is the fifth step: to establish a local fair trade steering group to ensure that there is a monitoring process, so that we have an annual assessment to see how we are doing in Edinburgh in meeting the five goals. Colleagues will already know that towns across the United Kingdom have signed up. Cities such as Newcastle, Nottingham, Croydon, Chester and Plymouth are signed up to fair trade. We have already marked progress in Scotland in towns such as Strathaven and Aberfeldy, and Aberdeen has also signed up. Edinburgh is not the first, but as it is our capital, I hope that it will be an important symbol. I particularly welcome the groundbreaking work of the Co-operative movement in the UK. I highlight the Co-op's work because, as members know, last week it became the first supermarket to convert its entire own-brand coffee stock to Fairtrade coffee. Members will have met Co-op representatives when they visited the Parliament last week. The Co-op has taken a huge step. My colleague Johann Lamont has lodged a motion of congratulation and I hope that all members will sign it. The Co-op's work builds on the conversion of all its own-brand chocolate bars to Fairtrade last year, so what I described is not a one-off or a quick hit. That step is a real development. The Co-op is using its purchasing power to make a change in developing countries. For coffee that is sold with the Fairtrade mark, coffee growers receive a fair price, which is currently double the global market price for some coffee beans. Under conventional agreements, coffee growers receive just over half the cost of growing beans, which means that, in effect, they subsidise our coffee drinking. Harriet Lamb, who is Fairtrade's executive director, described the situation well when she said: "Most people love coffee, but they would be appalled if they knew how bad life is for coffee farmers in many countries". In Nicaragua, former coffee workers now beg by the road. Earlier this year, thousands of them took part in a march of the hungry, during which 14 of them died. We are discussing a tough issue for people in developing countries. The poverty that coffee workers have experienced is due to the dramatic fall in world coffee prices, so the Co-op's decision will help some coffee co-operatives to build a better future. It gives us, as Britain's shoppers, a choice and it sends a wake-up call to the worldwide coffee industry.  Earlier this week, I spoke to students who are members of the University of Edinburgh's people and planet group. They are running a campaign to sign up the university as Scotland's first Fairtrade university. They plan to go further than the only Fairtrade university in the UK—Oxford Brookes University—because they want Fairtrade coffee not only to be available, but to be the default coffee. When people ask for coffee, they will be given Fairtrade coffee. If they really want another coffee, they will have to ask specially for it. That would be a superb move forwards.

An exclusive choice is not a choice. It is intended that a choice of coffee will be available, but that the average coffee will be Fairtrade coffee. I welcome what the students are doing. The university manages to drink its way through 1,700kg of coffee a year, so it has much purchasing power. The students' argument is that 1p or 2p extra per cup could make a difference to people's lives, and that is a wonderful message. Today, I hope that we will build support among people in all sorts of organisations, including key public sector organisations such as local authorities and health boards. Many will know of Unison's campaign to improve the quality of our food. The union wants fair trade to be part of that agenda. Much work is being done and there is much more that we can do. We should ensure that the Parliament and the Executive support fair trade. Last year, we heard about the moves that the Executive has taken to promote Fairtrade tea and coffee in the Executive. I hope that the minister will talk about how he intends to broaden that procurement change to other public sector organisations and to build on the partnership commitment to a co-operative development agency. Much is being done and there is much more still to do. As our capital city, Edinburgh is taking the lead. I hope that that will have a ripple effect throughout Scotland. I am sure that the interest of the members who are present tonight will help to develop the campaign. I am delighted to have secured a debate on the motion and that so many members have turned up for the debate. Let us take the campaign another step forward.

Mary Scanlon just made the point that I was going to ask her to clarify. Although we have some superb female politicians leading at local council level, we need an awful lot more women coming in behind them. I hope that we can all agree on that in this chamber.

In the minister's next review of building standards, will she explore how renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies, such as solar heating and combined heat and power systems, could enable Scottish householders to have warmer homes that they can afford to heat and which will not damage the environment?

I am glad to be able to take part in the debate. The debate should be about how we get from where we are to a Scotland that we can truly call sustainable. There are two things that we need to do. First, we must build on the progress that has been made by acknowledging the challenges that we have overcome, the shifts that there have been and the tasks that remain. Secondly, we must work out what changes are needed. We must raise awareness, develop a commitment to change and then agree on the action to be taken. We have a long way to go at each level. Rather than concentrating on specific policy issues, as a couple of members have done, I will talk about some of the institutional changes that the Parliament needs to make. I was interested in Robin Harper's attempt to appropriate the whole Parliament's environmental conscience for the Greens. All the parties have made some progress. The Labour party has made huge progress over the past decade, not only since the arrival of the Greens in the Parliament. We have tried to put sustainable development at centre stage, not just by appropriating the language but by thinking about the policy choices and challenges that sustainable development brings. We have grappled with the problems of joining up government on social justice and environmental justice, economic prosperity and environmental justice, and—the really tough task—all three together. We have made the links and we have started to make some progress on developing them. It is also important that we work with other countries and the rest of the UK, as we have a lot to learn. We have come a long way in a short time, but there is still a lot of change that we need to make. Our huge progress is reflected in the partnership agreement, which builds on the first four years of the Scottish Parliament. We do not need any lectures on conscience, as we have had to make some tough choices. We just heard Ted Brocklebank grappling with the problems in the fishing industry. The Environment and Rural Development Committee has had to make some tough choices. Ironically, it is Labour and Lib Dem members who have been prepared to make tough  decisions now to protect the viability of our scallop industry. None of the parties would be 100 per cent perfect in making those tough decisions, including the Greens, and the Greens did not support us on the scallop industry because there was not yet a crisis in that industry. What happened to the precautionary principle?

No, I will not. I have only four minutes, and Eleanor Scott will get another chance to speak. It is important not to be simplistic. There is not one answer and there is no single green truth on these issues. The challenge is for us all to work together to deal with these difficult, tough issues. In the report that Robin Harper mentioned, which I was involved in preparing this week, we examined structures at a ministerial level to see what more could be done to give political leadership to implement ideas that are in the partnership agreement. We also looked at the civil service and considered a more integrated approach that builds on the excellent work that has been done in social justice on closing the gap in order to learn the lessons and to translate that into work across the whole Executive. The key issue is how we mainstream sustainable development rather than see it as the preserve of environmentalists. There is a big challenge for the Parliament, and I do not want us to miss the target. Every bill is meant to address sustainable development principles; however, I can think of only two bills that have done that properly—the National Parks (Scotland) Bill and the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Bill. Sustainable development was at the core of both those bills and was debated extensively in committee, even making it to the chamber for debate. However, no member could put their hand up and say that every bill that we have debated has covered sustainable development and that we have tested all the legislative provisions that the Parliament has discussed. There is a lot more for the Parliament to do to exert leadership. Let us audit our policies and look at the budget process and our own structures so that sustainable development is not just something that we demand from the Executive, but something that we take ownership of and put into practice. I support the Executive's amendment.

Our colleague Robin Harper was gracious enough to amend his speech in the light of a correction that I gave in respect of the exact quotation from the document. I would be delighted to give the member a copy of that correction afterwards. The document does not refer only to the Executive—Parliament and wider society were also discussed. There is collective responsibility. That was the whole point of the paragraph.

I welcome the debate. I also welcome the investment that is to come from the city growth fund, which will make a real difference to people in our cities. For those of us who live in Edinburgh, it will improve our city streets and our bus information and it will play a part in tackling congestion. Edinburgh was awarded £24 million from the fund, the aim of which is to improve the quality of life for people in our six cities. I know that the Minister for Finance and Public Services, who has left the chamber, visited Edinburgh in September this year to see for himself what the improvements will mean on the ground. Edinburgh will undertake urban rail improvements and improvements to the Usher Hall. The funding will also allow improvements to be made to parks, pavements and roads in the capital. We are talking about key investment for key infrastructure. I am glad that the minister acknowledged that Edinburgh is a world-class city. It is a vibrant and cosmopolitan city with a dynamic economy. However, there is a huge amount that needs to be done, working in partnership, to ensure that Edinburgh remains a successful and attractive place to live, work and visit. In the debate, it is absolutely vital that we are not complacent about the progress that we need to make in future. That said, we can acknowledge the city's strengths and the progress that it has made in the financial sector, in the tourism industry and in the quality of our further and higher education institutions. Scotland's future is bound up with the success of our cities. Edinburgh is the key driver for growth in the east of Scotland and beyond. We urgently need a regional approach that builds in work on affordable housing and tackling congestion. I  would like the minister to undertake a creative examination of the business rates process—I will focus briefly on that issue later in my speech. The Executive's partnership work and partnerships between the cities, including Edinburgh and Glasgow, and between Edinburgh and its neighbouring authorities in the south-east of Scotland, are absolutely critical. I want to focus on a couple of issues on which we really have to make a difference. Housing is a key issue for Edinburgh. We have a growing population, but also a growing problem. We are moving towards a crisis in the lack of affordable housing for the people of Edinburgh. We have a booming economy, but we are not getting the affordable houses that allow people to live in our city. I commend the City of Edinburgh Council for the work that it is doing on tackling homelessness and for its affordable housing strategy. I also welcome the £3 million that the Executive has made available for work on affordable housing. However, if we are to tackle the problem, we need sustained, long-term, additional support. Edinburgh's £17 million budget buys around 350 houses a year through new build and refurbishment. If we are to tackle the real affordability crisis that we face, we need to double that amount of money. A modest increase in investment could lever in significant private investment. A joint approach is needed between the City of Edinburgh Council and the private sector. I hope that the minister will take my plea on board and will discuss it with the Minister for Communities in advance of the next spending review. Transport is also vital. I welcome the work that the Executive has undertaken with the City of Edinburgh Council. We need integrated, reliable and efficient transport. Huge investment is planned for transport but we must ensure that we tackle our congestion problems. I hope that the minister will work with the City of Edinburgh Council to tackle congestion. That will enable us to meet the Scottish Executive's targets for bringing down traffic levels in the city.

The biggest issue before us is the massive investment that is needed in public transport. A consultation process is going on at the moment and I welcome the fact that the  surrounding councils are engaged in that discussion. Another big issue on my agenda is the weeks of endless speculation about the investment that is to be made in Waverley railway station. I know that Christine May agrees that Waverley is a big issue for people in Fife. This week, we heard about investment in lengthening platforms. However, there have been all sorts of speculation and rumour that we are not going to get the investment that is needed in Waverley station. There is much that we need to do now to tackle congestion problems. I ask the minister to comment on that in his winding up speech. I said that I would briefly mention business rates. There is scope for looking at business rates. If we take Edinburgh as an example, the council has invested in the new conference centre, the burgeoning financial district and the superb festivals that draw people into the city throughout the year. However, because of the current pooling of business rates, the city does not receive a direct return on that investment. I do not expect an instant response from the minister on that point, but I would like a reassurance that he is at least examining the issues and considering a flexible approach. I will conclude on the issue of quality of life. People who live in Edinburgh deserve to benefit from living in a world-class city, but not everybody does. There is a serious imbalance in our city, particularly in my constituency. We are gaining the wrong kind of reputation. A lot of superb cultural events happen in Edinburgh, such as those in our theatres and the forthcoming MTV attraction, which I know my colleague Ms McNeill is most interested in. However, we have a big problem in that we are getting out of sync. There are problems in my constituency with stag parties and binge boozing and, at the last count, there were seven clubs offering what is euphemistically described as adult entertainment. I do not think that that is the way for Edinburgh to go as a world-class tourism destination and it is not what the residents of Edinburgh want. I would like a commitment from the minister that he will progress the work on licensing. Some superb work is being done by the Minister for Justice as a result of the Nicholson review. A gap needs to be plugged on issues such as lap dancing and strip clubs. I hope that the Executive will take that on board and bring back proposals so that Edinburgh can tackle those issues urgently. The minister made a very positive start in his speech. Edinburgh has been transformed over the past 20 years; we must move forward for the next 20. That means that there must be partnership work between the City of Edinburgh Council and the Executive. We must continue Labour's  leadership because although we have done a lot, there is a lot more still to do.

I agree with much of what the member says about the need to prioritise safer streets, walking and cycling. Does he agree that the City of Edinburgh Council's commitment—part-funded by the Executive—to introduce 20mph zones around all our schools is an excellent commitment and that it is exactly the way we need to go in our cities?

If I had had more time, I would have made the point that, as with all types of energy production, there are different issues to consider. I was making the point that, although nuclear power is clean in terms of CO 2 emissions, there are long-term waste implications.

I take it that Alasdair Morgan is referring to the Enterprise and Culture Committee.

I kick off by thanking the Rural Development Committee of the previous session and the clerks who worked on the report. I also want to thank all the people who gave evidence to the committee in its deliberations—that kind of consultation and involvement is vital to the success of our work. It is therefore appropriate that the present Environment and Rural Development Committee is able to have its first debate on the previous committee's report. This debate is unusual. The report was completed by the previous committee before the election; we now have new committee members and, indeed, a new committee that combines environment and rural development work. However, members of the new Environment and Rural Development Committee considered that our predecessors' report should be presented formally to Parliament and ministers because that would enable the report's conclusions and recommendations to be aired and discussed. We also felt that presenting the report would enable members to reflect on the recommendations and to add new issues that have come to the fore since the report was completed. I want to highlight some key areas of the report and then to outline some major challenges that the Environment and Rural Development Committee is working on. I fully expect colleagues in the chamber who were involved in drafting the report to discuss the issues that they regarded as being of the utmost importance. I am sure that my colleagues on the new committee will wish to share their thoughts, too. The debate is therefore unusual, but we felt that it is important to have cross-fertilisation of ideas. In its inquiry, the Rural Development Committee was presented with a wide range of evidence. If members look through the report, they will see that the committee covered a large number of issues, including farming, forestry, the rural economy in  the round, the need for affordable housing and rural transport, renewable energy and ways of improving the planning system. In general, the committee found a lack of effective integration between the policies of the statutory development agencies and it felt that there was a tendency for each organisation to pursue its own agenda. That has led to a piecemeal approach to rural development. I am sure that that theme will run through colleagues' comments on the different policy areas. The committee identified pressing issues for rural Scotland. On farming, the committee believed that more small farmers and crofters should benefit from the rural stewardship scheme. The minister has already agreed to some developments on that issue; however, the effectiveness of the changes needs to be kept continually under review by Parliament and by our committee. Personally, I want extension of agri-environment schemes, with more effective support for farmers and with financial payments that will enable more integrated local approaches. The Executive has already signalled to us the potential use of land management contracts. That could provide a new basis of support for farming in line with the wider public interest. The committee recommended that the Scottish Executive implement a single marketing and labelling scheme for Scottish farm produce in order to promote greater traceability and consumer confidence in Scottish farm products. On labelling and consumer confidence, the committee considered that there needs to be more support for niche markets that are based on high quality and high environmental standards. Since the committee's report was produced, we have had the Executive's "Organic Action Plan", which addresses issues such as marketing, quality of production and financial support. It also considers issues such as better distribution mechanisms—farmers' markets, for example—which would enable a more direct relationship between producers and consumers, with clearly labelled produce, high quality and high-value choices for consumers and opportunities for farmers. An expansion of organic or more environmentally responsible farming could also have spin-offs in other areas—for example, improved water quality and a reduction in costs for farmers. That point was made during the Environment and Rural Development Committee's visit to Perthshire this week. The previous committee recommended that the Scottish Executive develop a comprehensive forestry policy. That committee identified some particular issues, including the need to develop existing and new markets, such as biomass  energy and the use of wood in construction, and the need to develop a more sympathetic procurement policy so that the use of local products is encouraged. In addition, the committee had a strong sense that policies should work in an integrated way in order to gain the maximum value from the forestry industry. A particular issue that the committee highlighted was the relationship between forestry and local transport infrastructure. I know that some members in the chamber are concerned about that. During our committee's visit this week, wider issues arose, such as wildlife management and access to tourism. Those issues have to be considered in the management and development of forestry. Some of the most interesting recommendations in the previous committee's report were on the rural economy and rural housing. Those two issues are inextricably linked. The committee recommended that, in the short term, the Scottish Executive examine a rural rates-relief scheme for rural businesses. In the longer term, the committee wanted a review of the valuation system for assessing rural business premises. The committee acknowledged the difficulties faced by anyone wishing to create a new business in a rural area. However, it highlighted that unemployment was not the key issue. The key issue was getting suitable labour and finding accommodation to enable continuity of employment for people in rural industries. Those difficulties are increased by problems in obtaining land, connecting to services and obtaining financial support. The previous committee saw evidence of the present barriers to integrated rural development and felt that such issues should be highlighted and tackled. In taking evidence on the Executive's budget this year, one of the issues that the present committee explored with the minister was the costs of connection to water and sewerage services. Some of the issues that the previous committee identified are now being picked up by the present committee in its scrutiny work. A key issue that comes across loud and clear in the report is the lack of affordable rural housing. The committee said that that affects not only local populations but the ability of rural areas to attract more workers to provide labour for rural industries. The cost of housing in many rural areas creates difficulties for young people who are not able even to get on to the housing ladder. The committee believed that assistance should be targeted towards people with connections to areas, such as those who live and work or have family in the area. However, the committee acknowledged that that might be difficult to define in legislative terms. In relation to this issue, a lot of work has been done in planning. Parliament could usefully revisit some  of the legislative and planning issues. The committee felt that in order to overcome the substantial gap in available and affordable rural housing, radical and ambitious policies were required. The committee made a number of recommendations that Parliament should consider. More areas should be zoned as being suitable for rural housing that is appropriate to the needs and characteristics of areas. That should come through in every local authority's development plans. The areas that are most urgently in need of social housing should be identified and the Executive and local authorities should look towards increasing housing grants in those areas. The committee also suggested that the Scottish Executive explore the possibility of payments' being given to local trusts and housing associations to assist them in developing affordable rural housing for those who have a connection with the area. The Executive should also prioritise access to services for new developments in rural areas. I will not be able to go into every recommendation of the previous committee in depth. However, there are perhaps three other issues in the report that should be on our agenda—rural transport, renewable energy and planning. On rural transport, the committee raised a number of particular concerns surrounding public transport in rural areas. The committee identified lack of transport as causing difficulties in accessing employment, education and health services. Concerns were expressed about the cost of fuel, the poor state of some roads and the need to develop a more integrated public transport service for rural Scotland. All of those issues were seen by the committee as being substantial barriers to population mobility and economic development in rural areas. After the past four years, those issues will not be new to anyone in the chamber. We have debated them extensively. On renewable energy, the committee recommended that the Scottish Executive take urgent steps to implement a strategy on the location of renewable energy generation structures. The committee considered that the Executive should consult on and prepare an energy strategy for Scotland in order to co-ordinate and drive forward action on demand reduction and energy efficiency, to maximise the opportunities for renewable energy and to prevent ad hoc development in areas that require protection. This is perhaps also an opportunity for members to speak personally about their dependence on former polluting technologies such as coal, oil, gas and nuclear power, and on moving to a  combination of energy efficiency with targets and reduced consumption with targets. We can consider renewable energy from a wide range of sources and technologies. The cross-party renewable energy group is considering encouraging local energy generation and supply. A massive challenge for our Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning is to ensure that our huge offshore untapped potential can be unleashed and linked to manufacturing in Scotland—that is something that has begun to happen with wind energy. The committee felt that the strategy should relate clearly to other government strategies, which should seek to reduce overall energy consumption, in particular in transport and waste. The Environment and Rural Development Committee has been taking evidence over the past couple of months on implementation of the national waste plan, and we have been giving particular consideration to the implications of the plan for rural areas and the challenges for waste management and reduction in such areas.

As I made clear at the start, the Environment and Rural Development Committee has not been through all the recommendations. We wanted to ensure that the report was discussed in Parliament. I am interested to hear the views of all members on matters they think the Environment and Rural Development Committee should consider further. I am sure that other committee members would be interested to hear those views.

No, I would like to get on. The Rural Development Committee covered planning. What comes through loud and clear in its report is the feeling that is widespread throughout rural Scotland that many planning procedures are too tightly controlled and inflexible. There are recommendations on planning that could usefully be considered in the light of the new planning bill that is being considered by the Executive. A particular issue that was highlighted by the  committee was the regulations on the conversion to other uses of existing rural buildings. A number of recommendations related to planning for affordable housing. There are a huge number of issues—Mike Rumbles raised one that I have not covered. There are many recommendations that I have been unable to mention, but I have tried to give members a sense of the wealth of key issues that were identified in the report. There are new challenges. The Environment and Rural Development Committee is conscious that agendas are moving on. The committee is picking up new rural issues and, given its remit, is considering them from the perspective of the environment. One of the key issues that has come to the fore since the committee concluded its report is the debate on the current problems of the fishing industry in relation to white fish. It is an issue that the new committee will consider over the coming months and I am sure that it is one that we will debate with the minister in relation to his negotiations on the common fisheries policy. The other key challenge of which the new committee is very conscious and that it is trying to prepare for is the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy. The minister has published a document for consultation, which the committee will have to consider over the coming months. CAP reform is a big opportunity for the committee to be visionary—we must make the most out of what will be a difficult challenge for rural Scotland. The committee will have to work with our farming and rural communities to ensure that their views are properly plugged into the approach that we take in Scotland. We must consider the opportunities in rural development that we could maximise. In the past, there have been opportunities for matched funding from the UK Treasury, which may mean more money for rural development. Rather than consider farming in isolation, we should consider its contribution to wider rural development and we should pick up on some of the integrated approaches that the previous committee raised in its report. A big challenge for us all is to consider diversification in our rural communities and reflect on what flexibilities might be available to involve rural communities in a more integrated approach to countryside stewardship in the public interest. The Environment and Rural Development Committee will be returning to that issue, which is one in which the minister is currently engaged. The new committee, with new energy and the new job of considering environment and rural development, has been given the opportunity and the challenge to consider an integrated approach to rural development. We should engage in that.  I am clear from the work of the previous committee that it wanted to ensure that rural and remote communities have their distinct needs reflected across the range of Government policy and initiatives. That means practical support for innovation and enterprise in our rural communities and it means working with local authorities to protect and develop rural services. It is about maintaining strong, prosperous and growing communities in rural Scotland. That is a challenge not only for the Environment and Rural Development Committee but for all members. It should cut across the work of the Parliament and the Executive. I would be particularly interested to know when the review of the rural development plan will be published. I know that its publication is close, but I wonder whether the minister will mention it this morning. There is a big issue about how we involve people in rural Scotland—the key stakeholders in the next rural development plan. There has been some criticism of the options that have been presented and it has been suggested that we need a wider and more visionary approach. There is a big challenge for us all in scrutinising the Executive and in considering how a more integrated approach to rural development can be taken throughout the Executive. It is fair to say that the Environment and Rural Development Committee is at the early stages of getting to grips with that; it is on our agenda for the coming session of Parliament. As a committee convener, it is a bit unusual for me to be reflecting on the work of a previous committee, but there is much in the report that we should be debating in the chamber. I hope that I have added one or two thoughts about the direction that the Environment and Rural Development Committee will take in the future. Let us have a good debate this morning and let us thank the previous committee for its work. The new committee is keen that a bit of space should be created for members to have a debate, to develop the issue of integrated rural development and to allow members to put issues on the agenda not only of the Environment and Rural Development Committee, but of the Executive. I will conclude now. I do not know how many minutes I had, but perhaps we will get an extra speaker in if I stop now. I move, That the Parliament notes the recommendations contained in the Rural Development Committee's 1st Report 2003 (Session 1): Inquiry into Integrated Rural Development (SP Paper 735).

In the first session of the Parliament, the Audit Committee and the Auditor General for Scotland looked into the youth justice system in Scotland. Some excellent work was done in that piece of work on the need both to benchmark and to monitor the use and frequency of the disposals that are available to children's  panels. I agree strongly with Robert Brown on the point that he made about monitoring. It is a key issue that needs to be built upon in future.

Thank you for letting me speak in the debate this afternoon—I was not able to be here this morning because of a constituency engagement. However, I followed the opening speeches and noted the passion that colleagues brought to the chamber. I know that many members spoke eloquently about their experience of work with local communities. It is right that we bring such issues to the chamber. It is our duty to reflect the struggles that our constituents face and to consider what new legislative measures are required to tackle the unacceptable behaviour in many of our communities. There will be no easy, quick solutions. We need to consider long-term measures that are available to the police, local authorities and voluntary sector organisations, so that they can work together to support local communities that are addressing the problem of antisocial behaviour and to improve the quality of life in communities. Today's debate is also an opportunity to consider the effectiveness of some of the new projects and innovative approaches that have been put in place across Scotland. That consideration must take place in the context of the massive investment in our schools, the sure start programme and the opportunities for jobs and training that people have not had for a generation. We must consider not just the tough measures, but the opportunities that are available. I see the new facilities, including local leisure and sporting facilities, that are open to young people in our communities. However, there are still gaps and problems with the management of some of those facilities, because of the antisocial behaviour that we are experiencing at the same time. New money is coming through for local projects to address the needs of young people who get caught up in a cycle of offending and are going off the rails, but that money is not enough. We will also have to focus on some of the issues that Margaret Curran has raised. We have to approach measures on antisocial behaviour from the perspective of protecting our communities and acknowledging the damage that antisocial behaviour causes. I have talked to pensioners in Stenhouse and Saughton who are living on tranquillisers and in a state of fear because of daily harassment and abuse. It is our job to stand up for those pensioners and not to let such behaviour go unacknowledged and unchallenged. We must ask fundamental questions about how to challenge  people who engage in antisocial behaviour. Sometimes they need support, but they need to be challenged as well. We all know the impact that antisocial families who are out of control and living on the edge have on our communities. It makes me angry that that behaviour can go unchallenged, not just for months, but for years. If you talk to people in local communities, they know exactly the kind of problems that some of those families cause. A range of responses is required, from prevention right through to enforcement. The system has to act much faster and much more effectively. A lot of innovative work is going on in Edinburgh. I support that work and would like to draw it to the attention of the chamber. The new housing investigation team takes antisocial behaviour seriously. It works with tenants and has the sanction of eviction for people who do not take their responsibilities towards their neighbours seriously. Acceptable behaviour contracts are about challenging people's behaviour, but they are also about negotiating with people and working with them to ensure improvement. The neighbourhood support team has been established to support families and to work through complex issues that may have been around for years, but also to challenge those families. More money is needed for programmes of alcohol counselling and drug rehabilitation, and for more intensive family projects such as those in Dundee and those that are being developed in Edinburgh. This process is not just about supporting people—part of the process is about concentrating some families' minds. Antisocial behaviour is unacceptable, but another issue arises: not challenging antisocial behaviour means that we are failing children and young people. We are letting them drift into trouble. They are failing to develop themselves as human beings and they are not getting the skills, confidence or life opportunities that we take for granted and would demand for our own families. That is not good enough. We need sanctions because we need to put responsibility firmly back on some of the parents in our communities who do not care for their kids properly. They are not taking their responsibility seriously. Let us consider parenting orders and antisocial behaviour orders for under-16s when appropriate. We should not use them in every single circumstance, but they should be part of a range of options that local authorities and organisations have available. Let us consider short Scottish secure tenancies, so that we can negotiate with tenants to ensure that they take responsibility and do not flit from tenancy to tenancy, causing problems across the city. We must ensure that the work of the police, social work departments, housing departments,  education departments and the voluntary sector is much more integrated. That is beginning to happen in Edinburgh. We are beginning to see the use of protocols to share information. More work on that is needed, and it will be needed across Scotland. We must invest in projects to ensure that pilot projects that are working—and beginning to turn communities round and make a difference—get the chance to bed down and be extended. Edinburgh now has five teams of neighbourhood wardens. They are popular in the community because they are beginning to make a difference. Let us consider what practical measures we can take for the long term. All our agencies need to work together in partnership with communities—not imposing solutions, but working with people to turn round some of our most disadvantaged communities that are suffering from antisocial behaviour. It is important that we do not consider only council tenancies and do not simply look to the local authorities to consider their own tenants. We need to ensure that good work is expanded across housing associations, which, in my area, are beginning to come to the table and do some really good work. Let us not ignore the private rented sector, which is an increasing problem in some of our former local authority housing estates. Let us not forget owner-occupiers. Real issues arise in that sector. The coming bill is our chance to consider a range of issues, from prevention to the tough bits at the end. Let us ensure that all issues are on the agenda and that the measures taken are proportionate and effective.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Executive's timetable is for the introduction of digital hearing aids across Scotland. (S2F-239)

I welcome the new cash. The First Minister will know that one in five of the adult population in Scotland is deaf or hard of hearing and that 0.5 million people could benefit from a more than 40 per cent improvement in their hearing through the use of a digital hearing aid. Will the new cash for audiology be ring fenced in investment? Past experience in the Lothians shows that new money does not always reach audiology patients or deliver the services that they deserve.

I congratulate Mike Pringle on securing the debate, which is highly relevant and topical. It is extremely useful for us, as members of the Scottish Parliament, to focus on the issues that Mike Pringle's motion raises. As David McLetchie said, considering traffic in south Edinburgh means considering traffic in the rest of the city because the traffic that gets stuck and creates problems in south Edinburgh tends to weave its way into other parts of the city. Therefore, it is right to strive for an overview and a strategic vision that members across the chamber can share. It is important to say that we are debating the  issue in the context of record levels of investment. If we were having this debate four years ago, the context would be different. Then, the Waverley project was regarded as way out there and a dream—it had been David Steel's dream for 30 years. The project was regarded as impractical. Work had been initiated by previous Scottish Office ministers, such as Gus Macdonald, but nobody really thought that the Waverley project was on the table. Similarly, a crossrail system for Edinburgh was regarded as a nice idea by transport planners but not as something that would happen on the ground. Things have moved along. Trams, too, were viewed as a nice idea for Edinburgh, but people said that we had missed our chance. Now, those big projects are being seriously examined. Money has also been allocated to assessing the feasibility of the south suburban line. Despite the fact that big transport projects such as those are now being looked into, I agree with colleagues that we should not restrict ourselves to them. That is why the comments contained in the motion are absolutely appropriate. We need to consider park-and-ride schemes, for example. They are not so exciting, but they are fundamental to getting quick wins in public transport and to giving car commuters a real choice. We know that new park-and-ride facilities are demanded and used by drivers, and that drivers want that choice. As the MSP for Edinburgh Central, my concern is not about whether a park-and-ride facility is located in Burdiehouse or in the Midlothian Council area; my concern is that the project goes ahead quickly. The City of Edinburgh Council and Midlothian Council should work together to ensure that the facility is secured. The proposal for Burdiehouse is an expression of our urgent need for such facilities, and the City of Edinburgh Council wants to get on with it without protracted delays. I agree that having an out-of-town football stadium on the edge of Edinburgh will not improve our transport problems and that it could set us back to a huge extent. Let us hope that other solutions are suggested and will work. I welcome the new investment that we have and that is coming, but I would not pretend for a minute that that investment will be available to use tomorrow. The agenda for investment is a long-term one—that is one thing on which we can agree. The city council is now proposing orbital bus routes. The investment of £7.5 million is huge, and would not have been made several years ago. The next routes to be put in place and quality bus corridors, which will cut from the south of the city up to Leith, will benefit from £9.5 million. Big changes are beginning to take place, but they are not here yet, and we need to ensure that  they get delivered on the ground, in the same way that crossrail—which we know is beginning to make a difference—has been delivered, and that the new railway station in the west of Edinburgh will make a difference. However, that will not be enough. We also require other measures. We are not at the stage of debating Edinburgh's plans for congestion charging, because those are about to be put out for consultation. If members are not happy with them, the onus is on them to come up with something better. They should come up with practical suggestions and not just say that they do not like the plan and might like something better in, say, 10 years' time—which is far enough away in the political distance not to cause any problems now. We will have to take decisions across the city, as will the people of Edinburgh. I loved the bit in David McLetchie's speech when he spoke about Liberal Democrats in different parts of the UK. I was equally fascinated by the fact that he did not suggest his alternative. It is not good enough simply to say that we should not be anti-car. Members are not anti-car in any part of the chamber. However, we acknowledge the difficult issues to be addressed, and if we ignore the fact that traffic is projected to grow by 20 per cent, we are not doing our constituents any favours. We have a job to do in engaging in those tough problems. It will not be easy; such issues are not electorally popular. I hope that we will have a referendum, which will allow us to take a sober, mature look at the issues. It does not help to tell people that the City of Edinburgh Council's potential solution is to charge pensioners £20 every time they enter the city, which is something that I heard last night at a meeting about local buses. We need to have proper engagement and an honest discussion about the issues and choices. If people do not want congestion charging, that is fine, but they should tell us how they would tackle congestion. While it is the city council that is driving proposals forward, every member in the area—whether they are a constituency MSP or a list MSP—will have to engage in the issue. One thing that we need to focus on, but which is not in Mike Pringle's motion, is work between the Executive and the council, which is imperative. We need the allocation of £375 million from the Executive to make the trams work, and we will need the Executive to deliver improvements to Waverley and Haymarket stations. The agenda is exciting and radical, and I congratulate Mike Pringle on securing his first members' business debate. It is work in progress and, although I am glad that we are able to discuss the subject in the chamber tonight, this is not the end of the debate. We need a long-term  vision and short-term action. Perhaps medium-term action is required too, so that, when we debate the difficult parts of this agenda, we ensure that practical public transport improvements can be put in place. The debate is not just about public transport; it is about issues such as 20mph zones around our schools, more pedestrian facilities and more cycling facilities. We must have an integrated approach and there must be real choices for commuters, regardless of whether they come into the city through Edinburgh South, through Pentlands or from the east. We know where they all want to go—to jobs, leisure facilities and shops in our city. It is our job to ensure that we get the resources and that the City of Edinburgh Council has the resources to deliver improvements on the ground.

I welcome the fact that many discussions appear to be taking place between VisitScotland and the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport. The Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development has promised that he will relay to them today's discussion in the chamber. Will he also ensure that, in future, Edinburgh's role as the gateway to Scotland will be properly funded so that we can ensure that the many new visitors that come to Scotland do not stay just in Edinburgh and that we are successful in encouraging them to visit the whole of Scotland?

I have read the report and it occurs to me that one of the differences might be that community councils, as statutory consultees, are actively consulted on planning applications, whereas in licensing matters they simply have the right to make comments. If that were changed, it might make a difference to local communities. Does the member agree?

The key issue in the report is the nature of pubs. Most of the pubs on the Royal Mile are very small and have developed over time. The report makes the point that one of the good things that we could have is modernised facilities that provide space for people to eat and drink with their children. The nature of small pubs is that some are not appropriate for children. I am not making a negative point, but there is a historical issue around the pubs in that area.

Like other members, I welcome the Nicholson report. This review of the Scottish licensing system is long overdue. We should acknowledge that there has already been extensive debate and discussion, in which several of us have been involved. I welcome in particular the principles that have been set out. They provide a useful context for  proceeding with the report. The good practice between licensed operators and local police forces to which many members have referred is important and has been fed into the report. It is important that we are aware of the health implications of alcohol abuse. Regardless of what happens after the implementation of the Nicholson report, there will be no quick fix in that regard; there has already been talk about the long-standing cultural issues that we must address. We must also put on record the high price that individuals, their families and wider communities experience because of some of the problems associated with licensed premises. It is important to learn from experience. In my remarks, I will draw on my experiences as a local MSP and as a constituency representative of an area that has a high concentration of licensed premises. It is important to carry out a reality check on what the provisions would mean if they were translated into law and applied in practice. I have accompanied my local police on their rounds and have seen the challenges they face because of pubs and clubs emptying out at different hours and because of the reality of keeping the police in the city centre. I tried to reflect that in my submission to the Nicholson report. Modernisation of procedures is important and a huge amount of flexibility could be applied to the system. There is also at national level a need to issue clear sets of guidelines to the licensing boards, which need benchmarks and ideas about best practice. That was one of the most welcome recommendations in the report. I want my comments to emphasise the importance of taking on fully the concerns and experiences of communities. I have argued that local boards should be allowed to set their own policies to guide their decisions and I am glad to see that that is reflected strongly in the report. I offer the analogy of a planning system in which local polices that suit local circumstances can be set by people who are accountable. When people do not like the policies or their application and interpretation, they will know what to do—they will not vote for those local representatives the next time. I welcome the report's conclusion that licensing boards should consist of locally elected councillors, who would—which is vital—be accountable, and I welcome the definition in the report of who can submit objections and how that is framed. I welcome the fact that objections can be made in future to a licensing board and not to the people who are submitting applications or who are potential operators. That is an important point about access to the system for objectors.  Although I welcome the suggestion that there should be flexibility in opening hours, I will sound a note of caution. We have in Edinburgh a flexible system in principle, which means that it is up to pubs and clubs to ask for late licences. We have a tradition in Edinburgh of allowing people to open beyond 11 o'clock, 12 midnight and 1 o'clock. However, we must get the balance right, because I do not want to change that and return to the olden days. Today, there are shift workers and people who do not work the traditional hours of 9 to 5, but there are also still many people who like to get eight hours' sleep at night. The idea of 24-hour drinking is a bit of a red herring. I cannot imagine loads of pubs demanding the right to open up at 8 o'clock or 9 o'clock in the morning. The most important question is: what happens between 12 and 5 in the morning? Those are the conflict hours in my community. It is not about 24-hour drinking; it is about how we set the balance. A genuine issue that arises from the Nicholson report concerns local licensing boards having the ability to refuse an application on the basis of the key principles that are set out in the report . We must ask whether they are interpreting the principles correctly and whether they are using the right approach. There is good discussion in the report and the only point with which I take issue with the minister is on the phrase that she used a couple of times about a "premises-by-premises approach". It is vital that that is mediated by a locality approach in which the licensing boards exercise judgment, listen to the views of the community, the licensed operators and the police and thereafter take a view. There must be an appeals process, but it must be all right for boards to say, "In this community, we are going to set the broad framework here." There are also issues involving overprovision and the density, scale and nature of developments. Those are all critical issues, which licensing boards should be allowed to address. Incremental expansion and cumulative impact should be legitimate considerations for the boards, and that should be set out in statute. Like other members, I welcome a huge number of the points that are set out in the Nicholson report, so I will restrict myself to making two brief comments on it. I can see great arguments in favour of a national licensing forum, but I remain unconvinced about the need for a plethora of local fora, given that there are already drug and alcohol action teams—DAATs—and that there is a lot of good partnership working among communities, police and local authorities. I question the need for another set of people and I question who would be accountable in that regard.  I share the SNP spokesperson's concerns about children and young people. The problem of under-18s is very difficult to administer in practice if there is to be an automatic presumption in favour of people being allowed to visit licensed premises. I would prefer an opting-in approach, that takes particular account of lap-dancing or go-go dancing premises, as well as very busy pubs that are difficult for bouncers or people working behind the bar to supervise. The practical issues must be carefully thought through. Having made those cautionary comments, I say that there is a lot of good in the report. The real questions lie in the detail.

I very much welcome the commitment that has been made by the Executive today. I ask the First Minister to remember, in discussing the matter with the Minister for Transport, that the trains on the new Waverley line will need somewhere to park, where passengers may get on and off in a high-quality, accessible station. I ask him to ensure that Waverley station is improved as part of this welcome step forward for public transport.

Will the member take an intervention?

I was picking up the point that Mr Lochhead made, which was that no research had been carried out. Sylvia Jackson tried to intervene a couple of times to say that we have excellent research. I agree that excellent research is being carried out; the point is that we need more. I am sure that we can all agree on that.

The aquaculture debate in Scotland can sometimes be a false one in which the environment is posed on one side and the economy on the other. The two are seen to be mutually incompatible and unable to work with each other. Today's debate shows that we have to get both elements absolutely right. If we have a poor-quality environment around the coast of Scotland, there can be no aquaculture industry.  One of the main issues that affects the industry, particularly the salmon-farming industry, is the long-term cumulative impact on the environment. "A Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture" recognises that our coastal environment is of exceptional quality. However, it also recognises that, if we are to protect fish stocks, fish quality and the reputation of the aquaculture products that we produce in Scotland for being high-value and high-quality food products, we need to look to maintaining that water quality in the future. Evidence shows that the decline in wild salmon and sea trout off the west coast of Scotland has in part coincided with the increase of farmed salmon in inshore sea cages. George Lyon is not in the chamber at the moment, but his comments in that respect were useful in giving us an insight into the history of the development of salmon farming.

I would like to get into my speech. Maureen Macmillan and others talked about the work that the Transport and the Environment Committee did in the first session of Parliament in its inquiry into salmon farming and the environment. It is important to note that some of the committee's recommendations are in place or are being acted upon. The point that I want to make is that such work must continue. The conservation bodies and the industry must work together to ensure that the potentially adverse impact of salmon farming on wild fish stocks does not happen. Wherever possible, farms should be relocated to less sensitive sites to protect wild stocks as much as possible. The framework document usefully draws out the fact that the application of the precautionary principle in that regard is not straightforward. We need to have good, quality research that people can relate to and which they feel has some integrity. Getting such quality research is a really important issue. The challenge is to ensure that good monitoring of the industry and its impact on the environment takes place over time. Some members have already mentioned key issues such as residues of food and other nutrients, the impact of chemicals on a wider scale and the environment's carrying capacity. However, although such issues have underpinned some speeches, no one has really focused on them. I intend to do so in the short time available. Although the shellfish sector relies on a plentiful supply of natural food sources, overuse of that carrying capacity will result in poor growth and a failure to achieve marketable size. We must also consider the fin-fish—mostly salmon—sector, which relies on the environment's capacity to  assimilate the wastes that arise from rearing fish in cages. It is vital that such sensitive environments are properly protected. Moreover, because costs will be associated with any regulations in that respect, we must ensure that those are right and proportionate. We almost had a daft debate this afternoon, with the Tories tying themselves in knots over regulation. For example, they said that although they were generally against regulations, they were in favour of them where they related to quality. I hope that, in his summing-up speech, the Tory spokesperson will tell us exactly what is meant by the right measures. George Lyon and Alasdair Morrison effectively highlighted the need for appropriate regulation, and it is vital that the aquaculture strategy brings the industry into such discussions. Any expansion of the industry must be guided by good-quality research and information if we are to look after our environment in the long term, which is why we need good scientific evidence as a basis. The Tories have complained that there are too many studies and the SNP has said that there is not enough research. The truth is that, although some research has been carried out, which has helped to set out the industry's future path, we need more. Both the Crown Estate-funded scoping study on carrying capacity, which was published earlier this year, and SEPA's report on the incidence of harmful algal blooms on Scottish coastal waters help us to understand what is happening in the marine environment and have a significant bearing on the carrying-capacity debate, particularly in highlighting how the local environment can assimilate the impact of the aquaculture industry. However, as I have said, more needs to be done, and I welcome the establishment of the working group of experts from SEPA and the industry to ensure that any such studies are properly assessed and carried out. Indeed, it is vital to set out future research priorities and an action plan, because the industry relies on a healthy, clean environment to optimise production and product quality. Several members have mentioned that point this afternoon, and it is why issues that are referred to in the framework document such as environmental impacts, technical and biological cultivation research and health and fish welfare science must be properly considered. Research into them is fundamental to building a long-term sustainable industry. I also agree with the priorities on preventing cross-infection between farmed and wild stocks; on measures to prevent farmed fish from escaping and damaging wild stock; and on carrying capacity in the longer term. All the key parties that have signed up to the aquaculture strategy must work with the Executive and the industry to ensure that  we achieve long-term protection both of the waters around Scotland and of the industry. Every member has pointed out that such an approach is economically important, but we must reach the point where the environment meets the economy. Both sides must engage with each other on the matter. "A Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture" will allow us to develop the debate, and it is good that the document is the subject for debate this afternoon.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will respond to the recommendation of the report of the Nicholson committee on liquor licensing law. (S2O-355)

I welcome that response and the response to question 7. In taking forward the Nicholson committee's recommendations and in modernising our outdated licensing system, will the minister give a commitment to give full weight to the needs of local communities, such as my constituents in the Cowgate and the Grassmarket? They have suffered from an outmoded system that does not take into account the cumulative impact of large-scale licensed premises that have been ineffectively monitored over the years. Will she  give a commitment to ensuring a modernised and more accountable system?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to tackle childhood obesity. (S2O-299)

Does the minister agree that reduced physical activity is one of the most significant factors in weight gain for children and adolescents, which will lead to major health problems in adulthood? Over the past 20 years, the number of children travelling to school by car, as opposed to walking or cycling, has doubled. Will the minister and the Executive agree to work across departments on the issue? Does the minister recognise that schemes such as the safer routes to school scheme not only tackle congestion but work to improve the health of young people across Scotland?

It may please the member to hear that yesterday, at its second meeting, the Environment and Rural Development Committee decided that it would consider the issue of the national waste strategy, with a view to scrutinising the Executive's work and making an input to the work of the European Commission and the European Parliament on the issue, which must be concluded by the end of December 2003.

The debate has proved, once and for all, the extent to  which the Tories are obsessed with privatisation. They are obsessed with the ownership of organisations rather than with what those organisations do in practice. Murdo Fraser provided no historic context and did not accept the fact that the investment in the English water industry was made a decade ago.

They were privatised by the Government, which gave them a huge subsidy. The Tories came up with no solution for us at that time, because people in Strathclyde said that they did not want a private water industry in Scotland. We had decades of underinvestment as a result of the Tories' restriction of local government finance and they offered no solution for the Scottish water industry, so it is a bit rich for them to criticise us and to demand privatisation.

I thank Mr Fraser, but he has said enough this morning. It is a bit rich for the Tories to criticise and demand privatisation when the massive investment that is being made is beginning to make a difference to water quality after decades of underinvestment. There is a challenge to be faced in that Scottish Water and the three previous water authorities have a huge investment to put in place in a relatively short time. The water industry commissioner is on the side of the domestic charge payer and the big business-charge payer. We have to consider the impact on small companies, but the money has to come from somewhere.

I have only three minutes. If the money does not come from the taxpayer through Executive subsidies, it must come from the users. During the debate, no one has said where else that money could come from. The Tories have an ideological obsession. The Scottish water industry is using private sector skills and investment on major projects where that is appropriate. We must ensure that that investment is made so that there is an increase in the quality of the water that we receive. It is untrue to say—as Alex Johnstone said—that there have been no improvements. The Tories have given members the false perspective that privatisation—which no one else in the chamber wants—would be a simple fix that would solve the problem of people having to pay for investment. That does nothing to clarify how the Tories would  change the reality of having to pay for that investment. Efficiency savings are coming through—we need only compare the number of staff who are being laid off by Scottish Water with the number who were laid off by the three previous water authorities. There have already been efficiencies of scale and that must now be driven through the whole process of the £2 billion investment. It gives a false perspective to pretend that it would be better to have a private company than it would be to have a public company using private sector skills running that process. Members throughout the chamber agree that Scottish Water faces a massive challenge, but the solution that is proposed by the Tories would be a diversion from the task at hand, which is to invest efficiently £2 billion throughout Scotland as soon as possible.

The member said that £1 million for a new pipe system seemed hugely expensive. Is he making the point that it is too expensive because someone else could provide it more cheaply, or is he saying that we should not have to pay for that investment? I am not trying to score a point—I simply want to establish what the member means.

Will the member acknowledge the numerous projects around the country that have already been completed to improve the basic infrastructure of the water industry? When he says, in a cavalier fashion, that there has been no improvement in the quality of services, is he totally ignoring the impact of that investment?

Will the member take an intervention?

It will be brief. Given that the last Conservative Government privatised the rail industry and deregulated the bus industry, and that Brian Monteith is still enthusiastically in favour of that approach, can Mr Fergusson tell us exactly how the £100 million he proposes to spend every year would change the life of the constituent that he just mentioned?

I thank the members who supported the motion and I am grateful that so many have stayed to hear the debate. I also thank Citizens Advice Scotland for the work that it has done on raising our awareness of the problem in its report entitled "In too deep: CAB clients' experience of debt". Debt continues to be one of the most significant problems about which people throughout Scotland contact citizens advice bureaux and other debt management agencies. The cross-party support for the motion shows the strength of feeling and the urgent need to address the root causes and management of debt throughout Scotland. I also congratulate the Daily Record on its excellent campaign to expose loan sharks. My colleague Trish Godman wants to talk about the need for tough action to stamp out the misery that is caused by loan sharks. The CAS report—"In too deep"—is well named. It reports that bureaux throughout Scotland have been dealing with an alarming 47 per cent  increase in the number of new debt inquiries. The report outlines how debt is often associated with changes in circumstances, such as the loss of a job, ill health or the break-up of a relationship. It also shows that it is still far too easy for people in Scotland to get credit—especially credit that is offered at high or extortionate rates. Recent figures show that Scotland's CABx are dealing with more and more inquiries about debt. The average debt among clients who went to CABx was more than £8,000. That is the average. Nearly two thirds of debt-related inquiries are about consumer-related debt issues to do with mail order, hire purchase, credit sales and loans. What causes debt in Scotland? The CAS report is clear that the root cause is poverty that is brought on by low income. A vast number of people throughout Scotland do not have bank accounts or access to what might be described as mainstream credit. I do not know whether members know this, but anyone who rents property long term will find that they instantly pay more interest—simply because they are not a homeowner. That is discrimination and it is not fair and the issue has to be tackled. In my constituency, the Gorgie/Dalry CAB answers hundreds of inquiries on debt issues. In the past year, more than 46 per cent of all debt inquires related to consumer debt to do with catalogues, hire purchase and people getting over their limits with credit cards. Interest rates associated with those types of borrowing are much higher than for other mainstream sources of credit. A terrible cost is hidden behind the statistics on easy credit and the spiralling of people's debts. I want to give members just a couple of examples from my constituency. The first concerns a 22-year-old man who was working part time on a low wage. He applied for and got a credit card with a £250 limit. He spent up to the limit and then, for a variety of reasons, found that he could not meet the minimum monthly repayments. After six months of that, his debt is now more than £1,000 and is totally unsustainable—he cannot pay it off. He is now being penalised for being over his credit limit and the additional interest is exacerbating the problem. The other example is of a 30-year-old woman who works full time but is also on a low wage. She bought a computer for £900 and took additional breakdown cover costing £325, which paid for with a deal that offered interest-free credit over the first year. She made repayments of £44 a month during that first year but found that, after a year, there was still more than £630 to pay. Unable to pay the outstanding amount, she continues with the credit agreement but the interest rate has shot up from 0 per cent to 29.5 per cent. At the end of the four-year agreement, she will have paid nearly  £2,100 for a £900 computer. When we think about it, a range of questions arises from that case. I am sure that members will have read about issues to do with the massive cost of additional breakdown cover. There is a need to be absolutely clear to individual consumers about the real cost of such deals and about what happens after the interest-free period. There is also a basic issue about how well equipped people are to deal with enticing offers that can trap them into long term and escalating financial commitments. I have not even begun to explore what stress and pressure can do to people when they have those kinds of debts to deal with. We have to look at how we tackle the root causes of debt and at how people can be helped to get out of the traps that they might fall into. Some issues need to be addressed by the Scottish Parliament and the Executive, some issues need to be addressed by the United Kingdom Government, and trading standards issues could be dealt with by local authorities. There is also a role for the media in making people much more aware of the pitfalls of debt. When I read the commitments in the coalition's "A Partnership for a Better Scotland", I saw a lot of very good ideas. There are measures such as an extension of the money advice service, which will build on the work of local authorities, the citizens advice bureaux network and other voluntary sector bodies, to help those who are burdened by multiple debt. In Edinburgh, we are already seeing the benefits of new money advice staff who are in place to help people. We must support credit unions and community banking arrangements to ensure that people have affordable alternatives to mainstream banking. In my area, I am aware of two particular projects, the first of which involves the Canmore Housing Association and the Gorgie/Dalry Credit Union Ltd, and gives people access to low-cost loans. Another is the prospect plus scheme in Wester Hailes, which is run by the Bank of Scotland with the local housing association. Such practical projects will give people real opportunities. They break ground because they offer access to affordable credit at manageable levels. In the Wester Hailes project, a traditional bank works with a local housing association; there must be more projects of that kind and the big banks must tackle such issues more seriously. I am also in favour of local enterprise and trading schemes. It is vital that the Executive continues to work with the Department of Trade and Industry to tackle harassment by loan sharks and to introduce fairer credit schemes and new protection from exorbitant interest rates. I ask the minister to set out a time scale on the implementation of the partnership agreement.  Citizens Advice Scotland has raised with me the issue of debt tribunals, which would allow people to challenge extortionate debt agreements. The differences between debt tribunals and a normal court setting is that debt tribunals would be chaired by someone who has expertise in money or debt advice issues, they would be public and they would be free to the debtor. As a result, they would be much more accessible, in line with existing tribunals for benefit and employment matters. According to CAS, the fact that debt tribunals would be public—and therefore different from the DTI-proposed arbitration process, which would be private—means that they would set precedents in helping people to challenge unfair credit agreements. The process would be much more transparent and accessible. I ask the minister to focus on debt tribunals in the future. I pay tribute to the work of many people in my constituency, in particular Barbara Swan of Gorgie/Dalry CAB and the 45 trained volunteers who do a huge amount to try to alleviate my constituents' debt problems. We must tackle the root causes of debt. Our wider anti-poverty work on creating jobs with decent wages and on delivering tax credits must be part of the solution, but we should also focus on policies to promote responsible lending by the banks and lenders. There should be much more sensible limits and the costs should be explained to potential borrowers in an up-front and effective way. People on low incomes need protection and we must help them. Spiralling debt and fair credit are important issues for hundreds of thousands of people throughout Scotland; those issues should be dealt with urgently by the Scottish Executive and the UK Government. Let us ensure that tonight's debate pushes the issue up our political agenda.

Will the minister ensure that we get an integrated approach to the development of the tram network in Edinburgh? In particular, will he require consultation between Transport Initiatives Edinburgh and all the public transport operators to ensure that we obtain a tram network that builds on and complements existing transport networks in the city, rather than competing with them?

I am happy to congratulate Elaine Thomson on securing the debate. I think that I replied to the first members' business debate in the Parliament so it is probably appropriate that, as a back bencher, I speak in the final members' business debate of the session. Elaine Thomson's motion should be supported. It makes two key points. It recognises the good work that has been done in Aberdeen by the GNP and it acknowledges the importance of SIPs throughout Scotland. Tom McCabe made the important point that SIPs are doing good work.  Without SIPs, who would be focusing on and pulling together some of our most disadvantaged communities in Scotland? SIPs are a vital way of helping local communities advocate for themselves the kind of changes and support that they want from local facilities. I recognise the concept of a strong and economically powerful city with pockets of severe deprivation and social exclusion. The purpose of SIPs is to try to give those communities a voice so that they are not isolated and left apart in a sea of affluence.

I will when I get into my discussion. Many communities in my constituency in Edinburgh, which is one of the most prosperous cities in the United Kingdom, experience such social exclusion. SIPs give local people the chance to shape their communities themselves and to engage with local institutions of the state, whether council departments, the police or health organisations. Abolishing SIPs would take away that power of advocacy and the opportunity for social empowerment.

I think Brian Adam misunderstands the purpose of SIPs and the way in which they operate. I have yet to be lobbied on that issue, although voluntary organisations and charitable groups are speedy in beating a path to my door when they think they do not have enough money. The key issue is that SIPs add to local communities and give them a voice. Elaine Thomson has talked about an area-based SIP, but I want to highlight the work of the Edinburgh youth social inclusion partnership, which is a thematic partnership. It cuts across some of our most disadvantaged communities and ensures that the voices of young people are heard by those who make policy and decide on local services. As a local MSP, I am keen to support the work of that SIP. Part of that work is ensuring that there is a dialogue between young people and the people who provide facilities. I have recently been at discussions on leisure facilities and transport. It  can be quite challenging to be approached, as I have been, by young people who have a list of ideas about areas in which they want local services to improve. It is our job as politicians to see how we can improve the facilities that those young people depend on. Although that can be challenging, it is part of the overall approach to delivery of social justice throughout Scotland. SIPs do not duplicate local services—they change them. They challenge local service providers and act as an advocate for local people and, particularly in my patch, for young people who would otherwise be totally excluded. It is easy to label young people as troublemakers who create problems. However, we need to do a real job of work by examining the problems that they experience. They are vulnerable; in my area, they are often not allowed to use local sports facilities or cafes—indeed, they cannot afford to use them—because a very small number create problems. As a result, they are all labelled as troublemakers or as people who create hassle. That is not the case, and it is important that our local youth SIP challenges such views. Although young people are seen as threatening, they are the biggest group of victims of crime. Their voices must be heard by policy-makers, but that would not happen if it were not for the local youth SIP, which pulls together or changes the work that the police, social work and local communities carry out. That is not duplication; instead it is an essential part of the armoury with which we can tackle social exclusion, give the most vulnerable and socially excluded people in our society a proper voice and ensure that local services do not ignore their needs. That is why I support Elaine Thomson's motion and the work of the youth SIP in my constituency. I want to see more rather than less of that kind of work. The SNP is making a big mistake with its commitment to abolish SIPs.

I am deeply grateful that I have been allowed an intervention. I referred to the Pennell Initiative for Women's Health, which is a group that was set up to promote older women's health. I apologise for my earlier slip of the tongue, which I hope will be corrected in the Official Report .

I am tempted to say, "Follow that." I will try not to. It is appropriate that the last main political debate of the session is about what the Parliament has done to try to improve older people's quality of life. In her opening speech, Margaret Curran made wide-ranging comments about what the Executive has done. I will focus not on a range of issues, but  on how much more we need to do on the key flagship policies that define what the Parliament has done for older people and on the contribution that older people make in my constituency. It will probably be tough to cover those subjects in four minutes, but I will have a go. In considering how to improve the key flagship policies that are delivered throughout Scotland, I asked my intern, Beth Shatzel, to undertake questionnaire work and to talk to older people in my constituency. Week in, week out in the Parliament, we debate policies endlessly, but how do those policies feed through to people? How do they know that those policies are being implemented? We examined the three key policies of free off-peak local bus travel, free care for older people and free central heating. Through Beth Shatzel's work, which I followed up by attending many meetings of older people, it is clear that those policies have massive support throughout my constituency. Many older people have benefited from those policies, but many are still unaware of them. In the Parliament, we talk about the policies as if they were implemented at the flick of a switch, happened yesterday and are straightforward. We must communicate to older people what we have done in the Parliament, engage them in those discussions and talk to them about how to improve those policies. When I talk to people in my constituency, just about every older person whom I meet is delighted about free off-peak local travel on buses. People have used it from day one—they have been delighted to get out there. People are not only using the scheme, but are massively aware of it. We have been hugely successful in making people know about free off-peak local travel on buses. There is less awareness of what free care for older people means in practice and, as I said, it is incumbent on MSPs to communicate what policies mean in practice. Many older people whom we talked to had had free central heating installed, but many of them were suspicious about it. I was struck by the fact that they did not believe that it was going to be free. We have debated the issue in the Parliament—we know that free central heating is provided free and that the scheme is real. However, a lot of the older people whom we talked to thought that there was a catch; they thought that the scheme was something like a time-share. They said that bits of it would be free, but that they would have to pay for the installation or that there would be a catch further down the line and that 10 years hence they would have to pay for it. It is important that we do not simply talk about those headline policies but take on the job of communicating them personally. A lot of flak has  been directed at the Executive for the money that it has spent on advertising. As an ex-minister, I know that that is partly because a lot of that money used to be UK money. The Scottish Office did not have that money in its accounts and one of the benefits of devolution is that, when that money came to Scotland, we were given the choice about how to spend it. I defend to the last the right of our Executive to spend money on publicity. I want every one of my constituents to know that they deserve and will benefit from free central heating. I have visited several old people's houses and have seen the difference that free central heating has made to their quality of life. I was struck by the fact that those old people no longer have to live their lives in their sitting rooms; they can be comfortable in their bedrooms and bathrooms as well. Those are basic things that the Scottish Parliament has done to make a difference and we should defend them to the last. Although we have made a big difference in this parliamentary session, I would be the first to say that there is a hell of a lot more that we want to do in the second session. I would love to be in the Parliament then to extend those policies and to take them further forward. It is important that we do not see older people only as receivers of benefit or policies from the Scottish Parliament. Older people put a huge amount back into our constituencies and communities. As a local MSP, I am proud of the work that older people do in my constituency. They demand my support on planning issues, on sourcing grants and on getting the local authority to give them more support. They also demand my support in getting new facilities built and in the fundraising that is needed to staff the facilities. Many of the groups on my patch are run by older people, often for older people. It is important that we acknowledge that in today's debate, which is about closing the opportunity gap. The Scottish Parliament is making its contribution to that aim not only by spending money on older people, but by working with older people. We are making the work that older people do go a lot further—we should celebrate the work that is done by thousands of older people in every constituency across Scotland. I will finish by saying that we have done a huge amount to make a real difference to the quality of life for pensioners and older people across Scotland. For the past year and a half, I have been involved in the Pennell trust—[ Laughter. ] I am going to regret saying that. The initiative is about women aged over 45 to over 105. Older people make up a huge number of the population of Scotland and we all know that we are all moving towards old age. We can be proud of what the  Parliament has done so far, but I accept that there is an awful lot more than we still want to do. There are a lot of radical ambitions for the second session of the Parliament. I fervently hope that we will have a Labour-led Government to let us deliver those radical ambitions.

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive how initiatives such as community warden schemes can help to tackle anti-social behaviour. (S1O-6687)

I have heard that the Tories are against the community warden scheme. However, in my constituency, in areas such as Saughton Mains, residents are desperate for support and action on anti-social behaviour. Will the minister outline how she sees community wardens working in partnership with the police to tackle anti-social behaviour?

I add my voice to those of Margo MacDonald and all my local colleagues in welcoming the massive amounts of money that the minister recently committed to trams and to the rail link to Edinburgh airport. It is quite right that time should be taken in designing the routes for those projects and in consulting local people on those, but during that process the minister must ensure that he focuses on investment. We need investment not only in park and rides but in bus services and in improving our local rail services. A great deal could be done with the local bus operators, the train companies and the city council.

I welcome the committee's acknowledgement of the need for a bill that is not modest, but applies to the whole of Scotland. I strongly support Jackie Baillie's point about Gaelic-medium education, as I have a Gaelic nursery and a Gaelic-medium education unit at Tollcross in my constituency. People are committed to Gaelic-medium education. If the bill is passed, the committee's commitment to amend it at stage 2 will give us a much stronger bill, not the modest bill about which several members have talked. I would welcome that as a local MSP.

I had intended to intervene on the minister; however, I am taking the opportunity to speak in a little more depth. Members, including Jackie Baillie, have spoken eloquently about what we might lose through a rigid interpretation of the directive. The European legislation has gone beyond being a proposed directive and is now a  directive; the issue now is how it is implemented throughout the European Union. We were all sent a briefing from the Food Standards Agency, which says that it is intended that the implementation of the directive, through regulations that the Scottish Parliament will make, will be flexible. I have two specific questions for the minister. First, I would like her to clarify how she intends to draft the regulations. Can she confirm the cost of compliance—the cost of the production of the dossiers that must be produced before substances can be used? It has been suggested to me that a problem exists because, even when a product has been used safely for years, the costs of the regulatory process will be prohibitive for the producer of that food supplement. The issue is not that the supplements are dangerous or that they have not been used for years, but that the cost of their going through the system might be too expensive. Can the minister confirm what the cost of that process might be? Secondly, members have talked about derogation. Members of the European Committee, such as Helen Eadie and me, have to read through the derogation process all the time. It is very important that any application for derogation meets the terms and criteria that are set out in the derogation. I wonder whether the minister can tell us how she intends to ensure that that happens. Nearly all members have mentioned the need for that. Soil composition has been mentioned as an issue that is unique to us in Scotland, which, in another subject, would allow us a derogation. I wonder whether the minister has any advice yet on that issue. If the minister cannot answer those detailed questions tonight, it would be helpful if she could answer them before the European Committee debates the issue in three weeks' time. Tonight is not the end of the process. We are late on in the process, but it would be helpful if members of the Parliament were able to work with the minister, the European Committee and, potentially, our colleagues in the European Parliament and Westminster to get a co-ordinated approach. I am glad that we have had the opportunity to hold this debate. The real challenge for us is to get into the difficult, nitty-gritty issues of where we go next in relation to the derogation process and the whole issue of how the regulations might be drafted and implemented. I presume that they will come back to us for discussion and debate. I hope that the minister will be able to answer my questions—if not now, within the next three weeks.

I welcome today's statement from the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning. The new spending regime that he has outlined brings us significantly closer to having a level playing field between long-term road investment and public transport investment, which must be welcomed. On the allocation of £375 million for trams in Edinburgh, will the minister confirm the procedures for the approval for the schemes involved, with regard to the route and the project's completion dates? I welcome his commitment to integration but I ask him to ensure that an integrated approach to the tram includes car users—in respect of park-and-ride facilities—as well as cyclists and bus users. If that approach is taken, the new trams will truly benefit the whole city and we will have an integrated approach to improving public transport throughout the city.

I welcome the First Minister's reply. Does he agree that renewables such as solar heating, photovoltaics and biomass open up new ways of tackling fuel poverty and that our climate change commitments can also be tackled when they are used? Will he commit the Scottish Executive to taking the lead in promoting the use of such renewables by giving encouragement to those who are involved in regenerating and building new housing projects throughout Scotland?

I congratulate Angus MacKay on his success in securing the debate. At this stage of the parliamentary session, it is increasingly difficult to get a motion on the evening's agenda. The motion is an excellent example of grass-roots campaigning by People & Planet. I want to add my support for the work that it has already carried out in raising awareness of the power of the major institutions in our society to make a statement about their values and principles and to use their investment powers wisely. The People & Planet group has encouraged the deliberate use of such power, in a way that influences the financial sector and business. It is appropriate that Angus MacKay has brought the issue to the Parliament. As parliamentarians, we can add our weight and our voices to the issues that have been raised at the University of Edinburgh. The motion raises vital issues, such as the transparency of the way in which firms and major institutions conduct their business. It is appropriate for major institutions such as the University of Edinburgh to ask questions about firms' records on human rights, on the exploitation of workers and on pollution or irresponsible arms sales. If they get the wrong answers to those questions, they have the power not to invest in those companies. However, they need to obtain that information in the first place. I hope that the debate will help to progress matters. We should encourage companies to adopt positive, proactive policies and to have a positive investment strategy. Angus MacKay highlighted the benefits that firms and companies that work towards socially responsible investment can gain. Such institutions attract investors. They have attracted the investments of individuals, as Robin Harper has said, and of major organisations that have serious financial clout. Adopting a more ethical or socially responsible approach to the environment or to human rights can be good for business. It is good for a company's public relations and its reputation. Companies' adoption of such policies can help to shape the investment strategies of more conventional and mainstream companies.  I am particularly glad that the debate is being held tonight, as the European Committee is considering corporate social responsibility. We have looked at how we in Scotland can encourage companies and major public sector institutions to develop the concept of corporate social responsibility. Although the committee is near the end of its inquiry, I would like to make members aware of why it took up the issue in the first place. I suspect that there are similarities between our approach and what generated the interest of People & Planet. The European Committee investigated the issue because it is highly conscious of the impact of global restructuring and the price that Scottish workers have paid for that. The inquiry was also inspired by our visit to the European Commission in Brussels last year. The Commission asked us to look at Scotland's contribution to generating employment, to consider issues such as equal opportunities, women's rights and access to the labour market for disadvantaged groups and to think about whether there was a Scottish approach to corporate social responsibility. We started our inquiry against the backdrop of the work that was being done in Johannesburg at the world summit on sustainable development. The need for the environmental accountability of firms was highlighted as well as the need for firms to report annually on how they impacted locally and globally on the environment. We also highlighted how firms should try to say what steps they are taking to lessen the adverse impact of their company's work on the environment. One key issue that the European Committee considered is the role of major public sector organisations, such as the Scottish Executive or the University of Edinburgh, and how such organisations can lead the way. I am glad to be able to support Angus MacKay's motion, and I am glad that he has brought the issue to the Parliament. I hope that by debating tonight's motion we can learn the lessons that have been learned at the University of Edinburgh and encourage other institutions to take a similar view. We need champions; we need people who are prepared to do their homework; and we need people who are prepared to raise the issue and campaign on it. I support Angus MacKay's motion and I hope that others will take the issue further, beyond the University of Edinburgh. In his summation, I hope that Lewis Macdonald will give us some insight into how the Executive can further promote the debate.

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Executive will take account of the introduction of congestion charging in London in the development of transport policy. (S1F-2524)

Does the First Minister agree that in Edinburgh we need a package of investment, supported by the Executive, to improve the quality and choice of public transport in advance of the City of Edinburgh Council's referendum on congestion charging? Does he agree that the Tories' position reeks of hypocrisy, given their lamentable track record on public transport investment?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to improve the support available to vulnerable families. (S1O-6404)

I welcome the minister's commitment to practical support. In providing more resources to local authorities and the voluntary sector, will she ensure that resources and qualified staff are available to deliver those desperately needed services for vulnerable families? Will she redouble the efforts that she is already making to encourage more young people into social work and into the caring professions as their first career choice?

I very much agree with Robin Harper's point about the need for continued long-term support across the parties, but does he acknowledge that one of the key objectives of the bill—to have an annual debate in the Parliament—will in fact be achieved through the annual report that is provided for in Ross Finnie's action plan?

We have had an excellent debate and everyone, regardless of party, has agreed that we want to support the organic movement in Scotland. We want more organic food to be produced, and critically, we want it to be affordable. This week brought the publication of the action plan. Labour party members strongly welcome the plan. We have campaigned for it throughout the first Parliament—I lodged a motion for debate last year and I was pleased at the amount of support it got. However, the biggest conversion to organic that we have had is the minister, Ross Finnie. I remember asking a series of questions of Ross about when we would get an action plan and the strongest answer I ever got on the record was that the agriculture and environment working group report had a useful passage on organic farming. I give the minister credit for bringing together an organic action plan. Robin Harper's bill has concentrated the mind wonderfully. It has given those of us on the Labour back benches the impetus to push Ross Finnie. I am glad that he has introduced an excellent action plan. Robin Harper should be given credit for helping us get to such a pressure point in Parliament. We all know how the pressure points work; today is one of them. I agree absolutely with Rhona Brankin that the critical test will be what happens next with the action plan, which goes beyond what Robin Harper has put in his bill. The challenge is to deliver on the action plan. We need aspirational targets that will change in future. Let us consider what has happened with renewables in Parliament. We began with a modest aspirational target and we now have a challenging aspirational target. That has given leadership and confidence to the industry. We want the same for organics. Scotland must catch up with the rest of the UK. In an otherwise measured speech from Bruce Crawford, he made a ludicrous assertion that the devolution settlement might contribute to the failure of organics in Scotland. That must be the most ludicrous assertion that we have heard today. A 70 per cent target for organic production in Scotland to meet the demand is an excellent target and one that we should all support. Pauline McNeill made a passionate speech in support of accurate labelling for consumers. We need more research into organic production. We need support for local farmers' markets and we need retailing initiatives.  However, the biggest issue in the action plan that we must tackle is financial support. Robin Harper's bill would not deliver that. That is where the Labour party wants to add something to the debate. The action plan promises consultation and financial support. The Labour party is absolutely clear—we need radically to change environmental support through the agri-environment budget, which is the lowest in Europe; that is not good enough. We must have a radical shift in the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy. That is an issue for the Scottish Parliament elections. The process of getting there must be inclusive. We have our annual report to Parliament. One of the first debates we need in the new Parliament is on progress on the organic action plan. I pledge our support for the action plan. The Labour party will not be supporting Robin Harper's bill, but all credit to him for getting us to this point today.

I am struck by the fact that members are almost giving away their generations and ages by indicating their first alcohol of choice. I will not follow that pattern. Under-age drinking is a major problem in my city centre constituency. It is a very visible problem, although that is not the whole story—part of the problem is hidden. We all talk about the problem as if it were visible and obvious, but there is a lot of hidden abuse of alcohol by young people, and it is a difficult thing for them to deal with. I have spoken to representatives of the groups that support young people on my patch and it appears to be easier to resist drugs than it is to resist alcohol. Alcohol is so available—it is easy to get hold of and, because of peer pressure, it is very difficult to resist. Other factors are boredom and lack of confidence and self-esteem. It is not enough simply to look at the issues in isolation—the problems caused by alcohol alone. A lot of good work is being done, and it is appropriate that Trish Godman has highlighted a local group that is working in her constituency and which is making a  contribution through joined-up work and education. In my constituency, work is being done by NCH Scotland and an organisation called Streetwork, which talks to young people and gives them support on the street. Those organisations inform me that they regularly pick up young people—usually young girls—of an average age of 12 who are totally unconscious from heavy binge drinking. Members have already mentioned the dangers of unprotected sex. Children who are already hardened drinkers at the age of 12 are storing up awful health problems and other severe problems for the future. Members have discussed where young people get access to alcohol. It was made clear to me at a police briefing that I attended last week that it is not just through corner shops that young people get access to alcohol. The problem can lie with parents who supply them with alcohol, or, sometimes, with parents who have alcohol problems. We need a joined-up approach, and one of the issues that we need to address is that of family support. We need alcohol counselling that takes into account the number of young people who live in a family that might be headed up by somebody with alcohol problems. The issue is very difficult. I hope that the report arising from the Nicholson review will give us a further context in which to tackle underage alcohol. Despite the difficulty of the problem, I believe that a joined-up approach can be effective if it involves local agencies that have credibility, which is critical. Young people need to be able to trust the organisations that provide them with counselling and support. Groups on my patch such as Crew 2000 and Streetwork are able to talk to young people, to engage them in thinking about what is making them turn to alcohol, and to give them a better alternative. Such groups are important. I congratulate Trish Godman on raising this issue. I hope that when Mary Mulligan sums up the debate, she will discuss the Executive's approach. One of the key problems is resources, and another is the short-term nature of many projects. Voluntary groups are always asking us for long-term support. I do not expect the minister to wave a magic wand, but it would be greatly appreciated if she could provide us with a context that shows how, structurally, we can ensure that organisations survive to do the work that is desperately needed.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to consult on the draft education (additional support for learning) (Scotland) bill. (S1O-6332)

I welcome the minister's response and urge her to ensure that parents in particular are made aware of the consultation process. Will she acknowledge the distress that many parents experience because of the difficulty of getting appropriate educational support for children who have many difficulties? I ask her to ensure that the consultation provides the opportunity for those parents' voices to be heard and acted upon.

The last thing that the Parliament should do is sit on its laurels. My problem with this debate is that I am not sure that Robin Harper has made the case for land value taxation. He made the case for a renewed effort to develop inner-city areas and to tackle derelict land in rural areas. However, I am a bit sceptical that his proposal for moving things forward is the right one. The pamphlet that was circulated before the debate says that it would be easy to change the current system. The suggestion is that all we have to do is get surveyors to look at maps. Values could then be established and that would be it—very straightforward. I am suspicious of anything that is portrayed as being simple. Taxation is one of the most complex matters that individuals or Parliaments have to deal with. A strong case has to be made for change. Robin Harper raised some interesting questions and I am glad that he chose this subject for the debate—we should be thinking about and debating such ideas. However, I am not convinced by the case that he made. The thought of moving to a simple form of taxation fills me with horror, especially when I consider the history of innovative taxation. Alasdair Morgan mentioned the poll tax. That was a simple tax, which the Tories would love us to go back to. However, it caused huge social justice problems, which are still filtering through today—people are not registering to vote because they are worried that they will be picked out.

No, thank you. Attempts have been made to make some taxes greener. Since 1997, the Labour Government has been considering more equitable company car taxation and fuel taxation, for example. Those taxes are very easy but very controversial, as every member knows. We need to think about a range of taxes. In his summation, I would like Robin Harper to say how land tax would impact on people in my constituency, which is located in a city centre. Margo MacDonald talked about developments in Edinburgh. When I was a student in Edinburgh in the mid-1980s, we had a great opportunity to study a series of vacant sites in the city. We went to them for practice as town planners and we came up with ideas and new visions on how the city could be developed. The Tollcross triangle now has good-quality flats and a superb set of offices and shops. The hole in the ground is now Saltire Court, which is a superb legal and financial centre. The Morrison Street car park is the last of the big sites in Edinburgh and is now going to be developed into a range of offices and shops. Would land value tax have brought an instant solution to the development of those sites? I do not think so. The social and economic changes that have taken place are complex. There is a need for partnership. The Edinburgh Labour council has worked hard with the business community to bring about development on all those sites. I do not believe that flicking the switch from property and business tax to land value tax would have made that task any easier. Some of the developments that I now see in my constituency, such as hospitals, might have been made more difficult. I think about people who are living in areas such as Dumbiedykes, which is right in the city centre, beside the new Parliament building. The value of land there must be astronomical. How could people who are on lower incomes or benefits pay if land value were taken into account? The amenities in the area are not good and property values have changed. If we want to levy a land value tax rather than a property tax, we must be able to answer such questions. I would be worried about people on low incomes and pensioners in my constituency if a tax were introduced that is portrayed as simple but would have real social justice implications. I am glad that Robin Harper has raised the issue today, but we should consider other good forms of taxation. His motion rightly talks about a social, cultural and economic renaissance. The hard work that is going on in some of our big cities in Scotland is beginning to bring that about. In the case of Glasgow, the issue is not only land or property values, but giving people skills, rebuilding  communities, injecting confidence, creating jobs and ensuring that there is affordable housing. Dundee is a great example of investment in the arts. There, a per-cent-for-art scheme was introduced, in which new developments were invited to contribute voluntarily to the arts in the area. The city centre of Dundee has been revolutionised in the past few years because such imaginative, broad approaches have been taken. Let us look at taxation and how we can improve it, but let us not pretend that there is a simple solution. Hard work is required, including a range of policy initiatives and partnerships, such as those between the business community and the local councils. Local communities will have to be involved in deciding how their area should change. Imaginative ideas such as the planning-for-real initiative will bring communities into play and let them take part in the renewal of their areas. We do not want a simple approach. We had the poll tax and it was a disaster. Not only was it not thought through, but it was socially unjust. The point is that taxes have to work not just in economic terms; we have to think through their political and environmental implications. Indeed, I know that Robin Harper would be keen to see the latter issue taken forward. I am glad that we have been able to debate some of these complex issues this morning. However, we must not forget about the problems of social and urban deprivation, which a land value tax would not sort out at the flick of a switch.

Like other members, I welcome these amendments, which deliver greater transparency and allow people to be more involved in river basin management planning. Given the scope of such work, there must be wide consultation of NGOs, individual members of the public, businesses and statutory organisations. The last thing we want is for people to find out about the process once it has finished and they are unable to make any meaningful contribution. As the creation of river basin management plans will no doubt give rise to some difficult, long-term and even controversial issues, it is important that they are disseminated widely. I welcome the use of electronic means, especially the internet, in that respect and we must advertise where people will be able to access such facilities. People will find the ability to call up documents and colourful maps and to click on their particular area incredibly useful as it will allow them to find out what options are available and make it easier for them to access information.  I hope that, when SEPA consults as part of the further work to be done after the bill is enacted, it will take imaginative approaches, such as using map designs that will be easy for people to navigate. I hope that that will make it easy for people to see the impact there will be on their area, rather than having to look at a map of the whole of Scotland. It is possible to design such maps. If there had been a huge controversy in the chamber today, the issue would have got into the newspapers. The fact that we have all felt since stage 2 that the issue needed to be addressed means that there is support throughout the chamber. The challenge is to get people to take part in the discussions and to take part in the long-term changes that must come from the new strategies for river basins.

I welcome the Executive amendments in the group and the fact that they will strengthen the sustainable flood management approach. I also welcome the fact that an integrated approach to dealing with the issues will be flagged up and put in statute. I want to flag up the renewable energy industry's concerns about the application of the bill to the development of hydroelectricity schemes. The industry is worried not only about new hydroelectricity schemes, but about the bill's potential impact on existing schemes. That is why I welcome the bill's commitment to sustainable development and to an integrated approach that cuts across Executive departments. We need clarity and an approach that brings together the key players, including the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, Scottish Natural Heritage and the renewables industry to discuss the bill's implications and how those players can work together under the water framework directive. The hydroelectricity industry is concerned that the bill might cut across existing developments by requiring new licences. We need an integrated approach. The Executive's policies on climate change and renewable energy targets must also be recognised. The issues must be dealt with together and we must achieve the right balance and a consistent approach from SEPA, SNH and the Executive, so that everybody knows where they stand as the bill is implemented. Further evaluations and regulations will come from the bill  and it is important that the key players are involved in that. I want to speak against amendment 29. Although I support fully Bruce Crawford's suggestion that there be a strategic approach and a national overview on flooding, I am not convinced that the bill is the right, or best, place to make such a commitment. I welcomed Allan Wilson's announcement before Christmas about the Cabinet sub-committee, which would be a far better vehicle for pursuit of that objective. We must broaden our approach to the issue; it is not purely about the water environment or natural flood defences as opposed to built flood defences. The bill is only a starting point and its provisions must be developed further. I welcome the amendments that were agreed to at stage 2, which strengthened the bill, but I want us to go an awful lot further. We must work with the insurance industry to look after the 170,000 people throughout Scotland who are at risk from flooding. Today we will set a legislative framework, but we must ensure that action happens throughout Executive departments and the private sector. I would like the minister to commit to that. I welcome the minister's commitment—I do not know whether other members noticed it—to review and modernise the existing legislation on flooding, which is very old. We should consider the mechanisms that are in place to deal with coastal flooding.

No, thank you—I am in the final minute of my speech. I want the sub-committee that Allan Wilson set up to pull together the issues and, after it has reported at the end of February, to supplement the legislative framework that we will put in place today through consideration of the existing legislation.

I welcome the First Minister's acknowledgement of the superb work that is being done by Lothian and Borders police. I ask him to acknowledge the fact that they are dealing with the serious issue of child pornography, to acknowledge the investigative work that they are doing on terrorism and to acknowledge the increasing pressures that they have to face as the capital's police force. Will he give a commitment that, when there is a future review of police funding throughout Scotland, he will focus on the specific pressures in the Lothian and Borders police area?

The minister will recall that we had a members' business debate last year about Waverley station. Can he bring us up to date with progress on the Waverley project and the working group that he talked about last year? Has there been progress on time scales and commitments from the SRA to advance the project?

Will the member clarify for members the Conservative party in Scotland's policy on a nuclear waste  repository and its current plans to deal with the nuclear waste that we already have in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will allocate sufficient ring-fenced funding to modernise audiology services. (S1O-6132)

Is the minister aware that not all the money that the Executive allocated previously for audiology services has been put to that use by all trusts? Will she consider ring fencing the money in the future so that members can be assured, when we tell our constituents that the Executive is prioritising audiology services for people who desperately need them, that the money will be allocated to those services by each health board across Scotland?

I strongly welcome the bill and I call on the Parliament to support its key principles. Margaret Curran was right when she said at the start of her speech that the bill makes provision for an extension of rights to homeless people. It will provide a raft of measures to bring that into reality. We know that a lot has been done to support homeless people. Work has been done through the rough sleepers initiative, the supporting people initiatives and new investment is on the way for housing throughout Scotland. The empty homes initiative is bringing empty homes back into use and a massive investment in quality social housing is taking place throughout Scotland. We must accept that homelessness is not only about a physical lack of housing, although I will come back to the physical issues. Homelessness is also about social exclusion and people who have been through, or are going through, personal crises. For example, being made redundant can tip people into homelessness. Homelessness can be a result of difficult experiences in time spent in care or it can be related to alcohol or drugs problems. Other members have mentioned other routes into homelessness. Those factors mean that the support that homeless people get from agencies is critical. Support needs to be targeted and effective so that it can address every individual's past circumstances and needs for the future. We must recognise that a huge amount has  been done since Labour was elected in 1997, at both Scottish and local council level. I have worked with many voluntary organisations that support people in my constituency including the Ark, Streetwork, Edinburgh Cyrenians and the Scottish Council for Single Homeless. Those organisations do superb work in supporting people so that they can move into tenancies and, crucially, give them the on-going support that enables them to sustain those tenancies. Members have talked about the revolving-door problem. The bill's provisions on probationary tenancies are important, but the key point is to ensure that those provisions are given adequate management support and appropriate resources. Members have talked about lots of the other big housing problems that exist. The work that the Social Justice Committee has done in considering the bill must be examined at stage 2 when the Executive responds. In my casework, I have many constituents who live in inappropriate accommodation and who cannot get transfers to bigger or more appropriate housing. That can take too long. I get really angry when I hear Tory spokespeople in the Parliament talk about the success of Tory housing policy. No other members understand how the Tories can still believe that. The long-term impact of the right to buy social housing has meant that without replacement of every house that has been bought under the right to buy, we have a problem. That is why the work that Margaret Curran talks about in respect of reinvesting in housing and creating new housing is crucial. A lot has been done. Measures such as the common housing register will make it easier for homeless people to register with housing associations and councils. I want to flag up the particular problem in Edinburgh of high land prices and housing costs. We must consider the supply of affordable housing and practical support for homeless people. I welcome Margaret Curran's acknowledgement that we must address both of those issues. The Social Justice Committee's recommendation about a transparent and consistent set of criteria on priority need is important, particularly for homeless people, who deserve to see the criteria under which they will be housed. Many members have talked about anti-social behaviour. I agree with Shelter that the bill should not be used to tackle anti-social behaviour, but it is equally important that the bill does not unintentionally cut across the superb work that was put into the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001. That work is still in the early days of implementation and we must get it right through  taking effective action. I welcome the bill, which is long overdue and is part of our long-term commitment to social justice. In order to support people who find themselves homeless, we need effective working among social work, housing and health agencies and the vast array of voluntary organisations. The bill will require long-term resources. We must build capacity in housing agencies to provide new houses and support structures for homeless people. I welcome the content of Margaret Curran's speech and her willingness to engage at stage 2 in the details of the bill. The Parliament is making its mark by getting the broad aspirations and the detail right. I welcome the bill warmly and I hope that all members support it.

I welcome the fact that the fire was limited, that there were no fatalities and that no housing was destroyed, but the fire has had a major impact on local retail and entertainment businesses. Does the First Minister agree that the City of Edinburgh Council should be given every support to regenerate the site? Will he endorse my calls for the community of the old town to be consulted on proposals for the future of that historic area?

I  welcome the fact that we are debating this important issue, which the European Committee has been discussing for months. Having tried to follow the debate about the future of Europe, I think that it is appropriate that the key issues on our agenda today relate to transparency, subsidiarity—although I hate the word—and making the EU more efficient and effective. Above all, however, the key issues are about ways in which the EU institutions can relate more effectively to the citizens whom they represent. The key to the debate is the need to increase the democratic legitimacy of the institutions of Europe, by reforming them and making them fit for the 21 st century. The institutions were developed 50 years ago, in another era, after the second world war. As we start the new century, we are facing a larger Europe. The states that are joining the Union are looking for security, economic progress and the high quality of life that many of the states that are already in the EU almost take for granted. This is a radical time to be debating the future of Europe. I was disappointed by the Tory amendment and by Ben Wallace's speech. The Executive and MSPs have made a significant effort to stimulate debate. I have been to a series of seminars—I am conscious that I have missed some—as well as debates and discussions on the issue. In those meetings, there has been an attempt to engage people from trade unions, small businesses and so on, rather than the usual suspects and people like us who are already engaged in politics. It is important that we increase awareness.

No. Ben Wallace has already had a chance to speak. I was also disappointed by the SNP's amendment, although I agree with some of the spirit behind it. Much of what Irene Oldfather would have talked about if she had had 20 minutes would have related to the detail of the committee's recommendations, which are about ensuring that Scotland's perspective is represented at the table. We do that through the UK Government and through a plethora of organisations in the convention on the future of Europe. The convention does not comprise many people and they are not necessarily the most representative: there is an appalling gender imbalance and there are few young people. There is an issue about how we who are outside the convention can have our voices heard inside it. That is why this debate is important. In the UK, we have had the debate about our constitutional future; the challenge is to make it work. Every two weeks, the European Committee  of the Scottish Parliament scrutinises forthcoming issues. We also talk to our colleagues in the European Parliament. The debate is about getting the best of both worlds: being part of the wider UK, being able to network with other regions and member states in Europe and being part of the bigger picture. When we are finally presented with the convention's conclusions, it will be very difficult to make major changes. That is why we need to make our comments now. It is also why our different political groups need to engage in that debate now from their different perspectives. It is difficult to imagine the process coming to a conclusion at the moment, because there are very different political strands in Europe. One strand advocates an approach similar to the one that we take, with asymmetrical devolution and different solutions throughout the UK. We make that work and we network. There is the much more prescriptive approach, which is perhaps the French style, which is to write everything down—

I had not noticed you warning me, but I take that as a subtle hint that I should finish soon.

Concluding the process will be a challenge. That is why we need the debate. The Executive motion is positive. It challenges us to make the most of the changes that are happening in Europe. There will be new states in the European Union, some of which have had conflicts in the past couple of decades. They are looking for security and the economic, social and environmental progress that we have started to take for granted. We are now part of Europe and the challenge is to make that work more effectively. That means more transparency. I welcome Jim Wallace's comments about Council meetings, which take place in secret but make laws that apply to us all. There will still be scope for negotiation and little discussions in the backrooms, but the big decisions that affect us all—and, in future, the 500 million citizens of Europe—need to be taken in public. That ethos should run throughout the whole European Union and its dealings.

I welcome the First Minister's statement of commitment to the theatre in Scotland. Can I make the First Minister aware that many in the theatre community are concerned that the delays to the national theatre are unfortunate? I welcome his commitment to regional theatre, particularly to theatres such as the Royal Lyceum Theatre Company, which have suffered over the years because of local authority funding crises, many of which were due to the abolition of regional councils. Will the First Minister agree to ask his colleague Mike Watson to meet me to discuss the matter further to see how we can develop some of the excellent producing theatres in Scotland, upon which a future theatre could be built?

I welcome the minister to his new post. I am conscious that the Presiding Officer has already invited the minister to take an extra two minutes, so I offer an intervention to assist in the process. The minister just talked about the technical nature of the bill, which several members in the chamber also mentioned. Although the bill is essential and desperately needed, I ask the minister to focus, in stage 2 and thereafter, on the core issue of informing members of the public how the bill will affect them as owners, tenants and residents. That key issue forms the backdrop to many of the comments that members have made.  Will the minister, either today or at stage 2, talk about the relationship between the bill, the forthcoming bill on the law of the tenement and other legislation that looks technical and boring but is critical to constituents such as mine? Margaret Curran mentioned in her opening remarks a tragic incident in my constituency. We have such problems, particularly in city-centre areas where there are issues with multiple ownership and we cannot find out who the owners are.

I ask the minister to think about strengthening the local authority powers in the bill, how discretion might be exercised and how we can have best practice that creates good standards throughout Scotland.

I congratulate Duncan McNeil on securing this timely debate on utilities. I know that action is being taken at the United Kingdom level by the Minister of State for Energy and Construction, Brian Wilson. However, it is important that the  Scottish Parliament focuses on the issue. Duncan McNeil gave us an excellent overview when he kicked off the debate. I have campaigned on the issue of erroneous transfer and the mis-selling of utilities for some time. In a motion that I lodged earlier this year, I suggested that compensation should be paid to customers if energy suppliers are at fault. Something must be done to concentrate the collective corporate mind of energy companies. I know that the most frequent complaint that energywatch Scotland receives is from consumers whose electricity or gas supply has been taken over by another company without their consent. I have been contacted by many constituents about the mis-selling and erroneous transfer of utilities, which continue to cause unnecessary distress to many vulnerable people. Nobody is saying that companies cannot market or sell their products, but underhand tactics are simply not acceptable. I have heard countless examples of people being transferred without their knowledge or being bullied into signing a form that they have not understood because of the small print that is hidden at the bottom. From personal experience, I know how irritating and difficult it is to resolve an erroneous transfer of supply, because the power companies do not believe that anyone has been transferred erroneously. They just read their papers and say, "No, you have been transferred. Here's your new bill." Duncan McNeil spoke about public confidence in the industry. He is right to say that the mis-selling of utilities and erroneous transfers will hit the power companies hard unless action is taken to restore public confidence in the industry. That is why I welcome the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets' recent £2 million financial penalty on London Electricity for serious breaches of its licence conditions relating to the marketing of its products. That is the right way forward. However, I also want us to move to a situation in which customers are compensated when the energy companies are at fault. I, too, have experienced someone from an electricity company on my doorstep pretending that they had been subcontracted to read my gas meter. I began to think that I had been targeted, because the same thing has happened to me in two different flats during the past few years. I refused to let the person across the doorstep, because I am quite assertive and was quite sure that the gas company had not subcontracted the work. I phoned up the gas company later and was assured that, indeed, it had not done so. I was not taken in by the person because I had read about such incidents before and was determined to follow my suspicion through. Even so, I could not believe that the situation was happening to me.  I know that many of my constituents are not as assertive as I am and find it difficult to shut the door on an assertive salesperson who is trying to finagle their way into the house. Particularly in relation to older people, that kind of treatment is an absolute scandal. I am angry that my constituents are being treated in such a manner by the power companies. I support Duncan McNeil's initiative in highlighting the issue in the Parliament and calling for strong, co-ordinated action to stamp out such practices. If public confidence in the utilities companies is not to collapse, we need action and we need to broadcast the fact that action is being taken. I was keen to speak in the debate not only to raise the concerns of my constituents, but to focus the discussion on action that needs to be taken in partnership by the UK Government and the Scottish Executive. That is why I have backed the call for all parties to get round the table and make a concerted effort to drive underhand sales practices out of the industry. Those practices are unacceptable and have to stop.

First, I thank all the members who supported the motion and I thank them particularly for staying for the debate. Having been lobbied by several of those members, I know that they will be using Waverley station later tonight and I suspect that some of them will have points to make in the debate. I am grateful for members' support because I think that we should speak with one voice on the Waverley upgrading project, which is critical for the expansion and improvement of our rail services, throughout not just Scotland but the United Kingdom. The project is certainly central to Labour's ambitions in Scotland. This is a time of opportunity for our railways in Scotland. The first new stations in Edinburgh for years have opened—the Gyle, Newcraighall and Brunstane, in Susan Deacon's constituency. In a few months, Edinburgh Park station will also open. However, Waverley station is the crux of all the new railway developments and we urgently need new capacity to enable the expansion that we desperately need. There is scope for us to debate the issue and, I hope, encourage the prioritisation of the project, which is of UK importance. In terms of the main east coast line between London and Inverness and Aberdeen, Waverley station is a critical UK railway junction. It is important in terms of its Scottish location on the east coast, for central Scotland's capacity and particularly for the  Edinburgh to Glasgow capacity. Further, it is of regional importance for those of us who live in the Lothians and Fife, and I know that many members want new services to come through the ScotRail franchise. It is important for the opportunities in the Borders and, locally, Waverley is central to the development of crossrail projects and the council's plans to integrate a network of trams. I acknowledge that there has already been progress. I know that the Scottish Executive has allocated resources to help to work up the project options and I am aware that the Strategic Rail Authority has included the project in its list of important projects and that Network Rail has started a two-year programme of signalling renewals in the area to improve reliability. However, the next steps are vital and time is of the essence. We cannot afford to let this project slip. We need to get a scheme agreed. First and foremost, there has to be a clear priority for better services and a better experience for passengers. In that context, it is important to recognise that the destination for passengers coming to Waverley is not the station but somewhere else. Therefore, the proposals have to provide better interchange facilities and links with buses, taxis, bike routes and pedestrian routes. We also need an improvement in the quality and the range of services for passengers who use the stations. Many tourists' first experience of Scotland is Waverley station and there has to be proper information and easy transfers. For passengers with disabilities, we need a modern station that is fit for the 21 st century, not the old-style Victorian experience that people have to suffer at the moment. Regular commuters—many of whom are here today—want to be able to pass through the station as if on autopilot, picking up a paper and a cup of coffee on their way to a train that departs on time. It is important to acknowledge that the station's beautiful location is one of the most historic in Europe. It contributes to Edinburgh's world heritage site designation and that means that we need a design of the highest possible quality. Partnership is vital if we are to deliver those objectives as there are a range of stakeholders. The Scottish and UK Governments are important, as are Great North Eastern Railway, Virgin and ScotRail, local authorities, passengers and businesses. The next step is for the SRA to push ahead on the selection of the project. It is important that the management of the project is thought through well in advance. The last thing that any of us wants is for Waverley station to close down during the first week of the Edinburgh festival. I am sure that that would not happen, but I mention the possibility to illustrate the fact that a lot of thought is required.  I urge members to think about the relationship between Waverley and Haymarket station, which also needs to be refurbished. That is not as sexy a project and it is certainly not as expensive. However, the station needs disabled access and lifts as well as bus, taxi, cycle and tram access. Depending on the shape that the Morrison Street development eventually takes, the station could have to deal with 1,000 extra workers every day. We need to take action on Haymarket now so that we can minimise the disruption to passengers when work on Waverley starts. I understand that everybody is thinking about this issue. The council is planning the interchange. Network Rail has plans for the lifts, but no timetable. Further, the Disability Discrimination (Scotland) Act 1995 kicks in in 2004 but, having met the key parties, I do not think that the issue is at the top of anyone's agenda. That has to change. The next few months are critical. I would like the Waverley and Haymarket projects to be included in the next Strategic Rail Authority update in January. I would like there to be consultation on the project selection and capacity. Let us fix the station not for the next five to 10 years, but for the next 50 years. The issue of railways is about long-term investment. We must get on with this project and support it in our Parliament. I do not underestimate the challenge that it represents. Pulling together the railway industry after the experiences of the past couple of years will be difficult but can be done. There will have to be work by the Scottish and UK Governments and I hope that the minister will put on record tonight his commitment to action taking place at Waverley and Haymarket as part of an overall vision of expanding railways in Edinburgh and east and central Scotland. I hope that we hear a commitment from the minister to help to drive the project forward. We need to keep up positive pressure on the SRA. We also need to continue to work with my Westminster colleague Alistair Darling. He is the local MP and the Secretary of State for Transport. We need to ensure that everybody works together. I know that the will exists, but we need progress. I thank members for coming tonight. This is the start of the debate in the Parliament about Waverley station. The SRA is coming along with its next project and, next week, the Rail Passenger Committee is meeting in Scotland, which is another chance for us to push ahead on railways in Scotland. The ScotRail franchise is coming up for renewal soon. We have a time of opportunity, but only if we grasp the moment, work together and ensure that our colleagues at UK and Scottish level work together. The project can be delivered. I know that the will and determination exist.  Waverley station is nearly full up. When I look round the room, I see colleagues who have aspirations for improved railways—whether totally new railways, longer trains or more frequent trains. If we are to fulfil those aspirations, we need to fix Waverley station sooner rather than later.

The Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Bill was one of the first promises made at the start of our new Parliament. We should all welcome its commitment to sustainable water resources, to tackling pollution, to introducing greater consultation involvement and to putting the "polluter pays" principle into legislative effect. The commitment should be not only to punish polluters, but to acknowledge that the costs are borne by the rest of society and to provide an incentive to change behaviour in the future. As Ross Finnie said in his opening remarks, in some parts of the world, people are managing scarce water resources. In the middle east, for example, water is a source of major conflict. For us, however, the past few years in Scotland have brought a challenge for which we have not been prepared. We have experienced different weather patterns and we know from Scottish Executive research on climate change scenarios that, particularly in the west of Scotland, we are facing wetter and windier weather. It is a big challenge because currently, we are aggravating our flooding problems and we are not even at the stage of beginning to minimise them. We must consider those problems for the future in the bill. Many members have focused rightly on the cost and the difficulty in pinning down and quantifying costs. My constituency is flooded regularly and continuing with business as usual is too expensive for our communities. The Scottish Executive estimates that 170,000 homes are at risk of inland or coastal flooding. The current estimate of the annual average damage caused by river flooding is £20 million. It is predicted that the figure will double; the debate is about how fast it will double, but we know that it will double. If we break down those costs for individual communities, householders and businesses, we can see that the human costs are phenomenal. In thousands of homes throughout Scotland, people are seriously worried every time there is a flood warning because they do not know what will happen to them. In my constituency, we know that the Water of Leith is prone to flooding. Some of my constituents have been out of their homes for nine or 12 months, which is a horrendous experience that no one should go through.  In the past few years, we have focused on remedial measures—the response to flood instances that are already stored up. Edinburgh alone will spend something like £24 million during the next three years. Our challenge is to move from the response to floods to flood prevention. To date, people have been concentrating on the downstream impact of flooding and there has not been enough focus on the upstream causes of flooding. The bill gives us an opportunity to set that straight. The bill is already a huge advance in the legislative protection of our environment. I ask the ministers to take a long, hard look at flooding and to think about incorporating it in the bill. That is an issue that I raised at the European Committee, whose report to the Transport and the Environment Committee stated that we did not think that the water framework directive was sufficiently clear. My understanding is that the European Commission, under the leadership of the Danish presidency, is now considering strengthening the water framework directive in the light of this year's devastating floods across Europe. I also understand that flood protection will be included in the common chapter of the water framework directive guidance that requires implementation by member states. We also need a tougher approach by the land use planning system. We are still making the situation worse and we need the expertise. It is time that we applied the precautionary principle, and that must be done across Scotland. The bill should set the framework for a coherent overview on flood prevention and management. I do not care whether it is SEPA or the local authorities that produce a national flood approach, but somebody has got to do it. I have every confidence that the Executive can make it work. We need to pull in the land use development plans and an integrated river basin management approach, and we must ensure that that works. George Reid and I recently went on an all-party visit to Prague and other parts of the Czech Republic. Prague was the highlight of coverage of the floods, but when we visited places such as southern Bohemia, one of the most prosperous regions of the Czech Republic, we saw how those areas have been devastated. They do not have the millions of pounds needed to put right the causes of flooding. Flooding is a long-term issue that we must tackle. The bill gives us the chance to think in a visionary way and to tackle the problem. Scarcely a week goes by without one of our roads or railways being washed away. We cannot wait until somebody has perfected some kind of financial model to cost the solution to those problems. The  costs are here now, and the bill gives us the opportunity to start to change things for the future.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive plans to take any action in the light of the suggestion of the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents regarding begging. (S1F-2170)

I welcome the First Minister's answer and strongly support action to protect people from intimidation, robbery and assault. I commend the work that was carried out in the Edinburgh city centre initiative with the police and with the use of closed-circuit television. I draw to the First Minister's attention the need to support organisations that work to tackle the underlying causes of begging and homelessness. Does he agree that we need joined-up action between  housing and social work departments, voluntary organisations and the police to tackle the related problems of alcohol and drug abuse, particularly the activities of drug dealers who prey on vulnerable people?

Will the member give way?

Will the member not accept that if we get improved rail access to Edinburgh airport, one of the options would provide excellent access for residents in Fife and Tayside and beyond?

I welcome today's timely debate. As we look forward to the next 20 to 30 years, this is precisely the time when we should discuss what kinds of air  services Scotland needs. I have been disappointed with some of the nationalist speeches this afternoon. Never mind "Release our potential", listening to the SNP is like listening to the doom and gloom party. We heard about all the things that are wrong. There were some wonderful obsessions with London as a place to fly through—it is great if one is coming from Inverness but terrible if one is travelling from anywhere else. We need to recognise the interconnectedness of air services. It is important that we can fly via London, Brussels, Amsterdam or Paris. That is the modern world. People who want to fly in and out of Scotland need to have the right choice. We should not be obsessed with London. The one amusing thing in Kenny MacAskill's speech was his analogy between Iceland and Scotland. At some point, Mr MacAskill needs to get out the map and look at the differences.

No thank you. I have heard Mr MacAskill already today. One of the things that really disappoints me about the SNP amendment is that it ignores the range of challenges that are set out in the consultation document. It is almost as if the document had not even been read. The amendment ignores key issues to do with the development of routes and the development of Scottish Airports Limited under the aegis of BAA; issues to do with capacity and growth that our airports face; issues to do with surface access links, which are at a critical stage in Glasgow and Edinburgh; and of course the issue of the future development of HIAL, which Nora Radcliffe and Maureen Macmillan spoke about.

No, thank you. I want to focus on surface access issues. Although we are looking forward over the next 30 years, we must consider an urgent issue. I welcome the minister's commitment to get going on rail links by 2005. Around Glasgow and Edinburgh, the road network has reached capacity. Travelling to either airport by bus, taxi, car or—crucially for our freight industry—lorry, there are times in the day when people can miss flights because the delays are so bad. I welcome the look forward over the next 30 years, but the next five years will be critical. Many opportunities will be missed if we do not get our act together. I welcome the improvements that have been made—improvements that were welcomed by Brian Adam. The Labour council in Edinburgh has  improved bus access through the creation of the greenways network, which also gives taxis much faster access to the airport. Much can be done to focus investment to improve the quality of the experience for tourists to Scotland and to make the country more attractive for domestic users. The debate has not focused on making better use of our existing infrastructure. Glasgow and Edinburgh airports have seen significant investment over the past few years. They are now more attractive and much more could be done to market them and Prestwick to make them better used—with the existing infrastructure. When he winds up, will the minister confirm that he will consider the future capacity of runways? No decisions will be made in this consultation exercise but, over the next 10 years, we will have to involve local communities. I was at a community council event at the weekend—as was Mr MacAskill—at which it came over strongly that community councils feel that they have not been consulted. We must talk to the key stakeholders and the national stakeholders, but we must also talk to local interest groups, environmental groups, local business interests and local transport companies. They need to be consulted about the future of our airports to ensure that the benefits of our airports and the opportunities that they offer are maximised. The consultation gives us an excellent opportunity to discuss a 30-year approach, but we must make the most of the current opportunities in our airports. We must make the best use of them and consider the environmental impact of expanding the access to them. We must do that in a sensible and managed way. Critically, we must make the most of the airports that we have. The challenge is to see them as part of our economic future. I welcome the debate. I strongly support the Executive's motion, which has done the job—it has given us the opportunity to debate the issue. Let us be positive, let us look to the future and let us see what we can do—rather than just whingeing and moaning.

On this day of the establishment of Network Rail—the replacement for the failed Railtrack—will the minister give his commitment that he will, with that not-for-profit company, the Strategic Rail Authority and the UK Government, do everything in his power to keep the Waverley station project on track, on time and to a standard that people in Edinburgh and throughout the UK require of the development of the Government's aspirations for our railway network?

I have a brief question for clarification. The proposals that the Standards Committee have presented to us are an improvement and are clearly well worked out and thought through. However, I have a question about people who are not MSPs but who aspire to be, who are selected by their party structures and who campaign as parliamentary candidates. At what point are they expected to come under the aegis of parliamentary standards and principles? Members of the public might go through the parliamentary process for complaining about an MSP, but might then publicly throw allegations at the MSP. The Standards Committee could not consider those public allegations. A right of reply is all very well, but an MSP does not really have a right of reply to newspaper articles that are already out there. Is there any way in which people who have been selected as parliamentary candidates by their parties, but who have not formally put in their papers could be expected to abide by the high principles and standards that the Standards Committee is setting out for MSPs?

They are not hypothetical. That is why I asked.

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Executive will assess the potential impact of fluoridation on health. (S1F-2126)

I welcome the First Minister's response and the commitment to tackle children's dental health. Will he consider seriously the grave concerns that many members have about the impact of fluoridation on public health? In particular, will he consider the research that shows a significant correlation between fluoridation and  increases in hip fractures and osteosarcoma? Instead of focusing on fluoridation, will the First Minister focus on supporting healthy eating initiatives and targeting action through health visitors, nurseries and schools?

Will Kenny MacAskill give way?

Will Kenny MacAskill give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is supporting homeless women who have experienced domestic abuse. (S1O-5547)

The minister is aware of the excellent project in my constituency called space44, which she opened last week and which is run by two voluntary organisations in partnership, Streetwork and the Ark. Will the minister give a commitment to support work by the voluntary sector that provides places of safety for homeless women who have experienced domestic abuse and which gives them the space and support to rebuild their lives?

Since the establishment of our Scottish Parliament, we have already begun to make a difference. The statistics that Margaret Curran reeled off at the start of her speech—140,000 homes helped under the warm deal and 10,000 heating systems installed since last year—are beginning to make a difference to all our constituents. From talking to pensioners in my constituency, I know how much those initiatives are welcomed. Joint work has been undertaken with the UK Government on the winter fuel allowance for pensioners and the reduction in VAT to 5 per cent on domestic fuel, and action is being taken on low pay and to eliminate mass unemployment. Many good things have happened. The five approaches that are set out in the fuel poverty statement concern the total elimination of fuel poverty. I will focus on energy efficiency, because it is vital that the Scottish Executive takes the lead on that. I agree with Shelter on the importance of investment in our housing stock. That means decent insulation and efficient heating systems, which are essential if we are to eliminate fuel poverty. In March, the new building regulations came into effect. They deliver a 25 per cent increase in energy efficiency. That is an example of the benefits of our devolved Parliament. Double glazing, draught exclusion, insulation and combined heat and power systems will all contribute to reducing people's fuel bills. New initiatives are coming along the track. The new European Community directive on the energy performance of buildings will set a new framework throughout Europe. EC research shows that improved energy efficiency could reduce carbon emissions by 22 per cent. If we think about the  debates in Johannesburg, new measures that involve energy auditing and energy efficiency must be strongly welcomed as part of the Executive's package. I welcome Margaret Curran's announcement on work with Friends of the Earth Scotland. That is a big step forward. I see such measures in my constituency through the warmburgh initiative, which is a great example of partnership between the voluntary sector, local authorities and the energy companies. It means that people who live in tenements, who comprise half the households in Edinburgh, will have new opportunities. In my constituency, free energy audits and free energy saving advice are available. Crucially, grants to install energy efficiency measures can be accessed. The initiative is practical and it works. We would like more of that. The challenge for the future is to incorporate new technology and examine new ideas. We should consider the opportunities that solar heating systems and photovoltaic technologies present. The new solar grants from the Department of Trade and Industry give us the chance to make a difference. The technology works, so we should roll it out with partnership between the Scottish Executive and the UK Government. It is a win-win solution. We can tackle and eliminate fuel poverty while protecting the environment. We in the Parliament must be in favour of that. Yesterday, the First Minister re-emphasised our 40 per cent renewables target. The fuel poverty statement mentions linking fuel poverty with renewable energy. I strongly welcome that link. That is a radical step forward that the Executive must develop. I mentioned the new EC directive, which will push up standards. An important implication is that large building renovations will be required to incorporate new energy efficiency standards. That is a big opportunity for us in Scotland if we are thinking about brownfield developments that bring old buildings into new use. The fuel poverty statement looks to the future. I hope that future legislation such as the building bill and future housing legislation will give us a new legal framework that will enable us not only to make our buildings wind and watertight when we improve them, but to build in energy efficiency standards for the future. Tackling fuel poverty was one of the key objectives in Labour's 1999 manifesto. I am proud that we have made progress with our partnership Government in Scotland. We are working to eliminate fuel poverty. Energy efficiency must be part of that approach. It might be the less exciting part, but it is vital and will make a difference to people's health and their lives.  The commitments in the fuel poverty statement are measurable and practical. We can return to them, review them and examine progress. We must broadcast to people the facts that we are making a difference and that investment is coming to make that difference. We need to tell people that the work that we are doing in the Parliament is making a difference to their everyday lives. Several speakers, including Robert Brown, Karen Whitefield and the Minister for Social Justice, have touched on that. We are making a difference. The challenge is to focus on that 15-year target, which is one of the things that we can be proud of. Along with free personal care and free local bus travel, fuel poverty initiatives are practical, tangible measures that our devolved Parliament is undertaking to improve people's lives.

I am very grateful to the member for giving way. When reading amendment S1M-3350.1, I wondered whether Bill Aitken had in mind the Tory track record on pensioner poverty, lack of investment in council housing and mass unemployment, which the present Government is certainly not continuing with.

I acknowledge the work that has gone into the agriculture and environment working group's report, but I ask the minister to ensure that Scotland is not left behind on organics. Given that work on action plans on organic food and farming is already under way at the United Kingdom and European levels and that our sister Administrations in Wales and Northern Ireland already have action plans, there is a real danger that consumers and producers in Scotland will lose out. Will the minister commit the Scottish Executive to producing an action plan on organic food and farming?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to improve the diet and health of children and young people from lower income families. (S1O-5393)

I thank the minister for her reply. Does she agree that, given the increasing centralisation of the major retail industries and the difficulty of accessing affordable, high-quality, local food, food co-operatives—such as that based in Dumbiedykes in my constituency, which is run by volunteers on a limited budget—provide a vital service? Will the minister consider supporting groups such as the Edinburgh community food initiative, which works with nine food co-operatives in Edinburgh to source locally grown and, where possible, organic products?

Will the member take an intervention?

I agree with other members that it is highly appropriate for us to hold this debate during international nurses week. Since 1997, Labour has delivered 20,000 new nurses across the UK and has scrapped the two-stage pay awards. However, it takes time to encourage more people to become nurses and, while new nurses are being recruited, we are still losing existing nurses from the profession. The RCN has identified three issues that we must address: "better pay, better resources to do the work and improved promotion prospects". That chimes exactly with the representations that I have received from nurses and midwives in my constituency. I want to share with members some of the pressures that those nurses and midwives have shared with me. They have written to me about the pressures and stress of working in wards that are not fully staffed; the lack of training opportunities; the lack of financial support, which makes it difficult to take up training opportunities; and the struggle of studying and training while holding down a responsible and stressful job at the same time. There is general dissatisfaction with the level of pay and a sense of disappointment at the lack of career development opportunities and the lack of recognition of the new competencies and medical procedures that many nurses are now undertaking. Nurses are also worried about the impact of vacancies not being filled. There is strong concern about the use of bank nursing, about the insufficient number of fully staffed wards and medical teams and about temporary nurses being brought in to fill the gaps. Financial support for nurses and midwives during their training is a big issue and, as Malcolm Chisholm will know, I have received many letters from student nurses at Queen Margaret University  College, who are disappointed that they have missed out on the recent bursary improvements. However, they will benefit from access to the guaranteed year's employment on graduation. A common thread runs through the representations, based not just on individuals' self-interest but on concern about how the day-to-day pressure on nurses affects patient care. Every nurse who has contacted me has raised that issue.

No, thank you, Ms Sturgeon. Those concerns are a legacy of what the Tories did to the health service. The recent pronouncements of Liam Fox show the Tories' real agenda. First, they want to break the link between the NHS and health care. Then, they want to cut public spending. The statistics show that the Tory Government cut nursery and midwifery training places by 23 per cent in Scotland. Under Labour, the number of places has already risen by 8 per cent. Gordon Brown's budget will give us a wonderful opportunity to sort out the NHS and to raise morale across the service.

I will take a brief intervention.

I have not met any nurse who is unhappy about the massive increase that everyone recognises is going into the NHS. We need to talk up the fact that the money is coming to help to raise morale in the NHS. It takes time for new recruits to come through the system. While the key changes are being put in place, we must acknowledge the day-to-day problems in the nursing profession. It is vital that nurses are able to see real improvements taking place. I agree with Margaret Smith that the return-to-practice pilots are vital throughout Scotland. The improvement in bursaries for student nurses is a great start, but those who are switching career or who have a family to support while they go through training still face a real challenge. Like others, I welcome the fact that the unified NHS boards contain a nursing director, which is absolutely critical if we are to change the long-term culture in the NHS. Change is happening. I know that within Lothian there is a much bigger focus on tackling low pay across the health  service, and I welcome that development. It is absolutely vital that we invest in our existing and future nurses as a key part of the NHS family. It is important to say to nurses and patients that we have listened to them and that the improvements that they need are coming soon. Let us support the motion and send a message of confidence to nurses and to the NHS across Scotland.

When John Scott was opening, I asked him to get to the point in the Conservative amendment about why having other plans, strategies, forums and consultations would hinder the progress of sustainable development. Neither John Scott nor David Davidson have mentioned that, but they have said that the document is too thin and suggested that we need more documents and policies. There is a huge contradiction at the heart of the Conservatives' statements today.

Will the member give way?

Many of Mr Scott's suggestions are helpful in the sense of providing constructive  opposition, but his amendment claims that the range of "consultations, strategies, forums and plans may hinder the long-term delivery of ... sustainable development". Surely the whole point of sustainable development is that it is not a one-size-fits-all approach. We need the strategic planning review, the economic strategies, the transport plans, the health plans and the crucial social justice ambitions, which have for the first time been properly plugged into sustainable development. Surely Mr Scott welcomes those things.

I am impressed by Bruce Crawford's suggested list of further indicators. It occurred to me that Michael Meacher published an extensive list of sustainable development indicators to cover the whole of the UK. Is Mr Crawford suggesting that we should adopt Michael Meacher's approach, as it does not seem to me that the SNP is adding anything distinctively Scottish to the debate? Certainly, I have not reached the conclusion that independence would add anything to Scotland's environment.

We have just finished a debate on young people participating in communities, so it is highly appropriate that we end the day with a debate on older people participating in communities. I welcome everyone in the visitors gallery who has come to follow the debate. I thank the many members who signed the motion, particularly those who have stayed for tonight's debate. Clearly, the issue struck a chord with members—that is a testament to the commitment across the Parliament to tackling agism. I have a suspicion that the interest in the debate might have something to do with the sterling work that organisations such as Help the Aged are doing in raising the issue directly with members. I thank Help the Aged for bringing the issue to my attention and for all the work that it has done on raising awareness of age discrimination in health, education, social care, transport and citizenship. The Scotland Act 1998, which set up our institution, defines equal opportunities as "the prevention, elimination or regulation of discrimination between persons" and lists several areas, including age. However, Help the Aged's research shows how far we must go if we are to achieve fair treatment for our older citizens. The fact that 50 per cent of our older people feel that they are "on the scrap heap" should shock every MSP and motivate us to sign up to Help the Aged's campaign to change attitudes. The fact that many older people feel that  they are a burden to society is also something that we should not accept. We face several challenges: making older people feel valued; changing attitudes among the rest of the population to stamp out discrimination; and ensuring that we have monitoring in place to identify problems and to take action where it is needed. We need to send out the message that stereotyping and hackneyed images of older people are unacceptable. If such images were of women or people from ethnic minorities, they would rightly cause offence. As a society, we lose a great deal by allowing direct or indirect discrimination against older people. Let us take employment as an example. Long-term unemployment among the over-50s means that people are living on low incomes or in poverty. It is estimated that across the UK, £16 billion in gross domestic product and £5 billion in benefits and taxes are lost from the many people who would like to work. We also lose out on the experience and maturity that older people can bring. That is why positive employment policies by companies and public sector organisations are important. We need flexible employment opportunities for older people, although we must ensure that those people do not lose out on their pension rights. We urgently need more training for older people so that they can keep up to date and develop new skills. There is a clear role for Scottish Enterprise to take the lead in setting the agenda for employers in both the public and private sectors. Agism is also a social justice issue. One of the most important areas for older people is health. Our older people deserve better. A recent report on the health care of older people in Scotland showed that, although there was no evidence of agism, there was great concern among older people about its influencing health care. Older people do not want to be treated differently from others in the national health service. One of the key recommendations of the report is that the attitudes of some health care workers need to be improved. There is also a need to highlight the problem of delayed discharge, which causes distress to many older patients and their families. There are many challenges for us to tackle. I will focus on older women. All too often, older women are invisible to policy makers. We face a challenge in ensuring that older women are living not just longer, but more healthily. In England, a fascinating project is being carried out by the Pennell Initiative for Women's Health, which has developed pilot schemes with employers and communities and has shown that many older women would welcome a focus on their health needs and on what could be done to improve their health.  The Scottish Executive should establish a national advisory panel on women's health. That would let us get at the facts, generate the research that needs to be done and give us a clearer framework for work on older women's health. I ask the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care to raise that proposal with Malcolm Chisholm and to give it serious consideration. We cannot afford to ignore our older people. We all know that the demographics show that we are living longer and that, over time, the population of Scotland is aging. Much has been done through the better government for older people initiative, but that is only a start. We need the Scottish Executive to identify and address age discrimination across public life, because only then will older people feel valued and will we be able to develop comprehensive policies to give older people the chance to make a full and positive contribution to society. Local government must also make a contribution. The older people's equality forum in Edinburgh is a great example of a council bringing older people into discussions, so that their views can be taken on board in the design and delivery of the council's policies and services. That has led to a much greater focus in Edinburgh on accessible and affordable transport, community safety issues and support for carers. There have been some practical spin-offs: recreational opportunities have been promoted for older people in the city; research has been performed on piloting new technology to help people to live independently; and independent advocacy services for older people have been extended for those who live in residential care. I return to my first comments. Older people feel undervalued and on the scrap heap. The Parliament has a chance to do something about that, whether through having the right employment policies, ensuring access to affordable transport, giving opportunities in leisure and education, creating safer neighbourhoods and warm households for people, or ensuring access to high-quality health care. We need to accept that what we do in this chamber is relevant. We can make a difference. I hope that the fact that we are having this debate will send a message to older people that we are listening to them and that we know that there is an awful lot more that we need to do. The United Nations has set out a key principle for older people. It believes that we need "To add life to the years that have been added to life." That is a useful principle for us all as we age and as we work with the older people in our communities.

I am glad that we are able to debate this topic this afternoon. There is a danger that we, as MSPs, may feel warm inside about having a nice discussion among ourselves, but that the debate may totally wash over the young people with whom we need to engage and connect. All the reports that have been done and the discussions that we have had with young people indicate that young people want us to listen to them. They also want organisations to listen to them. That is only the starting point of what we should be doing. After that, we should ensure that key agencies and Government organisations reflect on what young people have said and then engage with those young people to tell them how we are going to act on their comments and recommendations. That is why I welcome the Scottish Executive taking the lead, setting the agenda and making it an expectation that young people are listened to by the key agencies. That is important because it legitimises the process. Work is being done across the city of Edinburgh, some of it funded by the Executive through social inclusion partnership funding and some by the City of Edinburgh Council. Some of that work is impressive and many lessons can be learned from it. The Edinburgh youth social inclusion partnership is working with the City of Edinburgh Council to increase levels of youth participation in service planning and delivery on the things that really matter to young people. Those organisations are taking the lead in considering the best ways to get young people involved. They are also working with some of the most disadvantaged and socially excluded young people and trying to give them the crucial skills to become involved on their own terms, not those of others. For example, EYSIP held a youth jury, which was a good experiment. Executive funding made that possible. The youth jury got some important commitments from local service providers—the City of Edinburgh Council, the NHS board and Lothian and Borders police—that they would do three seemingly simple and straightforward things.  However, those things require a lot of commitment and a bit of thought. First, each organisation said that it would conduct a youth-led review of one aspect of its service provision every year. Secondly, each would identify someone in the organisation who would be the point of contact and be able to respond to young people's inquiries, complaints or suggestions. Thirdly, each would hold a yearly open-doors event to give young people the chance to come in, see from the inside how the service works and get a better understanding of the key issues. EYSIP has been talking to young people about their key issues and where they want to see changes. Transport, education, leisure facilities—nothing that would surprise us—were all mentioned. The report makes difficult or interesting reading for those who deliver those services. There were a lot of common themes. For example, many young people say that they want proper, affordable and appropriate facilities. What does that actually mean to a young person? In my constituency, there are three organisations that involve young people in delivering their services and in considering what kind of services they have and how those services are designed. The Streetwork project works with vulnerable young people who might be homeless and have experienced all sorts of problems in the past. The project is doing some radical feedback work with young people. The project is working not in the traditional areas, but with young people as they congregate on the street. It is trying to talk to them about getting them involved and giving them the right kind of support. The Caledonia youth project provides sexual health advice to young people. That project is also partly designed by young people so that it gives them the right kind of service, which is not patronising. The Edinburgh City Youth Cafe, which we can see from the Parliament, is a massively popular project. Young people go there because they want to. It is safe and it gives good access to services and support. At lunch time, I heard that one of the members of the Scottish youth parliament has been on the board of the Edinburgh City Youth Cafe for six years. That is quite a commitment. Lots of young people are involved throughout the city and communities and are putting in that kind of effort. Many young people have a negative opinion of politicians, politics and Government. That presents us with a challenge. The challenge is not new, but we have the chance to do something about it, to turn around young people's views and to ensure  that our new democracy in Scotland is accessible. The work that has been done by the Parliament has started to make a difference, but there is a lot more to be done. In particular, we need to monitor the progress in our communities and find out the percentage of young people who are involved and how well we are doing. It will make a difference if young people can see the changes that have been made since they got involved in the discussion process. The EYSIP report, which was published today, talks about the bottom line. For young people, that means a starting point where they have information, the chance to participate and enough control in their lives to make real choices. Our job is to help them and to work with them to make that happen. That is the best that the Parliament can do and the debate is a good start for that process. We will need to come back to the issue in the future.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to update national planning policy guideline NPPG6 on renewable energy to include guidance on photovoltaics. (S1O-5045)

I thank the minister for her reply. Such advice will allow us to begin to make progress on the issue in Scotland. Does the minister agree that, even with our climate, developing this exciting technology could contribute to our renewables obligation and form part of our strategy to tackle fuel poverty? In particular, does she recognise that setting a lead through the planning process is only one element, and that we need a stronger incentive for public and private housebuilders to install solar panels to power heating systems? For example, Germany is implementing a programme to deliver 1 million photovoltaics. We need a similar campaign here.

We know where it is and we are jealous.

I congratulate Jamie McGrigor on securing the debate, because it is useful that we run through such issues in the Parliament. I support strongly the principle that is outlined in Jamie McGrigor's motion, which calls for improved consultation, but I would also say that consultation should be transparent. Picking up on what Tavish Scott just said, I stress that it is important that the communities that are involved in the designations can see how the scientific evidence has been pulled together and debate that with SNH. Broadly, the system that we have is based on ensuring that a rigorous process of identification is conducted in the public interest. Jamie McGrigor was right to point out the weaknesses in the system and to highlight areas in which people feel that the system has not worked properly. However, we should not make sweeping generalisations that cast SNH into the darkness and say that it fails on all the environmental designations. In advance of the debate, I received an interesting briefing from RSPB Scotland, which had positive things to say about the fact that people value the designation system that we have in Scotland. I do not disagree with Jamie McGrigor's focus on the problems, but we should not say that only problems are associated with environmental designations.  I want to reflect on the reasons why we have a system of protection in Scotland. Because traditional crofting and agricultural processes have created a high environmental quality, it is easy for us to make assumptions about the quality of our environment and to sit back and say that, given that we have had plant and animal life in the area for years, there is no problem. However, the statistics on biodiversity show that, across Scotland, we are losing species every year. That should be of concern to us. We should not pretend that the environment that we have will be there for all time. We need to manage it actively. We need to think not only about the quality of our visual environment and our landscapes, but about the habitats that our wildlife and plants need. Part of the problem is the language that we use. We often focus only on protection of the landscape and the environment and do not think about their active management. We should turn the debate round and focus more on active management and the financial support that should go to rural communities—and to some urban communities—that need environmental designations. We need that different approach.

No, I am not. I am suggesting that we need to take account of the statistics that tell us that, year on year, we are losing species from Scotland that we will not see again. The challenge is not just to reintroduce species after we have lost them; it is not to lose them in the first place, so that we do not get into such arguments. One of the core issues is ensuring that the Executive continues to shift the focus from straightforward agricultural support to agri-environmental support, so that the agricultural community in particular has a positive challenge and opportunity, and so that that community gets the support that it needs to manage some of our most precious environments actively and to continue economic development at the same time. I ask the minister whether the Scottish Executive has recently considered quantifying the economic benefits that flow from environmental designations, such as rural development opportunities and tourism opportunities, which Tavish Scott mentioned. Our system works broadly, but it does not always work. One of the reasons for that is that we need to modernise the system. I urge the minister to introduce nature conservation proposals in the Parliament as soon as possible. I have written to Ross Finnie about that on more than one  occasion. The last response that I received said that he would introduce legislation in the Parliament very soon. I know that "very soon" is an indefinable term, but I urge the minister to ensure that that very soon is very soon. If he has any hints, all members would appreciate them. Modernisation of the system would let us pick up on the glitches, the problems and the dissatisfaction that people feel about the way that the system operates. It would let us make progress together. It will not take away the local controversy. There will always be controversy, but at least modernisation would allow it to take place in a modern legal framework that suits us in the 21 st century. If the minister can give us any positive indications, I urge him to do that.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking in order to support voluntary organisations and projects. (S1O-4980)

Many voluntary organisations still do not have secure funding from local authorities. Organisations in my constituency, such as the Edinburgh Streetwork Project, which I  know the minister is well aware of, still face a yearly crisis in their funding arrangements. Will the minister give a commitment to do everything that he can to work with local authorities to ensure that three-year funding packages are in place for voluntary organisations?

Today's debate is all about ensuring that we have an effective and stable Parliament. Many members have made comments about the Parliament's founding principles, which are critical to our daily work. We have an open, transparent, accountable, modern, family-friendly Parliament that has a fairer electoral system without which only one member of the Tory group would be here. People voted for those core principles in the referendum and we depart from them at our peril. I commend the report of the SPCB and suggest that members read it. It contains useful analyses of the work of the committees and puts the Scottish Parliament in an international context. It considers the experience in New South Wales, Catalonia and other parts of the world and provides a useful benchmark for improvement. Almost everyone who has spoken has mentioned the Parliament's committees, which have a core role in holding the Executive to account, carrying out reviews and inquiries into key matters of Scottish public policy and, importantly, scrutinising legislation in detail. The Scottish Parliament does not have a revising chamber—we have to get it right ourselves. That makes the work of our committees vital. Pre-legislative consultation must also be considered. If there are 20 per cent fewer MSPs, the task of inviting members of the environmental community, the business community, local and constituency community groups and so on will be that much harder. We must ensure that the Parliament remains accessible. We should acknowledge that our committees are already stretched, although we are still trying to develop the work that we do. For example, this week, the European Committee was focusing on how better to scrutinise the work of the Executive on the vast topic of our interrelationships at a European level. There is much still to do. Post-legislative scrutiny is also important. We have spent most of our time passing bills—nearly 40 to date. The next stage is to consider how the acts are being implemented and how they might need to be revised in future. We have hardly begun that work. The Tory argument has been about criticising the Parliament. The Tories might as well be politically honest about that. Their point is not that we are passing too many bills—they do not agree with many of the bills that we have passed. Why do they not come out and say that they think we  do not need the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001, the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 or the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001? Those acts address the priorities of the people of Scotland and are the topics on which we should be focusing.

No thank you. Mr McLetchie has already made his speech. Today's debate is important because the Parliament needs stability. We have been here for only three years. Patricia Ferguson is right to say that we will need to review our Parliament in the future and see whether we can do better, but that is job for further down the line—2007 or 2011. Our priority today is to maintain a stable Parliament that can deliver on jobs, crime, health and education—the priority issues that people sent us here to tackle. We need to get on with our task, rather than vote to clip the Parliament's wings. I urge members not just to support the Executive's motion, but to reflect on their experiences in serving their constituents and to put their views to Helen Liddell's consultation.

I welcome the fact that the minister has produced a framework to implement the strategy, but I draw his attention to the problem that was highlighted in the Edinburgh Evening News today. There is a danger that we will lose our sentries at Edinburgh castle, which is in my constituency and which is one of our most popular tourist attractions. I have already been in touch with Adam Ingram MP at his Westminster offices. I ask the minister to liaise with his Westminster colleagues to get a sensible solution to avoid losing one of the most popular attractions at the castle.

Why are we discussing this issue today? Nuclear power stations clearly are an issue for us, but this debate is a chance for the SNP to raise the constitution in this chamber once again, to cast doubt over the constitution, to cast doubt over the powers of this Parliament and to cast doubt over our abilities to set out our long-term future in Scotland. The debate has been a complete waste of time from that perspective, because it is absolutely clear that decisions on nuclear power stations, and on all other power stations, are matters for Scottish Executive ministers, who are accountable to us in this chamber. Members would not think that if they listened to SNP speeches today.

No thank you. Alex Neil's speech in particular represented a fantasy world inhabited by nationalists that is divorced from the reality of politics today. It is absolutely clear that in this chamber, and with our colleagues at UK level, we take our environmental responsibilities seriously. We also take seriously the responsibility of thinking about not the next two minutes of an SNP soundbite, but the next 10, 20 and 50 years and getting our energy, renewables and environmental policies right. Michael Meacher's review of nuclear waste is critical and is about the long term: it is a seven-year consultation. That might seem like a long time in electoral politics, but it is not when we are dealing with an issue of the magnitude of nuclear waste. The nationalists did not comment on, congratulate us on or even acknowledge the fact that action is taking place now and we are going in the right direction. The key issue of energy efficiency, for example, was not mentioned at all by Bruce Crawford. If we are to have a rational debate on energy and the environment, we need to discuss energy efficiency, on which the Executive has done a huge amount since we were all elected in 1999. There is also the issue of supply. Rhona Brankin talked authoritatively about  renewables. Those are the priorities of the Labour-Lib Dem Administration in Scotland, and they are absolutely right. We have seen a turnaround away from the approach taken by the Tories, which does not take into account our long-term commitments and our long-term responsibility to the environment. The submission by the Executive to the UK energy review was a reasoned, considered and radical document. It considered the huge potential of renewable energy and the importance to Scotland of our energy industries. That was not reflected in Bruce Crawford's speech, and it certainly was not reflected in Mike Russell's speech. We need to take seriously our environmental responsibilities, and we have to acknowledge that we have a lot of nuclear generation. What did the SNP have to say about decommissioning? Absolutely nothing. Who will pay the bill for dealing with our nuclear waste legacy? There was not a word on that from the nationalists. The reason we did not hear a word is that separation would bring a massive cost. We need to work together on those issues, and not dismiss them.

No thank you. I am in my last minute. The Labour party is clear about the long term. In this Parliament in the past couple of years we have focused on the expansion of wind energy. There is a long-term agenda of wave energy and photovoltaics, which are being pursued in Germany to huge effect. Those are the real challenges. The Labour party's targets in Scotland are to produce 30 per cent of energy from renewable sources by 2020 and 50 per cent by 2040. That is a massive agenda and a great opportunity. Let us focus on that, not on the constitutional wrangling that the SNP wants to raise in this chamber in the coming year and a half. It is a waste of their time. We will take the opportunity on every occasion to tell the SNP what we are doing in Government. We have a good record and we will defend it.

Can John Scott quote for us which planning acts back up his case? Individual planning applications are decided on their merits. There is nothing in statute that bears out what he has alleged.

I congratulate Lord James Douglas-Hamilton on securing the debate. He has lobbied weekly to ensure that members attended and I wanted to support him. Like Margaret Smith and Iain Smith, I find that when I listen to Lord James not only do I forget that he was transport minister and part of the Government in Scotland, I sometimes forget that he is a Tory party member. Perhaps David McLetchie will balance up the Tory benches tonight and remind us of the true face of the Conservative party in Scotland. I agree with Bristow Muldoon that the motion is a good one. However, like other members on the Labour benches, I would disagree with what it says about Railtrack. I watched the progress of the west coast main line project, and as every month went by we could add another billion pounds to the price tag. Something had to be done to ensure that we sorted out the problem of rail investment in the UK. The Government was committed to ploughing billions into the railways. We needed to ensure that we got value for money. I have that minor disagreement with the motion, but I strongly agree with its sentiment and spirit. A mix of public and private investment is critical. I would disagree with ruling out the possibility of funding from Edinburgh City Council's plans for congestion charging. It is early days yet, and politicians throughout Edinburgh must consider and debate that when the city council introduces congestion charging. It is premature to rule out such funding at this stage. We are playing catch-up on railway investment in Scotland. We have moved a long way from a Government that avoided investment, kept the railway ticking over and invested solely in roads. When we travel around the rest of Europe, we are supremely jealous because both national capitals and regional areas have superb airport and railway infrastructures. We have to catch up, which is why we need to ensure that this project is on the list of the Government's objectives. I was disappointed to hear Kenny MacAskill's  comments. His was a bit of recycled speech—we have heard it previously in the chamber. However, I would agree with his saying that Edinburgh airport is a driver of the Edinburgh economy. The problem, as Margaret Smith said, is that without the proper public transport infrastructure, we set back economic development to the west of the city. We must ensure that we have high-quality public transport that provides people with a real alternative to taking their cars and parking them in the airport car park for days on end. It is important for the economy and the environment of our area. Bristow Muldoon was right that we must make possible maximum access to the airport. It is tantalising that, when the railway passes the airport, the line goes just past the edge of the runway. Getting the right route will be critical. I ask ministers to update us on the progress that they have made with the research on railway access to the airport, which was commissioned by the previous transport minister in Scotland. It must be about time that we had the outcome of that study. I cannot remember exactly when it was due, but it must be pretty soon. It is important that we do not think only about airport access. We must consider the regional context: the east of Scotland and the Lothians area will need a mix of light and heavy rail and Edinburgh will need a package. As a constituency MSP, I strongly believe that investment in Waverley and Haymarket is critical. We must upgrade access to the whole railway network in the east. There has already been great progress in Edinburgh, and the work with the council and the Executive should be applauded. Crossrail will open shortly, as will the new stations at Brunstane, Newcraighall in Susan Deacon's constituency, and the Gyle. The next stage will be a requirement for significant expenditure, not only by the public sector—there are major opportunities for the private sector. From that point of view, I strongly agree with Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's motion, which refers to the critical imperative of having public-private partnerships to get us much-needed investment. I ask the ministers to give us a reassurance that they will prioritise the airport link. If we are going to get railways moving in Scotland, it will need ministerial action and the ministers' commitment to develop the link as part of a wider, radical package of investment in railways in the Lothians and the east of Scotland. We can see the opportunities that are close to us. However, we need to ensure that we get to the stage of having an agreed plan and an agreed opportunity for private investors to put money into what would be an exciting and radical investment, not only for the next few years, but for the next couple of decades. We desperately need that in the east of Scotland and I hope that the ministers will give us their broad  support for that. I do not expect an announcement at an end-of-day debate, but an indication of how we are moving ahead would be most welcome.

Will the member give way?

This morning's debate has reflected the fact that we have moved on in the past couple of decades. Lloyd Quinan seems to be talking about people from the Labour party of 20 years ago. We recognise that the classic nation state of the 19 th century has moved on. Europe is more complex. It has a mixture of nation states and cross-regional alliances. It would help if Lloyd Quinan debated the present position, rather than the past.

It is what you guys want.

Not many members are in the chamber, although the debate is one of the most important that the Parliament will have. This is the start of a process. The debate is important to get into nitty-gritty issues that Irene Oldfather and Ben Wallace mentioned. Changes in European governance affect every person in Scotland. We face a major challenge in communicating those changes and engaging the citizens of Scotland in dialogue about them. If we are to be successful in that debate, we must get back to first principles and think about why we are in Europe and what Europe should deliver. After the second world war, the aim was to bring economic stability and peace to Europe. We should think about such fundamental issues and the development of a social Europe, which the Labour party has strongly supported. Latterly, Europe's aim has been to take collective action on global environmental problems. We are in Europe because of such reasons. Enlargement will bring more nations into the European structures. It will require different ways of working and a model of interdependence between different states, with different powers at different levels. The real challenge is not to create a superstate, as Ben Wallace suggested, but to create a set of institutions with democratic and transparent decision-making processes that people feel have legitimacy. The European Committee report is excellent. It gives marker points that we need to argue for with the Executive, within the UK and with many other voices throughout Europe that are arguing for exactly the same things. Scotland has the best of both worlds. We are part of the UK, which is a key and powerful member state. With a Labour Government, the UK has built up more respect in Europe. The Government does not simply go along with  everything that is suggested, but engages constructively in dialogue and debate. It has real clout. Scotland also has input into Europe and can engage directly on issues that are of major significance to it. There is also a challenge for MSPs, if we are to do our jobs properly. We should work and engage effectively with our MEP colleagues in all parties and with the UK Government to represent our interests in Brussels. Members should think back over the past couple of years. We have had major successes in working together constructively on the CalMac tendering process, on getting the go-ahead for the Rosyth ferry with the freight facilities grant and on many fishing industry issues that have arisen in the past couple of years. Where we work together constructively and argue our case, we are successful. There should be co-operation.

No. I want to talk about the report. I might take an intervention later, but I want to proceed. A key issue that the committee raised is the need to improve the Parliament's scrutiny of the Executive's work. I welcome Jim Wallace's constructive response on that. We cannot easily tackle the issue. If we are to get the right result in the UK and in Scotland, the Government must have some ability to engage in negotiations and dialogue without everything being open to discussion. There are challenges running up to each Council meeting. Council meetings do not just drop from the sky—they are the result of years of discussion between member states and at the sub-member level. There are real opportunities for us, but we require to prioritise if we want to be effective. That also means making demands on the Commission. I agree strongly with Jim Wallace's and Irene Oldfather's comments on the importance of Europe engaging in pre-legislative discussion, as we have done in the Parliament. That can gear up Europe's citizens, businesses and stakeholder organisations to play a constructive part in the process. We need to monitor what is happening in Europe and engage in dialogue at an early stage, so that we can prepare for opportunities that arise. For example, the proposed directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment is not the most exciting directive, but cleaning up Europe by dealing with electronic waste effectively is a major challenge. The challenge is to prepare and act now rather than wait until the directive reaches us. The Executive should take a lead and Scottish businesses should see opportunities. There is the unfortunate experience of the fridge mountain,  which is getting larger in Scotland. We must learn from that experience and engage effectively. The job of MSPs is to work with the Executive. I welcome the proposal to make each presidency an opportunity for a debate in the Scottish Parliament or the European Committee so that, every six months, we take stock and prioritise the work of the Parliament to enable our constituents and key stakeholders in Scotland to take part in debates, as we take part in debates in Europe. Devolution reflects a huge step forward from the old nation states of the 19 th century. It reflects the interdependence of states in Europe. There is a complex mix of traditional nation states, constitutional regions and sub-national and regional alliances that are developing throughout Europe. There is also the elected European Parliament, which we have not reflected on much this morning. The challenge for Scotland is to build alliances with like-minded nations and regions and to add our voice to the process in Europe for democratic, transparent and more accessible institutions. The European Committee's report gives us a good starting point for that debate.

I congratulate Donald Gorrie on securing the debate and on giving us more than lengthy notice that he would bring this debate to the chamber. During last month's members' debate on Dr Colin O'Riordan we were given sufficient notice of this issue so that we could all think about it and speak to people about it. As an EIS member, I should probably declare an interest in the debate. However, I was in the higher education section of the EIS, so I have no idea of how the schools bit of the union worked. That used to mystify me. I do not want to indulge in what came close to being a bit of union bashing  from Murdo Fraser in the chamber tonight. It is important that people are involved in trade unions, but that does not make the issues easy. It is highly appropriate that we are having this debate and bringing to life an issue that is discussed across the country. It is important that we record gratitude for the work of music teachers and instructors. Colleagues in the chamber have done that eloquently. It is also important that we do not regard music tuition as an add-on extra. Music is important, as members have said, for young people's personal development, for team building and confidence building and for the sheer enjoyment of the subject at school. I am sure that Robin Harper will agree with me that to find young people enjoying themselves at school is such a gift that we should nurture it when we have it. I was struck with the tone of the correspondence that I had. That correspondence motivated me to speak today. We might not be able to solve the issue in this debate, but a particular plea came through in the letters and the correspondence from the people who are involved. There is a worry and a perception that music tuition and instrument instruction will be downgraded and will not be given the recognition and acknowledgement that they deserve. I would like the minister to take time in her closing speech to give us a flavour of the Executive's policy on music in schools, to affirm the importance of music and to give us some commitments.

Yes. I am happy to give way.

Thank you for that intervention.

I thought that Pauline McNeill was going to talk about the importance of musical tuition in Glasgow. That was the only reason that I allowed her to intervene. She did not press her request-to-speak button when the Presiding Officer asked members to do so. It is important that we support the cause of music in our schools. One thing that was touched on is the importance of orchestras in our schools not just at the individual school level, but at the level of the development of regional and national orchestras. I know that Donald Gorrie is an active supporter of orchestras in Edinburgh. It is also important to put on the record Nora Radcliffe's comments about the work that is done outwith the school day. Many school orchestras do not meet within the school timetable—for example, the regional orchestras meet in the evening and at weekends. There is much individual and personal commitment from teachers and pupils to enable those orchestras to keep going. For the long-term future of music in Scotland, which must be part of this debate, young people need to develop skills and enthusiasm so that they can learn to become musicians. As professional musicians, they can keep our national orchestras going or go abroad and join international orchestras. It is important also that we encourage gifted, talented amateurs who keep music going in informal situations such as local music societies or groups. That is a talent, skill and enthusiasm that a young person can gain for a lifetime. It is highly appropriate that we acknowledge the patience, enthusiasm and professionalism that instructors bring to the work that is going on in our schools. That sentiment was put extremely interestingly—and I use that phrase advisedly—by the director of the National Association of Youth Orchestras when she wrote to me. She said: "Without the extremely dedicated and high calibre instrumental teachers nourishing the seedlings in the potting-sheds of music classrooms in schools up and down the country, we are in danger of ... losing" some of our high-quality Scottish orchestras. It was a nice bit of imagery to think of instrument teachers in potting sheds instead of in classrooms. At school, I campaigned to play the clarinet or the flute. One of my most exciting days was the day on which the music teacher interrupted our sports class to say that he had got me an instrument. I wondered whether it was going to be a flute or a clarinet. He said, "I have got you a trumpet." I was delighted, as musical instruments  were not available to all. We had to wait for them to become available. The excitement of being allowed to play a musical instrument was one of the moments that I will remember always from my school days. It made me enthusiastic. If we do anything in the Parliament, we should enable young people in our schools to have the opportunity—regardless of background and even regardless of talent—to develop their experience of music. It is highly appropriate that we are debating this subject, as I understand that the Festival of British Youth Orchestras is coming to Edinburgh this summer. I am sure that that will be debated again, if not in the chamber, at a local level. We need to attract more and not fewer people to become involved in music. As other members have said, the importance of musical instrument teachers is absolutely vital. I ask the minister to do all she can to support the superb work that is done by instructors across the country.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to improve housing standards in the Dumbiedykes area of Edinburgh. (S1O-4597)

I welcome the new money from the Executive, which ensures that we have a chance to modernise those flats and houses dramatically. Does the minister recognise that people in Dumbiedykes have waited for years for a major refurbishment? Will he assure me that, when the Executive receives the business plan from the council, it will deal with it as swiftly as possible so that the houses can be brought into the 21 st century?

Will the member give way?

Is the member aware that in other European countries, such as Austria, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden and England, there are restrictions on fur farming? The issue is being discussed not only in Scotland, but across Europe.

It is because I attempted to intervene.

Will the member give way?

I am not sure that that was a wise move. I congratulate Angus MacKay on securing the debate and giving members the chance to come together in the chamber, and I welcome the establishment of the trust in Colin O'Riordan's name. The speeches that we have heard tonight demonstrate why it is appropriate and important that the trust be established. It is appropriate that, in our new Parliament, we acknowledge the contribution that Colin O'Riordan made to music in Edinburgh and the marker that he was for others across Scotland. As Angus pointed out, I have to declare an interest: I was a student of Colin O'Riordan's. To put that into perspective, I used to sit up at the back of the orchestra. I knew who he was, but he might not have known who I was—although he would have done if we had got the notes wrong. On occasions, that happened. I was a member of ESSO—the Edinburgh Secondary Schools Orchestra—circa mid-to-late 1970s. It was exciting to be in a proper orchestra. I was in our school orchestra, which was a great personal experience, although there were times  when you wished that the violins were in tune. It was exciting to be able to go to an orchestra that drew pupils from all the high schools across the city. It made sense of the endless hours of practice that were required if you were to be any good at your instrument. One of the exciting things about being in an orchestra was being part of a team and also of a sub-team. I was in the brass section. We sat at the back and we were the slightly bolshie element of the orchestra.

Nothing has changed. Those identities are important to young people. I agree with the comments that Margo MacDonald and Brian Fitzpatrick made about the personal development that being involved in music allows young people. As well as talking about the importance of Colin O'Riordan's work, I also want to stress the importance of the work that was done at individual school level across Edinburgh. It was that that let us come together as an orchestra. As students, we did not have any appreciation of the effort that was needed to achieve that, or of the individual relationships between peripatetic music teachers, who had to cover the whole city, and the other people in the schools where they taught. Such teachers have a different relationship with their schools from that of the average teacher. They certainly do not get lots of praise at the time from the school students that they teach. They would get that praise only some years later. School students, as everyone knows, are not the most flattering people and never appreciate how much extra effort it takes to run an orchestra. Kids take it for granted that teachers are happy to stay on after school and to take them across the city. That is why I am pleased to be able to speak in tonight's debate, many years on. Although we were not personally appreciative at the time, I am sure that Colin was able to tell how much we were enjoying ourselves when we were playing. It was quite exciting for us to be able to come together as part of an orchestra and play Mussorgsky, whom most of us had never heard of until we were in the orchestra. It gave us a real sense of purpose and gave all of us the chance to develop a love of music and a personal confidence. There is a liberation in being able to understand how music fits together, to be part of an orchestra and to play one's part. That is something that is incredibly important. I acknowledge the important role that the Edinburgh Secondary Schools Orchestra played at the time. It built on the backbone of work done in individual schools across Edinburgh and made us proud to be able to come together.  At Christmas, I was pleased to be able to attend the Royal High School choir's performance of Christmas carols in the Parliament canteen. All the Edinburgh schools are still putting their orchestras and choirs together. As Brian Monteith said, that is still a core part of education and is important. It is superb that Colin O'Riordan's family and friends have put together a trust. Not only does it let his name live on, it also allows some practical work to flow from that. It continues to enable there to be a stimulation of interest in and access to music by young people. That is superb, and that is mentioned in the first point of Angus MacKay's motion. The trust also addresses the practicalities of allowing young people to have access to instruments. That sounds like the kind of thing that one would take for granted, but musical instruments are not cheap. The cost of a new bassoon these days, for example, is not cheap. It is not simply a case of buying a new instrument when a child starts to learn. They might start off with a battered trumpet or a pretty ropy clarinet, but there comes a point at which the child can play the instrument. To be able to play a good instrument is sometimes what lifts people up from being talented amateurs to being the kind of people Brian Fitzpatrick mentioned, who can make a life and career out of music. I am glad to support the establishment of the trust. I hope that, in addition to the fund-raising concert, the fact that we are having a debate on it will raise the profile of the trust, give it a boost and let more people know about it. I congratulate Angus MacKay on securing the debate and thank him for allowing us to pay tribute to Colin O'Riordan and give our collective support to the establishment of the trust and the work that we hope it will do for young people across the city.

Like other members, I welcome today's debate, which has been of high quality. That does not mean that I agree with all the points that have been made. However, it is clear to me that members have done their research and thought about how the issues that we are debating affect their communities. Robin Harper has proposed a huge topic for this annual Scottish Green Party debate. In my speech, I would like to acknowledge how far we have come and to flag up some of the key areas in which we need to go much further. We in the Labour party have come a very long way in a very short time. If we go back to the party's roots, we find that it has always been interested in people's working and living environment. That concern has driven the Labour and trade union movements since their very early days. However, only in the past decade, since the Rio conference, have we directly linked our commitment to the environment to our economic ambitions. Ken Macintosh mentioned the superb pamphlet by the Socialist Environment and Resources Association, Labour's environmental pressure group, on the opportunities that we need to grasp in Scotland. In 1997, and again in 1999, Labour committed itself to greening government; we can now see the benefits of the work that is being done in the coalition coming through in Scotland. Big investment is being made in renewable sources of energy. Today's debate is about not whether we are in favour of renewables, but whether those constituencies that could accommodate renewables schemes have them; in Edinburgh Central, we will pass on those. The standards of energy performance that are required in our building regulations have been increased to bring us further into line with the northern European countries, but we need to do more in that area. In the next round of changes, we may want to consider photovoltaic technology. We are not yet quite ready for the mass application of that technology, but in very few years we should be. Lewis Macdonald described the massive shift that we have begun to make in transport policy. We are seeking long-term investment and a better balance in how money is spent. Investment is being made in safer streets, safer routes to school, walking, cycling, buses and trains. We need to ensure that we cater not just for longer trips, but for short trips, too.  Almost everyone who has spoken mentioned the national waste strategy, which local authorities are beginning to implement. Robin Harper is absolutely right to say that we are at the bottom of the European league table on waste and that that has to change. That means making some difficult changes, such as reducing the amount of waste that we produce in the first place—few members have spoken about that this morning—and making maximum use of recycling and composting. The Parliament should welcome the first two area waste plans, which emphasise recycling and composting. Recycling and composting offer the most potential for job creation and provide opportunities for local companies. While incineration is likely to be part of the solution to our waste problem, it is vital that it is not seen as an easy short-term replacement for our dreadful reliance on landfill. That is why we need to promote recycling and learn from pilot schemes, such as those in Edinburgh, which have shown that people will act sensibly if we make it easy for them to do that. That means providing local access to recycling facilities. There is much in Robin Harper's motion with which we could concur, so I am a bit disappointed that the Executive's amendment leaves out the motion's first proposition, on which we could all have agreed. However, the test is what happens in Government. Since Labour came to power in 1997, there have been huge shifts in UK and in Scottish Government policy. Fiona McLeod's suggestion that our waste problems stem from the fact that Scotland is part of the UK is laughable. The fact that Germany, Denmark and Sweden have made huge progress has much more to do with the political composition of their Governments. In the debate, we should be positive about what we have achieved instead of using the opportunity to be negative all the time. We need to tell the non-governmental organisations, such as Friends of the Earth, Greenpeace and WWF, that we take them seriously and that we are making progress. We have an awful lot more to do. The report of the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution stated that we need to cut our CO 2 emissions by 60 per cent within the next 50 years. That is a huge challenge. I believe that we have made the right first steps in Government. We need to welcome what the Executive has done. We need to ensure that sustainable development hits the whole of the Executive and does not simply focus on the environment. That is what sustainable development is all about and that is why I support the Executive amendment.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to help Scotland prepare for the euro. (S1O-4450)

I am sure that the minister is aware of the importance of tourism to the Scottish economy and, in particular, to my constituency of Edinburgh Central. Now that there has been a smooth transition in the eurozone countries, what action is the minister taking on the  recommendations in the European Committee's report on the euro? In particular, what is she doing on the recommendations to do with raising awareness in Scotland's tourism industry—in VisitScotland and the Scottish tourist forum—on issues such as dual pricing, marketing and staff training, which the industry urgently needs before the coming summer?

Although this is an end-of-day debate and the issue that has been raised is a local constituency issue, what we do in the Parliament about renewables will be one of our longest and most important legacies. It is something of which collectively we could be proud. Members have made the point about the importance of developing clean energy sources. We have talked about waste issues. We do not have those with renewable energy. We do not get the problems that we have had from our legacy of nuclear waste and we do not get the problems that we have inherited with the waste from our coal-fired stations. Those problems can be tackled, but renewables offer us new technology for the long term that is environmentally friendly and genuinely green. When we develop renewable resources we are using the earth's capital, not squandering it. We will be able to use that technology again and again. It is true to say that, historically, Denmark has cornered the market in onshore wind development, and has begun to corner the market in offshore wind development and wind turbines. The challenge for Scotland is to think about the future and to consider the new generating capacity that could come from wave power and offshore wave installations. There are already some pilot projects around Scotland.

I would like to get further into my speech. The significance of the debate is that we can focus on the new investment that is going to come through the development that is proposed for Lewis. That proposed development has the potential to lift up the perspective on investment in renewables in Scotland. It puts the issue right at the heart of our energy and electricity interests. The work of the Scottish Executive and the UK Government that Alasdair Morrison identified is vital to develop fully Scotland's energy interests as part of the UK. That is why we need continued support from the Executive for new investment in capacity for transmission and distribution. Alasdair Morrison is also right to highlight the positive local impact on Lewis. We can see that being replicated across Scotland. One of the things that people are worried about with regard to renewables and the development of wind farms is that they do not know what the experience will be like. I remember doing a television interview in the Borders. The interviewer asked, "Aren't people going to be worried about the noise?" We were standing underneath an operating wind turbine and could not hear any noise. We need more such developments to reassure people that they are an environmentally friendly form of electricity generation with a beneficial impact on local jobs. The Lewis project is another significant step in raising the proportion of electricity generated by renewables. I ask the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development to consider the current target of 18 per cent. That is the right target for the next few years. We now need to be thinking about raising that target for the long term. I call on the minister to think about that as part of a radical expansion and to build on the success that has been highlighted by the proposed Lewis project. I also call on the minister to think about the whole of Scotland and not to forget central Scotland. There are massive opportunities for the development of renewables and wind farms in the short term, with the longer-term prize of offshore development. I am not talking just about wind power; wave generation is the one area where Scotland could get ahead of the game in terms of manufacturing. I congratulate Alasdair Morrison on securing the debate and I call on the Minister for Environment and Rural Development to take us forward.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will David Mundell not accept the fact that the key problem at Hatfield was the lack of effective maintenance by the privatised railway network and that that is what brought the system to a crashing and shuddering halt?

We are over eight and a half minutes into the speech and we have not heard one comment about what the SNP would do with our railways. Would Mr MacAskill tell the chamber? He has just implied that he does not believe that any investment in services on the east coast or west coast main lines will bring any benefit to Scottish passengers. We in the Labour party do not agree with him.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making in mainstreaming sustainable development across all areas of policy. (S1O-4403)

In producing indicators, what plans does the Executive have to monitor the progress made on developing renewable energy to the target of 18 per cent by 2010? What plans does the minister have to develop the target beyond 18 per cent, if we are to make the most of the manufacturing and economic benefits from developing renewables and use the potential that exists across the whole of Scotland?

I did not say that the motion was not in order; I said that I disagreed with some of its content. It is a matter of degree. I take Margo MacDonald's point on the matter.

I am grateful to Kenny MacAskill for choosing buses in Edinburgh for the topic of this end-of-day debate. I suppose it is an easy target for him as he hits out at what is happening in Edinburgh with the so-called bus wars, but both he and Fiona Hyslop missed many of the points. It is ludicrous to say that the biggest problems with transport in  Edinburgh are the pollution and congestion caused by buses. Everyone who lives in Edinburgh Central knows that the main problems of congestion and air pollution are caused by cars snarling up our roads because of the difficulty of attracting people on to buses. I actually think that it is good that we have lots more buses in Edinburgh. Questions about how long the large number of buses on routes will last arise, but that is an issue for the operators to sort out. I will come on to talk about possible solutions. Kenny MacAskill's speech did not contain a great deal of recognition of the positive changes that have taken place in Edinburgh over the past few years in the quality and range of bus services. Greenways deliver faster bus times and mean that there are more passengers on buses; new routes link people with their work and with where they want to go for leisure opportunities, whether at the Gyle or at Ocean Terminal; and there are newer and more attractive buses across Edinburgh with low floors so that pensioners and people with disabilities can now get wheelchairs on and off. The latest buses that Lothian Buses are introducing are entirely automated so that the drivers do not have to get out of their seats. Big changes are taking place. Next year there will be free bus travel for pensioners. All the changes are causing more people to use buses—we know that from the year-on-year increases in Edinburgh. There is a degree of hypocrisy in this debate. I know that we are meant to be touchy-feely at members' business debates, but I remember Kenny MacAskill's comments last year when he criticised the Executive for spending money on new bus routes. He said that the bus was a mode of transport for the last century. I think that buses are a key part of any transport strategy and that there is a lot to be praised in Edinburgh. Some of Mr MacAskill's speech was intriguing to say the least. Anyone who had to sit through the endless debates in the Transport and the Environment Committee had the opportunity to consider a new regulatory framework for buses. We did that in great depth, but the nationalists did not propose any alternative regulatory framework. We had rigorous debates about the timing of the introduction of contracts. In response to comments from a number of people, including the Association of Transport Co-ordinating Officers in Scotland, we brought forward the time at which contracts could be introduced and we changed the nature of the terms of contract introduction. I still feel that the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 took a balanced approach, but no alternative was proposed by the nationalists during those extensive debates.

Mr MacAskill would have to put that question to the City of Edinburgh Council. The regulations on the buses were published only towards the end of last year. They are lengthy and will require a great deal of thought. The debate over bus partnerships and bus contracts centres on the fact that they should be used where appropriate and in the public interest. That judgment is one that only the City of Edinburgh Council can make. It will then be able to put its case to the Executive. I think that the framework provided by the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 is absolutely appropriate. Part of what I found intriguing about Mr MacAskill's speech was the notion that, having spent two to two and a half years debating transport in this Parliament, we should now totally disregard the new transport act, set up a totally new framework of regulations that ignores the regulations in the act, and pretend to people that a new tender process—or a new regulatory process, as Mr MacAskill described it—can be triggered that would be quicker than setting in place the contracts that we already have and that have the detailed guidance that the Executive has produced. That is a ludicrous position. The nationalists are trying to con people in Edinburgh and the Lothians into believing that they have a solution for transport in Scotland. The real challenge is to use the grinding process of going through the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001, working out what is best for us. We need more consultation with bus users so that when bus routes are taken away we can campaign on them. The challenge is to put the tougher regulation that is provided for in the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 into place, creating more bus lanes and ensuring more long-term investment. That is a job for local authorities. I am glad that we have had tonight's debate, but I note that there has been an awful lot of hypocrisy in the nationalist case.

It is clear to everybody that members on the Government parties' benches recognise the need to set priorities. The Opposition has the luxury of sitting on the sidelines and being constantly critical while promising the world. John Swinney's speech was a classic example of that, although it was more negative than is usual for the nationalists. Only two sentences were given to their core priority of establishing independence for Scotland. Members on the Government parties' benches are striving for first class services that are delivered through working in partnership with our colleagues in Westminster, local government and Europe. The 2000 spending review set in train the biggest-ever investment in services that Scotland has seen. In my constituency, the new St Thomas of Aquin's RC High School will open in the autumn. That school will have been built under Labour through partnership between central and local government. In the coming years, more schools will be built. I am looking forward to the new facilities at Tynecastle and Boroughmuir high schools. There will be new schools that are fit for the 21 st century.  We must get real benefits for people from services throughout Scotland. That means that, to dismantle and replace the free-market inheritance that the Tories left to us, we must reform the delivery of services. That means that we must change the management culture in every organisation to put people first. That is why I welcome Malcolm Chisholm's announcement of a task force on waiting times.

Not just now. I also welcome the First Minister's commitment of new money for health. I suspect that every constituency MSP in the chamber will have examples from their mailbag of unacceptable waiting times. I, too, have heard from many angry and frustrated patients and families who do not understand why they must wait so long for treatment. We cannot allow that situation to continue. Over the Christmas break, the SNP's dismissal as bureaucracy of Malcolm Chisholm's actions shows how little it understands the challenge of delivering radical change in practice.

The point that I make to my constituents is that we are ploughing massive resources into the NHS. We need to ensure that those resources are delivered to every hospital in Scotland so that people see the benefits of that change in every kind of service. That process takes time. I am proud of the decisions that we have made in the Parliament over the past two and a half years, particularly in transport. We have transformed a transport budget that was dominated almost exclusively by roads expenditure.

No thank you. In 1996-97, only 12.5 per cent of the transport budget was spent on public transport. By 2003-04, we will have shifted our transport spending priorities to deliver a massive boost to public transport—53 per cent will go on initiatives such as safer routes to school, on buses and on trains. At the same time, we will maintain investment on our roads.  The coalition is based in the real world. We are committed to building for the long term, which is why I welcome the recognition of sustainable development in the Executive's motion. We are already making massive progress on promoting renewable energy, on resource management—through tackling our waste mountains—and on sustained investment in our new transport choices. Over the long term, that will help us to tackle our global emissions targets. The challenge of using our resources wisely must be one of the fundamental challenges of the 21 st century around the globe, not just in Scotland. Our decisions and resources need to fit in with our social justice priorities and we must make the most of the economic opportunities that will come from wise use of resources. That is why it is absolutely right that in motion S1M-2578 the Executive identifies young people as being at the heart of our ambitions. I notice that Mr McLetchie has missed another reference to the heart of our priorities. The First Minister said that he will lead the Executive's work on sustainable development. That commitment should be welcomed by us all, because it shows the political priority that sustainable development is being given from the top. We are in the business of bringing about long-term change, which means difficult choices—not the quick fix or the glib soundbite. It means making decisions that give us the maximum return on every pound that we, as a Government, spend. That is why the Executive's priorities are right for Scotland.

I welcome the new resources that have been made available to local authorities by the Scottish Executive, but does the minister agree that the work that is done by the voluntary sector in providing practical support for people while they are homeless is absolutely vital? Does he agree that organisations such as the Ark Trust in my constituency are doing a sterling job? Can he assure me that the Executive will make efforts to work with the voluntary sector to ensure that such organisations are given full support, just as those organisations support the homeless?

The minister will be aware of the devastating flooding that there has been in Edinburgh, in particular, over the past few years. He has talked about emergency responses. What plans does the Executive have to fast-track local authority proposals for long-term flood prevention schemes?

I am keen for ex gratia payments to Scottish Transport Group pension members to be made as soon as possible. However, that cannot happen until the pension schemes are wound up, and that is entirely a matter for the pension scheme's trustees. As soon as the schemes are wound up, the Scottish Transport Group will be dissolved, the surplus will be transferred and ex gratia payments will be processed.

No one is keener than I am to ensure that the pensioners have justice. The Executive has not delayed. The fact is that we cannot pay out until the trustees have wound up the scheme. We cannot access the detailed information on all the pensioners until the scheme is wound up and the trustees pass that information  to us. As soon as we have that information, I think that we should issue full payments and not mess around with interim payments or delay the final settlement that the pensioners have waited far too long for.

I will stick to the substance of the question. The Executive has not delayed. We are working hard to get the schemes through. We will be at the Finance Committee next week to ensure that we have the powers to pay the money. I want the money to be paid as soon as possible. That is also the UK Government's position. Until we have the final wind-up from the trustees, we cannot pay the money. We must ensure that that work goes ahead as soon as possible, once the Parliament and the Executive have the authority to pay the money.

First, we are in discussion with the trade unions to ensure that they know the criteria on which we will disperse the money. Secondly, as soon as the Executive has the money and we are able to make payments, we will have the widest possible advertising campaign to ensure that every single pensioner who might benefit from the funds knows about it. That will ensure that the records are up-to-date and will allow us to make payments.

Absolutely. We have worked closely with UK ministers. We have an Executive team that is ready and waiting to pay out the money as soon as we have it and the records from the STG. We are ready to pay out the money, but we need to have the money for us to be able to do that.

The remaining single-track section of the A830 is included in the agreed list of schemes for which European transitional funding will be sought. Highland Council will shortly be undertaking the necessary outstanding work, leading to the publication of a draft order. The scheme will be a candidate for future trunk road programme funding, taking account of the availability of European transitional funding.

As everybody knows, the Executive was set up at the same time as the Parliament. That was in 1999. Six months after the Scottish Parliament was set up, I gave the go-ahead for work on the second-last stretch of the A830. This summer, I visited the work site. The-second-last stretch of the road is now going  ahead. The Executive has made that a priority. We have already instructed Highland Council to do the preparatory work for the final stage. Fergus Ewing can take from that that we have a full awareness of the importance of getting on with the work.

I can give Rhoda Grant a commitment that we will do that. We have to make tough choices throughout our trunk roads network, but the fact that we have one final stretch of single-track road in Scotland is a lasting issue, which must be taken into account when we next consider priorities throughout the trunk roads programme.

I regard the reopening of the Stirling-Alloa-Dunfermline line as a very important project, which will increase capacity in central Scotland, with benefits for that area and more widely.

I thank Andrew Wilson for the deep sincerity that he expressed in offering his best wishes before he asked his question. The issue has nothing to do with a lack of funding and the broader question about railways. It is about getting accurate costings. The benefits of the project are massive. If we were able to get freight trains off the Forth rail bridge that would let us have faster express trains between Dundee and Edinburgh, faster trains between Perth and Edinburgh and much more reliability in the network for passengers in Scotland. It would also open up huge opportunities that do not currently exist for freight. That is why we have a team working on the project and why we have a partnership approach with the council, the local enterprise company and the Strategic Rail Authority. We want to deliver the project, because it will bring benefits to the whole of Scotland. That is why the Executive is working to deliver the project.

The line is one of our top priorities. Members regularly ask questions about other projects such as the Gourock and Larkhall to Milngavie line. We want to get on with a series of key projects. The Stirling-Alloa-Dunfermline line is a strategic project for not only central Scotland, but beyond. Getting freight off the Forth rail bridge will bring big benefits for passengers. We are considering the opportunity for freight to go from Stirling to Alloa to Longannet. There are massive opportunities; I am determined that we capture them in the study that is being done and that we ensure that we make progress on the project.

We inherited a mess of a railway system. The way to get out of that mess is  through partnership. That is why we are working with Clackmannanshire Council, the local enterprise company and the Strategic Rail Authority. A partnership approach is the only way to make progress on projects such as this. The Executive is already committed to providing funds for the passenger element and is already committed to the freight element. We must bring in broader support to ensure that we get a package of funding that will ensure that the project goes ahead.

Before going into administration, Railtrack indicated that many projects throughout the UK would be put on hold, because of its concerns about availability of key resources, notably signalling. At present, Railtrack plc is being run by the administrators that were appointed by the Secretary of State for Transport, Local Government and the Regions. I will meet the administrators presently to press the case for key rail projects in Scotland.

I assure the member that we are raising the case with all the key people. Crucially, I have met Richard Bowker from the Strategic Rail Authority and John Spellar, and I intend to press the case further. I am aware that  Gourock is a particular problem because there are time constraints to consider. We need to ensure that projects such as the redevelopment of Gourock waterfront go ahead.

I am amazed that Christine Grahame wanted to make that point—it is total fiction. The question is about current projects that have been held back not just by Railtrack going into administration, but by problems that the company faced. I am looking forward to considering the new franchise. That is the context of new rail projects such as the Borders line and the Bathgate to Airdrie projects. Such projects are longer-term projects. The key challenge is to unlock rail projects that are on the books and to which we have already signed up.

In the most recent round of public transport fund awards, I announced more than £14 million of funding for Strathclyde Passenger Transport to purchase new rolling stock, to refurbish existing trains and to develop plans for better transport interchanges. That came on top of previous awards of more than £5 million from the public transport fund, which funded projects such as the Partick interchange and a previous refurbishment of rolling stock. Our £21 million investment in the Larkhall to Milngavie rail link consisted of £16 million for infrastructure plus £5 million for the additional rolling stock that was required. We have also made significant increases in SPT's capital allocation from the Executive.

The critical issue to which Mr Brown alludes is partnership. We have a framework for that through the west of Scotland transport partnership, with local authorities working closely together. There is also SPTE which, as Mr Brown rightly says, is the sole passenger transport executive in Scotland. A range of projects is currently being implemented. I have not yet received a proposal on the Glasgow crossrail from SPTE. It is for SPTE to work out that project and then to consider future funding options. Mr Brown can be assured that many projects are being delivered in west central Scotland through SPT and funding from the Executive.

I disagree fundamentally. Unless we have proper robust studies, we cannot implement projects that require major investment. We have a number of projects going ahead at the moment only because there was a robust, value-for-money case for them. If we are to finance projects by attracting money from the private sector, we need to ensure that we have good business cases. That is why we will study rail access to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports. That work is absolutely critical. It is absolutely crazy to pretend that we can go ahead with a project without a good case.

Part of this year's public transport fund award to SPT was specifically for new rolling stock for Ayrshire commuters, who come from Kilmarnock and Ayr. I know that there are key issues with passenger comfort on those routes to Glasgow. SPT received such a large award from the public transport fund this year  especially to tackle the problems on the Ayrshire routes.

The key point that came across from the consultants' presentation yesterday, which many members attended, was that our existing public transport network cannot meet the transport needs that the consultants identified in relation to the motorway. We need to consider carefully a range of issues, for example strategic bus routes and new railway opportunities, such as the one that Karen Whitefield mentioned. Yesterday, the key issue for me was seeing how many people travel alone in their cars. Choice is not available to them. That re-emphasises the need not only to ensure that the money that we have spent on public transport is implemented, but that we have long-term and sustainable funding for a range of projects throughout west-central Scotland.

The trunk road maintenance contracts permit the operating companies to provide MPs or MSPs with factual information. However, the Executive remains responsible for trunk roads policy, so questions of policy are handled via the Executive. A number of meetings have been arranged between MSPs, Scottish Executive officials and BEAR Scotland staff. I understand that Mrs Ewing has arranged a meeting for 5 November. I hope that she will find that useful.

Absolutely not—nothing could be further from the case. As with the previous  contract, it is vital, where there are policy issues relating to the Scottish Executive, that our officials are fully involved in providing MSPs such as Mrs Ewing with accurate answers. The reason that we ask MSPs to tell us what information they are seeking is to ensure that, where it is directly appropriate for the operating company to provide that information, it is able to do that. When MSPs request meetings, it is vital that they get the most out of them. That is why a number of meetings have been arranged with colleagues in the chamber. I am happy that there is that transparency; it is important that members get the right answers to the questions they submit.

I am aware that that is an important issue to the people of Aberdeen, which is why it is important that the local authority, the trunk road company and the Executive work together to address the matter.

Absolutely. I am well aware of the issues that Jamie Stone has raised with me and with the operating company. The Executive has already had a winter planning conference, involving the local authorities, the operating companies, the police—crucially—and the motoring organisations. The plans are now in place. I have arranged for details of a briefing that I gave yesterday to be put in the Scottish Parliament information centre so that members can see for themselves what arrangements are being made.

It sounds as if there are some specific issues that must be addressed. If the member writes with the details of the problems, I would be more than happy to write to him and deal with those matters properly.

It is far too early to speculate on how the new infrastructure company will affect enhancements to the Scottish railway network as the proposed construction of the Borders railway is not expected until 2005 at the earliest. The challenge is to ensure that the new railway structure enables cost-effective public and private investment that meets our strategic objectives.

I am happy to acknowledge that the first feasibility study into the Borders railway line was conducted in recognition of the social and economic conditions in the Borders. Those conditions still remain. The key thing is for the work being done by Scottish Borders Council to advance, so that the correct work is in place to consider the Borders railway line further.

We have yet to give strategic advice and guidance to the SRA on the next ScotRail franchise. However, throughout the period in question we have been in regular discussions with the SRA—at ministerial and official level—on a range of railway projects.

The new structure will give us a range of options to procure new railways infrastructure—that gives us opportunities across the whole of Scotland, not just in the Borders.

Two schemes on the A9 at North Kessock junction and Bankfoot junction were included in the £680 million three-year programme of improvements to Scotland's motorway and trunk road network that I announced in March this year. In addition, I have commissioned a detailed accident analysis of the A9 and a report is due at the end of November 2001. The results will be examined to see whether there is any correlation between accident type and location, with a view to identifying whether further road safety improvements can be introduced.

As members will recall, the strategic roads review in 1999 identified a number of options that we are now pursuing. We are paying particular attention to the option of online improvements between Helmsdale and the Ord of Caithness. That work is on-going.

The safety work will involve a consideration of the accident rate on different stretches of the road. We are also reviewing the  route action plan for the A9. Together, those two pieces of work will enable us to consider priorities when rolling forward the trunk roads and motorways programme in future years.

I am grateful to the SNP for picking this week to debate railways—the week that sees the biggest-ever set of awards for public transport in Scotland. We need mature debate and discussion about the way forward. It is not self-congratulatory to say to passengers that there is, and will continue to be, more investment in our railways. Andrew Wilson ignored the key issue of investment under the old Railtrack, which was that Stephen Byers was faced with a request for a blank cheque for the railways. If we take the west coast mainline as an example, we see that costs rose from £2.3 billion to £7 billion. That is why we need a new Railtrack and better financial control and management.  I want to use this morning's debate to discuss the opportunity that has been brought about by Stephen Byers's announcement on Railtrack, in the context of the work that the Executive is already doing. I also want to set out where we go from here. It is just over a year since the Hatfield tragedy and what followed was chaos for the travelling public. There have been debates about the mess that we inherited from the Tories, but now we need to move forward and set new structures that can deliver the basics: safety, maintenance and better management of our railway infrastructure. The old structure lasted for only five years. That is why it is vital that the new structure and the company limited by guarantee stand the test of time. We do not need a back-of-an-envelope scheme—the railways are too important for that. We need a framework for strategic investment that meets our priorities for an integrated network. Since the Labour Government was elected in 1997 and the Scottish Parliament was established, there has been record investment in our railways in Scotland and a new vision for the railway network. That has meant new stations at Dalgety Bay, Queen Margaret in Dunfermline and Howwood in Renfrewshire. We have seen new rolling stock and new safety measures at stations, with better closed-circuit television. Just last month, I gave the go-ahead to the Larkhall to Milngavie proposal—a £26 million project with financial support from the Scottish Executive and Strathclyde Passenger Transport. Of course, we would all like improvement to happen faster. That is why I have allocated record sums from our public transport fund this week, acting on the representations that I have received from members from Fife, Glasgow and Ayrshire. This week's investment in new rolling stock will enable the SPT to deliver more seats on trains on the Glasgow to Ayrshire routes and the Glasgow to Stirling routes. There will be more park-and-ride facilities at Falkirk, Larbert, Stirling and Dunblane. My commitment to Fife Council that we will work with it to deliver new rolling stock will bring benefits for the hard-pressed commuters of Fife. We are also building for the long term with rail studies now in progress on the Borders railway line. Work is also in progress on the central Scotland railway capacity study to address issues such as access at key points on the network in places such as Edinburgh Waverley and between Bathgate and Airdrie. This week I gave the go-ahead to Dumfries and Galloway Council to work with SPT on better access to the existing network and to Dundee City Council to consider options for new stations to the west of Dundee. We need to do the basic groundwork if we are to take decisions on further  development of the network and to help us identify and prioritise opportunities for investment by the private sector. Our consultation on the ScotRail franchise saw people sign up to our vision for the railways of Scotland. We take a strategic approach to the network that sees railways as a key way of tackling the congestion problems in our cities, with environmental benefits and a real choice for drivers who are stuck in traffic jams. We want better access to the network—better trains that are accessible to all. There is an emphasis on safety for the network as a whole and for the individual safety of passengers. I want to set out what the new landscape that has been opened up by Stephen Byers offers us. We have an opportunity for greater transparency.

No, thank you. There will be an end to the perverse incentives in the railways and to the obstacles that made developing railway projects tortuous. That is the problem that Andrew Wilson identified that we need to address. There will be better management and financial control of the railways. Clearly, there is an opportunity here, but only if we grasp it. We need to ensure that we get better value for taxpayers and passengers. The Tories' botched privatisation of the railways had to come to an end. We need to ensure that the basics are in place and that there are high safety standards and effective investment in maintenance.

Stephen Byers has been absolutely clear that the stakeholders that depend on our railways must be involved in the new structure. That includes the trade unions, the passenger interest and the freight interest. The critical thing is to ensure that the new structure is driven by the people who need it. The last thing that the railways need is more fragmentation. We need a UK rail framework so that Scottish passengers get the high safety standards and reliability of services that they deserve. Our developing rail freight industry and cross-border services need UK-wide regulation. That is why the new company limited by guarantee is a big opportunity for us in Scotland. Devolution has brought more powers to Scotland through the McLeish settlement. The challenge is to ensure that the new company limited by guarantee reflects Scottish interests, both in the way that it operates and in what it delivers.  The rail industry in Scotland has a reputation for partnership and co-operation. There is scope for better integration, but we need to get the details right. The last thing that the industry needs is another failed quick fix. That is why I met representatives of the rail industry in Scotland yesterday and will meet them individually over the next few weeks. I met John Spellar last week to discuss our interest in ensuring that Scottish interests are taken into account fully in the structures that are set up. The Scottish Executive has been working hard to deliver Scottish rail projects. However, Railtrack's announcements last month put back implementation of several key projects. That is why, last week, I also met John Robinson, the chair of Railtrack, to make clear just how important those projects are for Scotland. I also made our position clear to the rail administrators, Ernst and Young. The Scottish Executive's priorities are absolutely clear. We must ensure that we have proper and full input to the restructuring of UK railways, that Scottish enhancement projects go ahead and that we make progress on the ScotRail franchise process. I want to ensure that we continue to deliver record investment in Scotland. I move amendment S1M-2344.1, to leave out from "with the collapse" to end and insert: "it has been a difficult time for the railway industry since the tragedy at Hatfield a year ago and welcomes the steps that the Executive is taking to meet the needs of Scotland's rail users; calls upon the Executive to continue its programme of record investment in the railways and its work to make sure that projects for enhancements to the rail network go ahead, building on the good partnership that exists across the railway industry in Scotland; also notes the recent placing into administration of Railtrack plc and the opportunity that this presents to re-examine the organisation of rail services across the UK; welcomes the Executive's commitment to work closely with Her Majesty's Government to ensure that Scotland has a full and proper input into the restructuring of the UK rail industry, and calls upon all concerned to develop an ownership and investment framework for Railtrack assets that maximises both public and national interest."

Following the Finance Committee's approval of the granting of  indemnities to the trustees of the pension schemes, the wind-up of the fund is now proceeding. The Scottish Executive is finalising the detail on the basis of a fair and equitable distribution to eligible STG pension scheme members. We will provide details of our proposals when the Executive brings forward the STG dissolution order for consideration by the Scottish Parliament.

I understand the sentiment that Mr Canavan brings to the chamber and I know that the pension scheme is unfinished pre-devolution business. We inherited the situation from the previous Westminster Government. The Scottish Transport Group (Pension Schemes) Order 1996, which was passed in Westminster, provided for the surplus money to go back to Westminster. Through the good offices of Henry McLeish and Gordon Brown, we have successfully persuaded HM Treasury that the Scottish pensioners should get a fair deal from the money. That is why we have managed to retain £100 million that will go directly to Scottish pensioners. My concern is that we get on with the matter. We need to ensure that the money goes to the correct pensioners and that there is fair distribution. We will come back to Parliament after the recess to ensure that we get on with the unfinished business.

I have been in touch with the TGWU. We are keen that the TGWU and other relevant trade unions be involved in discussions with my officials to ensure that their members' concerns are put to us. However, ensuring that we get a fair scheme in which individual pensioners receive the right sums of money is a complex procedure. I have asked the TGWU and other relevant unions to meet my officials to ensure that we have those discussions soon. When they are concluded and the scheme has been set up, we will introduce the dissolution order to Parliament. Once that has been processed, we will pass across to the Scottish Public Pensions Agency all the forms which, I know, members have been working with their constituents to fill in. At that stage, the agency will ensure that everybody gets their money as expeditiously as possible. Members throughout the chamber agree that we should get on with that unfinished business. We want to ensure that our Scottish Bus Group pensioners get a fair deal out of the system.

I understand the point that Fergus Ewing makes. We must get on and consider the detail of the scheme to ensure that people get fair payments. I know that pensioners are extremely anxious that we get on with it. We need to talk to 14,000 potential pensioners. We have already sent forms out to ensure that people send us up-to-date details. As soon as Parliament has passed the dissolution order, all those forms will automatically go to the Scottish Public Pensions Agency. At that point, we will issue the widest possible publicity to ensure that every eligible pensioner knows about the scheme and to ensure that they get their details to us so that they are included in the pay-out.

I answer on behalf of the Minister for Environment and Rural Development.  A transitional planning team is in place. The prospective chair and chief executive have been identified and we have advertised for prospective board members to ensure that Scottish water can be established quickly if Parliament approves the Water Industry (Scotland) Bill, which was made available today to members of the Parliament.

Ross Finnie is focused on the fact that we need to ensure that the needs of the employees and customers of our water companies are taken into account throughout the process. I will mention the response to Bruce Crawford's letter to Ross Finnie and ensure that that is expedited. Ross Finnie is in Austria with other environment ministers from throughout Europe. I am sure that the Parliament welcomes the fact that he is engaging in those European discussions. I will ensure that, as soon as he returns, he is made aware of the concerns that Mr Crawford has raised so forcefully.

I agree that the creation of a single water authority does not automatically mean the centralisation of the delivery of the water authority's services. I know that Ross Finnie is keen to ensure that we have the highest quality water standards throughout Scotland. That is why we have already appointed the water industry commissioner, who is also examining issues such as efficiency and value for money for customers. Ross Finnie's driving desires in creating a single water authority are to ensure that customers' needs throughout Scotland are recognised, that  our massive £1.8 billion investment programme progresses efficiently and effectively and that people throughout Scotland benefit from the higher water quality standards that the new investment and new water board will provide.

I will certainly not go beyond my brief and answer questions that Ross Finnie has not enabled me to answer. As the minister has said, the driving force behind the creation of the single water authority is the creation of an efficient water industry that deals effectively with competition to ensure efficient prices throughout Scotland. One of the core objectives behind the appointment of the water industry commissioner is the provision of an independent and objective system that will ensure that the current water boards and the delivery of the investment programme are managed in the best possible way, and that they are managed in the interests of individual domestic customers and the business community.

That is an operational matter for ScotRail and Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive, but I understand that there are on-going negotiations on the matter.

I am happy to acknowledge that the member has been trying to persuade the two parties to get moving on this issue. Being able to access directly the Edinburgh and Glasgow services has been a huge benefit to people in the Croy area. As the member said, we now have a car-park problem because so many people are using the station. I am happy to make people aware that there are opportunities under the public transport fund for operators and local authorities to work together to submit partnership bids. However, we will have a while to wait because we have just gone through the round for this year's public transport fund. I hope that the fact that Cathie Craigie has raised the issue and has been pursuing it will lead to a speedy resolution in the next year.

I accept the member's point that he wishes action to be taken on the issue, as does the whole chamber. It would be highly inappropriate for me to involve myself in land-acquisition negotiations on every railway issue in the country. The key issue is that ScotRail and SPTE work together with the council, as Andrew Wilson suggested.

That was a helpful contribution. Access to our railway network is a key issue, on which the public transport fund and discussions on the next franchise come into play, as it was a clear issue in the consultation exercise that we conducted last year. I am happy to reassure Brian Fitzpatrick on that point.

We plan to publish, by the end of  this year, guidance that will include a checklist of issues relating to gender. It will be for the use of central Government, local authorities and transport operators in designing and implementing policies, programmes and services.

The key issue that we want to put across with the guidelines is the fact that many transport operators have not considered the needs of women at all. The research that we have carried out shows that women are concerned about safety and comfort and about physical access. Better lighting, safe car parking, low-floor buses, lifts and ramps, and better storage space for buggies and luggage are the kind of practical improvements that we want operators to work with us to deliver. I hope that the guidelines will raise awareness and will put those issues firmly on the agenda of transport operators.

Yes.

The Executive will allocate £16 million to Strathclyde Passenger Transport as part of a joint £23 million package for the Larkhall to Milngavie rail project. We have also announced funding totalling £880,000 from our rural transport fund for the improvement of rural public transport services in South Lanarkshire between 1998-99 and March 2004. Furthermore, three community organisations in Clydesdale have received almost £112,000 for local rural transport initiatives.

Now that the money is on the table, two key issues have to be resolved. First, there must be negotiations involving the Executive, SPT, Railtrack, Scotrail and the Strategic Rail Authority to ensure that the performance regime is in place for approval by the rail regulator. Secondly, we must secure a contractual deal on signalling timing, which must be agreed between SPT and Railtrack. We are actively pursuing those matters.

According to the contract that Railtrack currently has on its books—which, as I told Karen Gillon, is the key matter for discussion—the Larkhall line will be reopened by 2003. We must find out about Railtrack's resources as far as signalling is concerned, and hope that putting money on the table will make our discussions more fruitful. Mr Ingram did not mention the fact that we are reopening a 4.7km railway line from Larkhall to Hamilton Central and the Dawsholm section of the Anniesland to Maryhill line. We are opening new railway stations across Scotland and are dealing with an historic underinvestment in rail infrastructure. More railway stations will open as a result of the public transport fund in future. The most important point is that today we have given the go-ahead to ensuring that the rail companies will examine the Larkhall line. The SNP would do well to congratulate us on that instead of trying to ignore the fact.

We have come to the end of a substantial and wide-ranging discussion about the bill. The issue has had considerably more of an airing than would have been the case if an order had been passed timeously in the first instance. Before devolution, a matter such as this would probably have slipped through unnoticed. It is a testament to the procedures of our Parliament that we have had an extensive debate today. This has not been about sidestepping Parliament or reducing Parliament's legitimate right of scrutiny. I said last week, when I discovered that there had been an administrative error, that it was deeply unfortunate. Today has been about quick, decisive and accountable action to put right that unfortunate and regrettable mistake.  I will touch briefly on some of the key issues that members have raised in the debate. It has given us the opportunity to think through some of the substantial themes and issues raised by members, such as public accountability and the role of Parliament in scrutinising the Executive and the legislation that it brings forward. We have discussed efficient administration; in particular, the need for the Executive to improve its procedures, investigate what went wrong in this situation, learn from that experience and ensure that we put in the right kind of information technology procedures and management procedures to prevent this kind of thing from happening again. We have also had a lengthy debate on the balance of responsibility between use payers and the general taxpayer for funding transport facilities. We have also had the beginnings of a useful discussion on the social, economic and environmental well-being of areas around the Erskine bridge. We have had that discussion on other bridge areas but the local members—Des McNulty, Trish Godman and Hugh Henry—have put important issues on the agenda today. I reiterate that the bill, which is what we are here to discuss, does no more than put us back to where we should have been two months ago. It has not been a cunning dodge. It is not about stealth taxes or about removing the Parliament's powers of scrutiny. I have not even taken the opportunity to simplify some of the arcane accounting and legislative provisions that we inherited from more than 30 years ago. The bill is a straightforward rectification of an unfortunate mistake. It is a rapid response to clarify the law and to stop the haemorrhaging of thousands—and over time perhaps millions—of pounds of public funds, funds that would otherwise have had to come from taxpayers' pockets to pay for the upkeep of an important piece of our national infrastructure. The funds would have had to come from other vital transport programmes and projects. The SNP has suggested that I should merely go to Angus MacKay and say, "Can I have another 5 million quid please, Angus?" I am afraid that government does not work like that. There are severe pressures on our budgets. We must budget properly and take decisions for the long term. We cannot make off-the-cuff comments in the chamber. Managing our budget responsibly means that we must take tough decisions. We have heard nothing from the SNP about how it would find the funds to replace lost revenue from the tolls. It has told us to find the funds ourselves.

No thank you.  The SNP has done what it always does. It has criticised, it has been negative and it has indulged in opportunism, breathtakingly in the case of their final response to the chamber on the Erskine bridge. What we needed to do today was to fix the problem that was brought to our attention. There will be future opportunities to discuss the Erskine bridge, if Parliament and the Transport and the Environment Committee want to take them. There will be opportunities to review the toll order in 2006. Today is about putting things right. I commend the bill to Parliament.

During the summer, I answered that question in a written answer to two of Mr Ingram's party colleagues.

The Executive believes that amendment 2 is another attempt by the SNP to be clever. It is an attempt—I do not say that it is successful. The intention is to give pause for further consideration of the issue, but the amendment does not achieve that. The amendment would run the risk of bringing the bill and the Erskine Bridge Tolls Act 1968 to an end after a single year. The work load issues that Murray Tosh so ably mentioned are also involved. If the Parliament agreed to the amendment, it would go back on its acceptance of the general principles of the bill. The bill resuscitates the 1968 act. If the bill came to an end after a year, so would the 1968 act, including the bill's retrospective provision to correct the error that was made. Chaos would result. If the 1968 act came to an end, so would tolling on the Erskine bridge. Accusations of stealth taxation were made this morning. Amendment 2 is a stealth amendment. It is dressed up to make it look as though the SNP is interested in consultation. As Des McNulty said this morning, its interest in consultation on the issue is recent. The amendment would knock holes in the transport programme without saying how the gaps would be plugged. Even if we accept that the amendment would simply extend the operation of tolls by a year so that further consideration could be given to the general principles, we reject the  amendment. As the chamber implicitly accepted, five years is a sensible time frame in which to consider the issues. An annual extension would not provide a stable or sustainable approach to planning the maintenance or operation of a major piece of infrastructure with a lifetime of 120 years. Five years offers more balance between democratic accountability and good management of a national asset. The bridge accounts are laid before the Parliament every year. Members will continue to be able to challenge the Executive.

No. Amendment 2 is another example of the opportunism that the SNP demonstrated this morning.

No. It would be simply ridiculous to include a provision that would bring the bill to an end a year from now. The SNP should come clean and say that it wants to stop tolling altogether. I ask the chamber to resist amendment 2—it is inept and could lead to chaos.

Amendment 1 demonstrates starkly that the SNP's arguments in the debate this morning were based on a misreading of the Erskine Bridge Tolls Act 1968. We were told that the Erskine Bridge Tolls Bill would take away a basic democratic right, that we are riding roughshod over local opinion by introducing a new toll order without a local inquiry and that section 3 of the Erskine Bridge Tolls Act 1968 requires that an order to extend the tolling period is subject to local consultation. Amendment 1 shows that we were right when we pointed out that the SNP's interpretation was wrong.

No, thank you. Amendment 1 seeks to amend section 3 of the Erskine Bridge Tolls Act 1968 so that an order seeking to extend the tolling period would have the same degree of consultation as one that sought to change the toll level. I am surprised that the SNP has not sought to make the amendment retrospective, so as to validate what SNP members said before lunch. For a party that talks about rewriting history, that is a bit rich. As we pointed out this morning, the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991 is not relevant, because the bridge was built under the Erskine Bridge Tolls Act 1968.

No, thank you. The New Roads and Street Works Act 1991 relates to roads constructed after 1991. The real issue, which was raised by Lloyd  Quinan and other members this morning, is that consultation is important. The virtue of the Erskine Bridge Tolls Act 1968 is that it recognises that the level of scrutiny provided under section 3 is appropriate to a change in the toll regime. It is only right and proper that a change in the level of the tolls should involve a wider debate than a simple toll extension. Amendment 1 is a sledgehammer to crack a nut. It is all too typical of some of the comments that we heard this morning and the disproportionate approach that the SNP has taken to today's proceedings. I ask the chamber to resist amendment 1.

The Scottish Executive is in regular contact with ScotRail and the Strategic Rail Authority on a wide range of issues, including levels and standards of service.

Many of us in this chamber have had the experience that the member outlines. We will ensure that the issues are passed through the appropriate channels. For the benefit of all members, I highlight the fact that the Rail Passengers Committee for Scotland is the port of call for passenger complaints. It has a statutory role in discussions with the Strategic Rail Authority. Overcrowding, customer services and the quality of services delivered will be key issues when we deal with the renewal of the ScotRail franchise, which runs out in 2004. The matters that Mr Johnstone raises are regularly brought to my attention and we make sure that they are also brought to the attention of the Strategic Rail Authority and ScotRail. The matter is not only an issue for the train operating company but an issue in terms of the fulfilment of the franchise commitments.

I am sure that the member will be aware that the campaign to electrify the remainder of the east coast main line has now moved on to consider a series of initiatives aimed at speeding up the line between Edinburgh and Aberdeen. Connecting Aberdeen with Edinburgh is vital and we must ensure that the train can compete with the private car—at present, the  speed with which the train travels from Edinburgh to Dundee and Aberdeen is matched by the private car. That issue is part of the long-term development of the east coast main line. Electrification is not the only issue that we must consider. For example, the new gas-powered turbine trains could deliver our aims efficiently. I agree with the member's desire to improve speeds on that line and I stress that that desire is shared by the Executive.

The member misunderstands the point. The new generation of trains will operate not only on the line from London to Edinburgh but onwards to Aberdeen and Inverness. The critical issue is journey times. That has to be addressed when the east coast main line is fully renewed, which we expect to happen.

We have no plans to introduce measures, through the Parliament, in respect of the Tay bridge. However, we plan to introduce the order that I recommended during the passage of the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001, to tackle congestion on the Forth road bridge and to enable investment to be made in transport methods around the bridge in the light of the local transport strategies produced by the new charging authority. Annabel Goldie has highlighted the fact that there are different approaches to tolling on our bridges. The bill will not address those different approaches; it will merely put in place what should have been there had we presented an order to cover the extension from 2 July.

It is important to clarify that the construction costs were nearly £11 million. Major strengthening work was carried out in the late 1970s and major waterproofing and resurfacing work was carried out in 1994-95. Those works were carried out automatically. There was no question that they would not be carried out—they were not put in a queue with the other trunk road priorities at the time. The member must take account of the longer-term costs of the bridge. Although the latest accounts show a surplus of toll receipts over costs incurred, expenditure on the bridge in other years has exceeded receipts. We guarantee to drivers who cross the Erskine bridge that, because of the tolls that they pay, the required works on the bridge will always be carried out. As more drivers use the bridge, more works will be required in future. The toll that they pay ensures that the work will continue timeously.

To clarify matters and to give some helpful information, let me add that the SPICe note does not take into account all the costs of maintenance and major bridge works. I am not saying that there have not been years when there has been a surplus, but the figure does not take into account the cost of the bridge or all the works that have been carried out on it. The toll regime was established by the 1968 act.

The bill that I lay before Parliament today has one purpose and one purpose only: to establish a toll collection regime on the Erskine bridge on the same basis as the regime that was in place immediately before 2 July 2001. Before turning to the detail of what is proposed, I will set the bill and the events that led to its introduction in a wider context. The Erskine bridge was built in response to local demand and the local authorities agreed that it should be tolled at the time. If tolls had not been charged then, it is unlikely that the bridge would have been built when it was. Thus tolls have been levied on the Erskine bridge since it was first opened to traffic on 2 July 1971. The power to levy tolls at the bridge was originally set out in the Erskine Bridge Tolls Act 1968, which set the initial tolling period of 20 years from July 1971. It also enabled the Secretary of State for Scotland—and now, under devolution, Scottish ministers—to extend by order the tolling period by five years. The original tolling period was extended for five years in 1991 and again in 1996 by the then Tory Government. When the bridge was opened in 1971, the toll was 15p. If that had been uprated by inflation, drivers would now be paying £1.25, but they do not—they pay 60p because the tolls were increased to 60p in 1992. I stress that the bill does not change the cost of the tolls by a penny.

Annabel Goldie is correct. However, one thing that is different about the Erskine bridge is that road haulage industry  vehicles pay the same as those cars that cross the bridge and are required to pay a toll. That gives the Erskine bridge a distinction In terms of the broader economic interests in the west of Scotland. In August 2000, I decided that the tolling period should be extended before the 1996 order lapsed on 1 July 2001. I instructed officials to prepare the necessary statutory instrument. As members and everyone in the country know, there was an administrative error and that did not happen. The principle of tolling at the Erskine bridge has been a policy of successive Administrations from both sides of the political spectrum. The Erskine bridge is not an isolated case. The practice of tolling major estuarial crossings is commonplace throughout Europe and further afield. France, Germany and Norway all levy tolls on such crossings. Closer to home, the Severn and Humber bridges are tolled—so too are three other bridges in Scotland. All the countries that I mentioned levy tolls because they believe that the users of major estuarial crossings, which are expensive to construct and maintain, should contribute to costs. They believe that the costs to the users are outweighed by the benefits that the users receive in quicker and more reliable journey times. The Executive believes that those arguments still hold good for the Erskine bridge. That is why I decided in August 2000 to extend tolling from July 2001 to July 2006. Undoubtedly, members will say that there are different issues in relation to different bridges. Members of the Transport and the Environment Committee and others will remember our debate last year on the Forth and Tay road bridge provisions during the passage of the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. There was an extensive debate about tolling on bridges. Other bridges were mentioned by Labour members of the committee, rather than by SNP members, as Des McNulty mentioned.

I will not take the member's point. I will bring forward an order shortly on the Forth road bridge so that the new Forth road bridge board can tackle congestion on the bridge. We discussed that issue extensively in respect of the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. The consequences of not tolling would be costly. Members know that tolls benefit the public purse to the tune of about £100,000 a week or £5 million a year. We should be clear about what the loss of such sums to the transport budget could mean.

No, thank you. I will continue. In the past two years, there has been substantial investment in the Erskine area. There have been major works around the M8 St James interchange, carriage reconstruction in Milton village, strengthening and structural work to the bridge itself and works to the M8 and M898 junctions at Craigton. Those who oppose the bill must come clean. Where will the additional £5 million come from? If there is no additional money, which transport projects would they cut?

Duncan McNeil is right to suggest that if we pass the bill today nothing in the roads programme will be put at risk. We intend to take action on the bridge to which he referred later this year. That is why we must act prudently. To drop tolls on the Erskine bridge would be easy; it would be a quick, populist gesture. However, it would simply give rise to an increase in traffic with a knock-on effect on the quality of the local environment. Dropping tolls would also leave a long-term hole in the public finances. That would have serious consequences for the improvement of transport in Scotland. Government is about tough choices and this is one choice that we should not duck. The Erskine Bridge Tolls Bill is short. It raises no new issues and has no read-across to any of the other toll bridges in Scotland, each of which has its own separate statutory authority. The primary purpose of the bill is simply to establish a toll collection regime on the same basis as the one that was in place immediately before 2 July 2001. In keeping with that desire simply to rectify the situation, the period of extension remains five years, in line with the provisions of the 1968 act. Similarly, Parliament's right of scrutiny remains unchanged. Any subsequent order to extend the tolling period by a further five years from 2 July 2006 would be subject to the affirmative procedure and would have to be passed by Parliament. The bill also leaves the toll level at 60p for cars and other vehicles and the category of exempt vehicles remains unchanged. There have been calls to provide some form of payment holiday equal in length to the 60 days in which we unknowingly and unlawfully levied a toll at Erskine bridge. I considered that carefully but concluded that such a payment holiday is unjustified and would be unworkable.

No. I want to clarify the point. We have simply no way of knowing who crossed the Erskine bridge between midnight on 2 July and 8.50 pm on 30 August 2001. To offer to make payments on unsubstantiated claims would open the Executive to accusations of misuse of public funds. Moreover, it is unlikely that a payment holiday would compensate the same drivers who crossed during the 60 days in July and August. Some motorists would pass through for free and others with a legitimate claim would not. The payment holiday is a flawed idea. It is superficially attractive but in practice it would be little more than an expensive gesture. The bill simply restores Scottish ministers' rights to collect tolls from July 2001. It is drafted to meet all the requirements of the European convention on human rights—the Executive's lawyers and the parliamentary authorities agree on that. Subject to parliamentary approval, the current toll-free period will end once the bill receives royal assent. To drop tolls on the Erskine bridge would achieve nothing in respect of Scotland's long-term transport problems and our long-term ambitions. Every member knows that there are huge pressures in our roads network. The £660 million motorway and trunk road programme from 2001 to 2004 is fully committed. I see no logic in increasing the strain on that budget further. The letters that I have received from members and local lobbying to me on safety issues and urgent road improvements back up that argument. We should not seek a quick, populist fix. We should focus our sights on the real transport issues that we all face. Nobody likes bridge tolls, but they are a necessary part of the transport finance regime in Scotland and in many other countries. The episode has been a deeply unfortunate administrative error but we are determined to learn lessons. The investigation that I have ordered will put us on that path but we should move on to the task in hand. I hope that Parliament will endorse the bill. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Erskine Bridge Tolls Bill.

I confirm that I did not receive an order to sign. I also confirm that Nicola Munro, the new head of department, took over the department after 1 July.

I inform the member that his interpretation is incorrect. The Transport and the Environment Committee would have considered a statutory instrument, but no opportunity for an inquiry would have existed, because the statutory instrument would not have increased tolls at the bridge, but merely reinstated them, as will the bill. The member's point was inaccurate and I hope that he is grateful for that intervention.

I will introduce legislation to restore tolls on the Erskine bridge. The need for such legislation comes about for one reason only—administrative error in promoting an order extending the toll. That order would have required approval by Parliament—a much less complex process than that which we face today. I will set out why we must legislate quickly to rectify the error. We must clarify the currently uncertain legal position. We must leave motorists in no doubt about where they stand. Most important, we must ensure that the unforeseen gap in the public finances is filled. The cessation of tolling is costing the public purse about £100,000 a week. If tolling is not restored, the shortfall will have to be met by cutting expenditure on transport. Do critics of tolling really want £5 million pounds less to be spent on roads? We must act quickly. That is why I ask Parliament for its approval to rectify the mistake by means of an emergency bill under rule 9.21 of the standing orders. I deeply regret that we have to take up parliamentary time to do this, but it is important that we put Executive action back on a sound statutory footing as soon as possible. The fast-track procedures available to us today are clearly the most appropriate way to do that. The bill is very short; it raises no new issues and it will not delay other measures in our legislative programme. We will debate the detail of the bill later today, subject of course to Parliament's approval to do so, but I take the opportunity to comment on one feature of the bill. In drafting the bill, we have been guided by one aim—to establish a toll collection regime on exactly the same basis as that which was in place before 2  July 2001. We believe that the proposed Erskine Bridge Tolls Bill does that. The period of extension remains five years, in line with the provisions of the Erskine Bridge Tolls Act 1968, and Parliament's right of scrutiny remains unchanged. The toll regime on the Erskine bridge therefore remains unchanged. It is appropriate to examine the timetable of events that led to the failure to extend the tolling order from 2 July; it is important that I put that in front of the Parliament today. The Erskine Bridge Tolls Act 1968 set the initial tolling power of 20 years from July 1971. The Tory Government extended that for five years in 1991 and in 1996. In August 2000 I decided that the tolling period should be extended before the 1996 order lapsed on 1 July 2001. I instructed officials to act on that. It is unfortunate that that power to toll was not renewed earlier in the summer because of administrative error. The error was first drawn to senior officials' attention on the morning of Monday 27 August. I was informed at the first opportunity on that day. Legal advice was sought on Tuesday 28  August and I alerted the Cabinet the same day. Consideration of the legal and practical arrangements continued through Wednesday and Thursday and I received definitive legal advice on Thursday evening, which made a clear case for the suspension of tolls.

I will come to the issue of how we ensure that mistakes such as this do not happen again. Murray Tosh is right. We must ensure that the procedures and the circumstances surrounding this case are properly investigated. I will deal with that matter shortly. As soon as I received the definitive legal advice on Thursday evening that made the case for the suspension of tolls, I immediately ordered a temporary halt to tolling, effective from 20:50 on that day. Tolls have now not been levied on the Erskine bridge for six days, at a cost to the taxpayer of around £14,000 every day. Those costs will be met from end-year savings on the motorway and trunk roads programme. The Executive will continue to meet its contractual obligations to the toll-collection company, APCOA Parking (UK) Ltd. We currently pay APCOA a monthly management fee of just under £50,000 to collect the tolls on the Erskine bridge. I clarify to  Parliament that I have not stopped payment to the company during the current cessation of tolling. That monthly fee will enable the company to maintain staffing levels and ensure that people's jobs are not put at risk because of an Executive failure. I now come to the substantive point raised by Murray Tosh. I have asked the head of my department to investigate the circumstances surrounding the error and to make recommendations designed to prevent such a situation from happening again. I have made it clear that I expect a full report in a matter of days. That report will likely consider the use of information technology systems for statutory instruments that require periodic renewal or amendment. The recommendations of that report will be made available in accordance with our policies and practices on freedom of information. What matters to us all, I believe, is that in the long term we learn the lessons of this unfortunate error. We need to understand what went wrong. The personnel implications are clearly a matter for the head of department. However, I promise that any procedural improvements—

I   will take a brief intervention.

That matter must be taken up by my head of department, Nicola Munro, when she is looking at all the circumstances surrounding the error. It is important that all the issues are looked at properly. That is why I want the recommendations to be made public. I want members of Parliament to see what lessons we have learned from this experience. I promise that procedural improvements—

No. I have just dealt with one of the member's colleagues. Any procedural improvements that are recommended will be introduced throughout the Executive. We will publish those recommendations, because we are determined to ensure that such an error does not happen again.  The Opposition has claimed that this episode has wider ramifications and that the failure to renew the order is the latest example of financial and administrative mismanagement by the Executive. I fundamentally disagree with that. This is a deeply unfortunate error, but an error nonetheless. Last year, 453 statutory instruments were laid before the Parliament. Since the Parliament opened in July 1999, some 950 statutory instruments have been processed. To the best of my knowledge, this is the first statutory instrument to slip through the net and we must address why it did so. However, it is important that we get the matter in perspective. One out of 950 is one too many, but it is not symptomatic of a wider systems failure, nor is it evidence of the Executive failing to manage public funds properly. The real test of any system is its ability to respond to deficiencies and we are absolutely determined to ensure that the improvements that we put in place will prevent such an error from happening again. This is a serious and a regrettable error. It is, moreover, an error that, if not put right, will cost millions. That is why, to put matters right, I ask Parliament to support the Executive's motion. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Erskine Bridge Tolls Bill be treated as an Emergency Bill.

The summons has been served and will be lodged for calling at the Court of Session at the beginning of July. The identity of the parties will come into the public domain only when the summons is called. The case will then proceed under the normal rules of the court.

I am happy to tell the member that the Executive is seeking to recover the full cost of repairs plus interest from August 1996 to the present day, which is a substantial amount of money. If the Executive is successful, I will be happy to consider where to spend that money most effectively.

Freight facilities grant awards made by the Scottish Executive during the past six months will remove a further 5 million lorry miles from Scotland's roads each year.

We are conscious that it is an uphill struggle to persuade people to move off the roads and on to rail. Everyone in the chamber will be aware that in the months since Hatfield there has been immense strain on the railway network, which has been a particular problem for freight hauliers who use it. We are keen to restore confidence in the rail network. Over the next three years, we are doubling the amount of money that is available under freight facilities grants. It is important, however, that we process every grant properly. The Executive is taking steps to ensure that it can process grant applications as efficiently as possible and that we have accurate, hard information when we hand out Executive money for new rail projects.

That is precisely what we are trying to achieve through the rural transport fund and the community transport fund. The evaluation that I discussed threw up many of the issues to which Mr Welsh has referred. That is the precisely the type of agenda that we aim to follow. Furthermore, with our new public transport information, which will apply across Scotland, we are keen to do more in that regard.

May I make a brief intervention to put information on the record?

Mr Brown was passing on representations from his constituents. I responded to Mr Mundell's points about transport problems in south-west Scotland. I understood that he was making points as a regional list member. I hope that that is a helpful clarification.

It is important that we debate this issue in Parliament this afternoon. For too long, transport was at the bottom of the previous Government's priorities and rural transport was starved of investment. With the election of a Labour Government in May 1997, we saw new impetus, new investment and new determination to improve rural transport. The early creation by Labour of the rural transport fund brought new investment of more than £14 million, creating 380 new rural services—mainly bus services, but including some ferry services and support for air services—and supporting 100 new rural community transport projects. There is a new focus on lifeline services, with investment in new airport terminals at Kirkwall and Stornoway and two new vessels for Caledonian MacBrayne services to the small isles and on the Uig to Tarbert and Lochmaddy service. That investment is all part of our record support for lifeline services, with a record investment of £19 million this year. Our Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition built on that investment in the spending review by allocating an extra £60 million to enhance transport in the Highlands and Islands. The rural transport fund—which has already backed many crucial initiatives for isolated communities—will expand by £4.5 million over the same period, to £18 million. That is a 33 per cent rise. Those figures are important, but the real difference is on the impact on individuals and communities throughout rural Scotland. The coalition recognises the importance of vital links to remote and rural communities. That is why we are prioritising those links and providing record levels of support for Highlands and Islands Airport Ltd and Caledonian MacBrayne. The new contract for northern isles services will bring three new vessels, timetable improvements and lower fares. The new investment in airport terminals at Kirkwall and Stornoway will improve the travelling  experience for all who use those vital airports. The investment will particularly benefit passengers with accessibility problems. Accessibility needs to be improved in the new facilities. The new instrument landing system at Kirkwall will improve the reliability of flights in and out of Orkney. Record assistance to HIAL—£16.2 million in 2001-02—keeps costs down for users of the company's 10 airports. Without subsidy, 782,500 passengers last year would have had to pay much higher fares and many would not have been able to travel. The new rural transport fund, which was launched in 1998, aimed at tackling underinvestment in rural transport by improving scheduled services, providing massive support to rural community transport and supporting rural petrol stations that are most vulnerable to closure. The fund is targeted at those who need it most and shows our commitment to social justice, with its emphasis on funding allocations to remoter areas with the most widely dispersed populations. Local authorities with a rural population benefit. The only parts of Scotland without direct benefit are the four city authorities. That testifies to our delivery of social justice. Rural community transport investment is targeted at those who cannot use conventional public transport or where conventional public transport is uneconomical. The rural petrol stations grant scheme helps small petrol stations in particular to carry out capital works that they could not otherwise afford. The scheme maintains a network of vital rural petrol stations. Its emphasis has now changed to ensure that we can help to promote the supply of liquefied petroleum gas in rural areas. More than 350 new and improved bus services are running as a direct result of Executive grants to local authorities. Those are backed up by new powers in the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. I want to give some sense of the qualitative change that we are beginning to deliver. Recent evaluation shows that a high proportion of the users of those services had no access to a car and that one third would not have been able to travel without them. In the remoter areas, the impact is even more dramatic. Half of all journeys on those services would simply not have been made without our investment. That is clear proof that we are enabling people to move about in rural areas. Rural community transport initiatives have supported 100 projects throughout rural Scotland. They target remote areas in particular. They also target assistance for people who are not able to use traditional public transport services or for whom scheduled services are not the most efficient way of delivering transport.  The kinds of projects that we have been able to assist have included group hire schemes in Annandale and Ellon, dial-a-bus schemes in Buchan and on Lewis, social car schemes in Badenoch and Strathspey and in Perthshire, the community ferry between Kilchoan and Tobermory, and development officers who help to empower communities to devise and deliver their own solutions to their transport needs. For rural community transport, our evaluation shows that 75 per cent of journeys would not have been made without the schemes that we support. We are getting people out of their homes, getting them moving and getting them involved and included in the community life that most people just take for granted. I am keen that we build on the work that has been done so far and I pay tribute to the vital role of the Community Transport Association in actively supporting local groups. I can announce today that I am awarding another £300,000 over the next three years to the CTA to expand its work in rural Scotland. The CTA has proven its worth. We want it to do more. The new money will allow it to employ a second rural worker and support even more groups. I will give a practical example—the Wigtownshire community transport project. It shows the power of the rural community transport initiative and is a good example of joined-up government. Just over two years ago, I gave a grant to establish the project in Wigtownshire to co-ordinate the considerable resources that were already available in the area and to involve a range of agencies, such as social work services, community health services and voluntary organisations. The project also includes work on a range of initiatives to support people with disabilities, to raise awareness of transport issues for people with disabilities and to identify opportunities for new ways to deliver transport. Part of the project was a study into the requirements for a car scheme in the Wigtownshire area. It identified the problem of people becoming increasingly isolated and socially excluded because of their inability to obtain transport. The study highlighted the need for a more demand-responsive transport service—different from the approach that we have traditionally taken. As a result of the study, the co-ordination project applied for a further grant to purchase a small multipurpose vehicle to address the more individual needs of the community. Last month, I was delighted to be able to give the go-ahead for a further grant of £26,000 for the purchase and operation of a purpose-built vehicle. The small projects are as critical as some of the big projects.

I am aware of the problem that David Mundell identifies. That is why I have had discussions with Russell Brown. I know that Elaine Murray is also very interested in the subject. Russell Brown, the MP for the area, has a meeting arranged with Stagecoach. The issue is Stagecoach's services in that part of the world. David Mundell, as a list MSP, will know that the problems go wider than small individual areas. We have the problem of the deregulated bus market across Scotland. Through our community transport initiatives and our rural transport investment, we are trying to build on the services. Does Mr Crawford want to correct me on something?

Absolutely not. I regularly receive representations from MPs and MSPs. Regardless of their party, I listen to what people tell me about what is happening in rural areas. It is important that such information is fed through, because it is the Scottish Parliament that has the powers to improve rural services and put new investment into them. I thought that Mr Crawford was going to correct me because I had got somebody's name wrong. The other key area in which we are investing new resources through our grant scheme is rural petrol stations. So far, 19 petrol stations have been assisted with the installation of new tanks or pumps. That has helped to provide four new LPG outlets in the Highlands and Islands. There have been particular benefits in Ardnamurchan and Coll. In Ardnamurchan, two petrol stations closed before the introduction of the scheme, leaving only three to serve the area. All three were very vulnerable and needed major investment to bring them up to European environmental standards.  Where there was not a prospect of a return on that investment for the operator, the rural petrol stations grant scheme has provided the catalyst for partnership with the local enterprise company and the local authority, and for European funding, to allow the operator to replace tanks—one of which was 60 years old—and pumps. That has kept the petrol stations open as a vital resource for locals and tourists alike. Everyone in those communities is very keen on such projects. They regard their rural petrol stations as giving vital local access. On Coll, the community owns the petrol. We supported it in renewing tanks and pumps. The next nearest petrol station to islanders on Coll is four hours away by boat, in Oban. Our grant scheme has made a real difference in keeping that community viable. Rural Scotland has benefited not only from the specific support that we have provided through our rural grants: rural areas have also gained from national programmes such as the public transport fund, investment in trunk roads and freight facilities grants to railways. Public transport fund investment has supported projects across Scotland. Benefiting rural Scotland are the Eriskay causeway project, the Sound of Barra integrated transport project in the Western Isles and a new vessel for the Corran ferry in the Highland Council area. Eriskay is one of the most peripheral areas of the UK and the causeway will reduce the isolation of islanders, increase access to employment opportunities, health care and leisure facilities, and reduce travel time and costs. The causeway to South Uist is expected to be complete in the autumn and improvements to ferry services across the Sound of Barra will be completed next year. The new Corran ferry will increase capacity for all traffic, particularly coaches and commercial traffic. It will provide improved links with Ardnamurchan, Morvern and Mull and will reduce traffic on fragile local roads. That new vessel is just coming into service. We have also invested in our trunk roads network. In March, I announced a £680 million investment package over the next three years. It sets out a programme of smart, targeted improvements across Scotland that will make a real difference to local people. Of the 63 schemes that have been announced, a significant number will help to improve strategic road links in rural areas. There are 12 schemes in south-west Scotland, on the A75, A76 and A77. There are major improvements to the A1 and A68 in and around the Scottish Borders. There are seven schemes in the north-east and junction improvements on the A9 at North Kessock and Bankfoot. Further targeted schemes in rural areas  include the upgrading of the A830 between Arisaig and Kinsadel, and the replacement of the main deck of the A87 on the Shiel bridge. The total cost of those schemes amounts to more than £92 million in the next three years alone. I am looking at bringing forward further schemes later in the year. In particular, we are considering the completion of the A830 route to Mallaig. Tenders have been received for that £11 million project and we are considering what more could be done. We are currently examining options prepared by consultants for a series of improvement works to the A9 north of Helmsdale and will look hard at progressing our top priorities. Our freight facilities grant is opening up opportunities across rural Scotland. It is particularly worth highlighting the new rail freight opportunities from the central belt to Inverness, Wick and beyond. We have delivered an awful lot, but there is much more still to do. We cannot turn around the previous lack of priority and underinvestment in one go. However, the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition is making a real difference to people's lives in rural areas and to rural communities. I find the suggestion in the SNP amendment that we are complacent outrageous. If my Executive colleagues would give me more money, I would spend it. Government is about tough choices—not just in my portfolio, but across the Executive. I could spend more money in every area of rural transport. Over the next three years, our programme will allow us to do just that. I call on the SNP to acknowledge that we have made progress and that, at least, we have made rural transport a high priority and are keen to do more. In respect of the Conservative amendment, I am very keen to take forward route action plans across our rural areas. We have yet to present our conclusions on the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee report, but we will do so in due course. It is a constructive and helpful report. In suggesting that I am not keen to accept the Conservative amendment, I would point out that that is not because we do not want to see action on both those issues in the future, but that we need to consider them properly. We have done a lot, but there is a lot more to do. Our increased funding will deliver more over the next three years. We have a lot of which to be proud. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Executive's commitment to improving transport in rural Scotland, notes the progress that has been made by investing in lifeline air and ferry services, rail and bus services, community transport, petrol stations and roads that serve remote and rural communities, and recognises the vital role that these  record levels of investment play in improving people's lives in rural Scotland.

I wrote to Dennis Canavan on 20 April about the new trunk roads maintenance contracts. I am still considering whether further steps can be taken on the pensions of those employees who transfer to the new operating companies under the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations. I will write to Dennis Canavan once I have concluded how to proceed.

The letter that I wrote to Mr Canavan last week was intended to reply to the points that he made in his letter in December and other contacts that he has made since. We are looking at the matter with the greatest urgency and, when I have a response to make, I will ensure that those members who have written to me—I have answered the other points that they have made on the trunk roads contracts—will get a reply on this issue.

If Duncan Hamilton had listened to the whole of my speech, he would have heard that that is precisely what we are doing, day in, day out, with the UK Government. We are promoting Scotland's interests at the UK level and we are working in Scotland to deliver what is within our powers.

Today, we have two opportunities to debate the transport issues that affect rural Scotland: this afternoon, the Executive will set out the positive steps we are taking across rural Scotland to address the transport needs of rural communities. Our agenda is positive. It is the result of hard and persistent effort and we have worked closely with rural communities, making a difference to real people in their daily lives. By contrast, this morning's debate has nothing to do with making a difference to rural Scotland and everything to do with electoral opportunism and political hypocrisy. SNP members think that if they shout loud enough, no one will notice the hollowness of their  position. Rural Scotland will not be deceived: rural Scotland wants real progress on the ground, not empty gestures. We recognise the real concerns of many rural communities about high fuel prices and poor public transport services and that Scottish rural motorists travel longer distances, spend a higher share of their income on motoring and have fewer alternative forms of transport. There is also a substantial differential between prices in Scotland's remoter rural areas and elsewhere. Prices in Sutherland, the northern isles and the Western Isles are on average about 7p to 9p a litre higher than prices in the central belt. As MSPs from the Highlands and Islands know too well, the differentials are even higher in many instances. Those serious issues need to be addressed in a serious manner, not with nationalist scaremongering. The nationalists' antics do a disservice to those they purport to help. That is particularly the case when rural Scotland is suffering from the effects of foot-and-mouth disease.

No thank you; I have just started. After so much struggle and effort by so many, the situation in Scotland appears to be improving, despite the disappointment of the confirmed cases further east, near Duns in the Borders. Ross Finnie is coming to the chamber to make a statement on that situation shortly. Against that backdrop, the SNP has lodged a motion that raises the spectre of further large-scale price rises and that casually promises reductions in fuel duty. What are the facts? Diesel prices have stayed constant, so Scotland's hauliers are paying no more this week than they were last month. We accept that Scotland's haulage industry has a major agenda that needs to be addressed, which is why we are working to implement proposals to improve the situation. As for the cost of petrol, pump prices have risen about 1.5p a litre over the past few weeks. What are the facts about fuel duty? Our debate should be honest. Fuel duty is a sizeable source of revenue, raising about £23 billion in the past year, which is more than 6 per cent of the total UK tax take. That revenue has not been disappearing into a black hole; it is funding schools, hospitals, local government, environmental protection and transport.

Yes.

Annabel Goldie is referring to the SNP's policy and the point that she makes is at the heart of this issue. I will speak about what Gordon Brown has done later in my speech. Ten pence a gallon off fuel duty makes a great slogan and harmonisation of fuel taxes across Europe is a great piece of rhetoric, but what of the reality? It is interesting that Mr MacAskill did not mention the nationalists' plan to increase by 5p the top rate of income tax on taxable earnings over £100,000—the wealthiest Scots would pay that. The motion tells us that the SNP's real agenda is tax harmonisation across Europe. What are the nationalists' plans for income tax for the future? We have a right to know that. They are adding new spending commitments as they go. A reduction of 10p a gallon would cost our budget some £65 million a year—that is quite a lot of schools, hospitals and roads—and harmonising tax levels could lose us about £450 million a year.

No, thank you. That is an awful lot of schools, hospitals and roads.

No, thank you. I am just about to come on to the nationalists' policies. This time last year, Kenny MacAskill told us that he was still looking for the best solution to the problem of exorbitant fuel prices in rural areas. He went on to say that European Union rules meant that national taxation had to be applied at a standard rate and that the only apparent scope for alteration was to surcharge motorists in urban areas. There was not much about that in his speech today. This year, he calls for a review, so the nationalists still do not have the answers. So how are the nationalists going to pay for all this?

I will take a timely intervention from Mr Wilson.

We have examined the nationalists' uncosted wish list. Mr Wilson should add up that list to see what the impact would be on income tax. The SNP's motion talks about a marginal reduction in fuel duty and how it would be paid for, but the SNP is talking about a wider review and a total harmonisation of taxes in Europe, which has much bigger implications. While the nationalists are at it, perhaps they might explain in their summing-up speeches how they will pay for the cost of renationalising the rail network, which would cost around £7 billion at the UK level, taking account of share buybacks and assumed liabilities. Last week's commitments on the A9 and the A96 by an SNP candidate add another £1 billion. Nationalist candidates from around the country constantly add to the wish list. It is all hot air with an eye on the election.

No, thank you. By contrast, the Executive is serious about representing in London the interests of Scotland's rural communities. We have an easier time of it with a UK Labour Government that is committed to investing in Scottish services, rather than a Tory Government that would be committed to cutting £16 billion from public services, which are still recovering from the Tories' last time in office. By working patiently and constructively with the UK Government, we will ensure that a balance is struck between the interests of Scotland's fragile rural communities, the environment and our wider spending policies. Gordon Brown has listened. There has been a cash freeze for all road fuel duties, an extension from 1,200cc to 1,500cc of the lowest rate of vehicle exercise duty for cars, a cut of 2p in ultra-low sulphur petrol backed up by a temporary 2p cut in standard unleaded petrol until June—

No, thank you. I am in the middle of a list. There has been a 3p cut in ultra-low sulphur diesel, abolition of VED for agricultural vehicles and a major reform of lorry VED which will save the UK's hauliers more than £300 million a year.

Yes, if it is brief.

Mr Tosh will know that, last year, the Office of Fair Trading produced a report on that issue. He will also know about the current EU rules on derogation in rural areas. In our discussions with the UK Government, we are carefully examining what can be done within those constraints. The Executive is working hard to address rural transport problems and to make a difference. By our own hand, the rural transport fund has provided new investment of more than £14 million in rural public transport, creating more than 380 new rural services, supporting 100 new rural community transport projects and assisting 23 rural petrol stations. As a result of the spending review 2000, we will increase our spending to £18 million over the next three years, which is an increase of 33 per cent. Support for lifeline air and sea services is at record levels, with new investment in airport terminals and new ferries. Work is also under way on key trunk road schemes: the £10 million A830 Arisaig to Kinsadel widening and the £12 million A96 Fochabers to Mosstodloch bypass scheme. Over the next three years, a total of £92 million will be spent on rural trunk roads. There has also been help from the public transport fund, which has provided support for rural public transport projects in Shetland, Orkney, the Western Isles, Highland, Argyll and Bute, Aberdeenshire, Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders. That is not empty rhetoric, but action.

No, thank you. The SNP's motion is disappointing, particularly when it is contrasted with the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's recent "Report on the Inquiry into Fuel Prices in Remoter Rural Areas". Committee members from all parties have worked together to produce a considered and constructive piece of work, as have members of the Rural Development Committee in that committee's "Report on the Impact of Changing Employment Patterns in Rural Scotland". Unlike the SNP motion, the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report acknowledges the complexity of the issues, the  constraints imposed by European Union policy and the practical measures that the Executive has taken. The Executive will give serious consideration to the committee's recommendations on vehicle excise duty, support for liquefied petroleum gas and the future of the petrol station network in remoter rural areas. We will respond formally in due course. The Executive will continue to talk to the UK Government about motoring taxation. We have already done much to support LPG, in spending around £1 million a year on converting up to 1,000 cars a year and in providing grants to convert rural petrol stations to supply LPG.

No, thank you. We will meet the Petrol Retailers Association and the Scottish Motor Trade Association to discuss the difficulties that confront their members in rural areas. A lot has been done but there is a lot still to do. Once again, the SNP has chosen to debate a reserved issue. That issue is important for Scotland. That is why the UK Parliament is important, why we have to work with it to promote Scotland's interests and why its debate on the Finance Bill on Tuesday was so important. We do not want hot air and soundbites—that is all the SNP seems to offer Scotland's rural communities. The Executive is in the business of delivering and making a difference. I urge members to reject the motion.

The Executive is working closely with NorthLink and P&O Scottish Ferries to ensure the smooth handover of the 2002 to 2007 subsidy contract for the northern isles passenger ferry services. That work includes regular meetings with both companies to discuss a range of issues. The Executive has no formal role as employer and it is for the two companies to consider staff transfer. We expect the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations to apply.

I agree that yesterday's groundbreaking initiative between the new ferry company and the tourist boards in the island areas is important. The new ferry services that will begin in 2002 will bring major service improvements. The Executive is keen to ensure that those services are marketed effectively and that islanders and the tourism industry benefit. That is why we have been keen to invest £12 million in Scrabster harbour, as part of a £16 million  package. We have also invested in Lerwick, for improved harbour facilities. We are considering improvements in Orkney and are discussing them with Orkney Islands Council. We have made a huge investment. We are keen to ensure a smooth handover, which is in the interests of ferry passengers and staff.

My department is in close contact with Clackmannanshire Council and Railtrack about progress with the project. I have called for an urgent report from the council on potential cost increases.

Until I have the urgent report that I have asked for, I will not be able to answer those questions in detail. That is why we need that urgent report. Members will recall that, in 1999, I deferred Clackmannanshire Council's application for further work, although we gave it clearance last year. I am very concerned about the potential cost increase in the project, but more background work is required to find out from all the parties involved exactly what the nature of those increases is before we can make statements about the future of the project. The gap is significant and we will need to consider the issue very carefully.

It is fair to say that there has already been a meeting with some of the key  players who would be involved in delivering the project. I take the matter very seriously and, in issuing the next public transport fund circular for information, I am certainly minded to ensure that the authorities provide us with more information than they have hitherto been required to provide. It is up to local authorities that are submitting bids to the Executive to ensure that the whole package is in place and has been properly and robustly evaluated. That is why I need an urgent report and why we cannot take the matter any further forward in the chamber today. Nevertheless, I am happy to talk to Richard Simpson and Scott Barrie about the matter.

Just as I was not prepared to speculate to Labour back benchers, I am certainly not prepared to speculate to an SNP back bencher. I am just being consistent to all members in the chamber. We need to get the facts on this matter. It disturbs me greatly that there has been such a huge increase in costs and I am not prepared to lay blame without having the full facts in front of me and without being able to analyse the problems. We need to get more information. These issues have come to light very recently. Before members make speculations, we need to have the evidence in front of us.

Road safety on all trunk roads, including the trunk road links into the central Borders, is continually monitored. Where localised sites are shown to have accidents arising from a common cause, accident reduction measures are implemented to address the particular problems identified.

Two elements are important. First, we have allocated £70 million over the next  three years to local authorities to enable them to do more repair and maintenance work on local roads and bridges. Secondly, later this year, additional work—to the value of £1.2 million—will be done on the A68 at Soutra hill. We expect that work to take between four and six months from start of construction to finish. Work is going on. We are also considering updating and refreshing the route action plans with a view to further programming in future years.

I cannot give the member a guarantee that those schemes will automatically move up into our roads programme should there be any slippage. We are considering the medium-term and long-term improvements that were identified on the A7 Auchenrivoch scheme and other schemes, with a view to incorporating them in the trunk roads programme. As members know, I have announced this year's roll-forward of the trunk roads programme. We intend to do that annually to introduce extra road schemes, especially where we have to tackle safety programmes.

We have provided the Scottish Borders Council with the resources to consider the parliamentary preparation that will be required for that railway scheme and—critically—to consider the funding issues. As members know, the scheme is not cheap. We want the council to have the opportunity to consider ways of bringing in money, whether from private or public resources.

The Scottish Executive will be considering with the Society of Chief Officers of Transportation in Scotland how best to take forward the findings from the initiative. In the meantime, I have announced total funding of £13 million for walking, cycling and safer streets projects in the two years from next April. Local authorities will be able to use those resources to introduce measures such as 20mph zones.

There are two key issues. First, we know from research that 19 out of 20 pedestrians who are struck by a car moving at 40mph are killed. At 20mph, one pedestrian in 20 is killed and there are small injuries. We know that 20mph zones are critical. In the 20mph areas in the 75 pilot schemes that we have considered for the research there are fewer accidents and—because of the 20mph tag—drivers are more aware. The co-operation and involvement of communities is central to making the schemes work. We have that information—the challenge is to identify the next schemes throughout Scotland  that are the best use of the new resources.

The Deloitte & Touche study published on 13 March concluded that there was insufficient support in the region for the establishment of a Highlands and Islands integrated transport authority at present. However, the Executive believes that an authority should remain a real option for the future. We will work with partner authorities to explore the matter further. In the meantime, we recognise that the status quo is no longer acceptable and have identified short-term actions to improve transport provision in the region.

I assure the member that we are very aware of the sensitivities in different parts of the Highlands and Islands. That is why I agreed with Shetland Islands Council's suggestion on exploring a strategic relationship with the future transport authority. All the authorities in the region want a full relationship in that regard. We need to  consider the exact details and scope of the authority's work and, as Rhoda Grant suggested, we must ensure that the momentum is kept up. I give the commitment that we will consider the issue further with a view to progressing it and we will bring a report to the Parliament for future consideration.

I very much disagree. The whole point of the survey was to bring together the interested parties. We are establishing the Highlands and Islands transport authority. That is a serious business and we need to do it properly. We need to ensure that we put in place the funding mechanisms and we need to consider the implications that an authority will have for the Executive, as we provide many of the lifeline services for people in the Highlands and Islands. That is why I gave a strong commitment, which was warmly received by the Highlands and Islands transport forum, to continue to work with other agencies. Together, we intend to move forward and to consider the real possibility of a transport authority for the Highlands and Islands.

I think that the question was on whether I was aware that people in Oban are keen for the town to be the future location of such an authority. I am happy to inform the member that I  am well aware of the case, which was put to me strongly when I visited Oban recently. I am also aware of the keen interest that has been expressed in Inverness and Stornoway—

—and now Wick. As we get closer to the creation of such an authority, we will focus on the details, on the scope of the authority and on funding issues. The authority's location is one of the key issues for us to examine.

As the First Minister said on 15 March in response to Bruce Crawford, "The new contracts do not contain any conditions relating to pensions to be paid to employees transferring under TUPE. TUPE does not cover occupational pensions."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 15 March 2001; Vol 11, p 194.]

It is important to say that I have received a number of representations on this issue, not just from COSLA but from the trade unions that are involved in the transfers. I have given a commitment to look at the issue carefully and explore our legal entitlements and obligations. I am actively considering the issue and will respond to members and the outside representations that I have received once we have a final answer.

As Bruce Crawford well knows from his previous career in Perth and Kinross Council, dealing with employment issues and legal provisions is complex, and we have to act within the law. The Cabinet Office statement of practice does not explicitly address the circumstances that apply in this case, which are that the contracting authority—the Executive—did not seek to transfer any of its staff to a new employer and that staff transfers were not involved when the contracts were first placed. I was advised that, for that reason, there were legal and practical difficulties in imposing the contract conditions to which the member refers. The legacy of the drafting of the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations is that pensions are not covered by the regulation. That is a matter of regret to many of us, but that is the statutory position.

We are not yet in a position to say how many people will transfer under TUPE and how many may be made redundant. The early indication is that the number of redundancies is not likely to approach the figure of 3,500 that was mentioned in the chamber. Of course, any redundancies would be a matter of regret.

A robust planning policy framework and a range of other regulations govern operations in and around such sites.

I am aware that Cathie Craigie has a strong interest in that issue as the local constituency MSP. I give a commitment that the issue will be taken up by North Lanarkshire Council as part of the operation and management of local mines. As the member will be aware,  mines are dangerous places. That is why we have planning guidelines and health and safety regulations, which guide the operation and management of sites. If the member wants to write down a particular question, I will be happy to respond in writing.

I expect presently to receive a report from CalMac on the conclusions of a review of its current fares structure. I will take decisions in the light of those conclusions.

I am well aware of the debate, especially about freight costs from our highland and island areas and the key role that is played by CalMac in providing opportunities. The difficulty with Duncan Hamilton's suggestion is that, as the consultants concluded, the introduction of RETs would result in substantial reductions in the company's revenues. Consequently, there would be a need for much greater subsidy. At nearly £20 million a year, we are already at record levels of subsidy for CalMac. I am keen to see whether improvements can be made. The point of an extra review is to let us consider carefully how we can improve fares structures throughout the Western Isles and the islands communities and to work out whether we can get better deals from the current services. That matter is firmly on my agenda.

It is important that the people who are affected by services and fares are involved. That is why CalMac ensured that libraries had copies of the consultation document, so that local people could read it. I understand that the company also made the consultation exercise available on the internet, which is one of the ways that we are all trying to use to communicate more effectively with people throughout the country. I hope that that made the consultation exercise more accessible to people. The extension by a week of the consultation exercise will ensure that all who wanted to contribute will have their views fully considered.

There is an opportunity for people to contribute their views to the review that is currently being carried out. Once we have everybody's views, we will be able to see how to move forward. We are aware of the fact that the subsidies that CalMac provides are absolutely vital to the social and economic future of communities on our islands and remote peninsulas, so we are keen to continue that. If we can improve the measures that we have at the moment, we shall consider the consultation exercise carefully when the CalMac review is completed.

The report was received on 17 February and discussed at my meeting with the partnership on 6 March. My officials will be writing presently with our detailed response.

We are well aware of the economic importance of Cairnryan and Stranraer to the Scottish economy. That is why I was so keen to meet with the partnership, to ensure that it had an early opportunity to speak to me about some of the conclusions. The report pulls out some important information about the growing volume of freight that is going through those ports. The study does not deal with some of the traffic issues. I have agreed that my officials can discuss, with Dumfries and Galloway Council, how we can move together on the route action plan. I am keen to ensure that we get going on some of the key improvements that must be made in the next few years.

It is important to say that about £117 million has been invested in the route over the past two decades. That is a substantial improvement. I am aware of the problem of platooning, which is a result of the success of the routes, as the large number of lorries makes it difficult for people to overtake. We intend, through the route action plan, to tackle first the key priorities. We are keen to have dialogue with councils. One of the matters that my roads engineers are keen to consider is the issue of platooning. We do not agree with one or two of Dumfries and Galloway Council's minor suggestions, because we think that the current route action plan is a better way forward in the short and medium term.

Mr Tosh listened to the part of my answer that he was keen to hear, but not to the other part. Our discussions with the council are based on our belief that the route action plan gives the best short, medium and long-term improvements to the A75. We must see the plan in the context of wider improvements to the A77 and the long-term improvements that we are making to the M77 north of Ayr. A lot of investment is going into the area and we want to ensure that it is agreed locally. However, the route action plan is our top priority and I hope that, when I introduce the roll forward on the motorways and trunk roads programme, my meeting with the North Channel Partnership will be useful in setting my priorities.

I listened closely as George Lyon and other members spoke. It was almost a unique experience to hear the member who opened the debate ask a series of questions, 95 per cent of which he proceeded to answer extremely effectively. I shall respond to the one or two points that he left for me to address. I welcome the opportunity to put on record the views of the Executive on this matter. As George  Lyon rightly pointed out, the situation is developing. The Executive recognises the importance of CalMac to the communities that it serves throughout Scotland. The company is an integral part of many people's lives, and members have echoed those people's comments. I am absolutely committed to protecting levels of service. The company plays a crucial economic role in facilitating the imports and exports on which the island communities depend and in allowing tourists to visit some of Scotland's most attractive destinations. The motion correctly identifies the fact that the employment that CalMac provides is an important element of that economic equation. CalMac draws many of its employees from the communities that it serves. Those jobs are good and they are stable, which is particularly important in communities with fragile economies. George Lyon and Maureen Macmillan made that point effectively. We cannot overstate the importance of the experience and skill of the CalMac work force and its commitment to serving Scotland's island communities. The simple fact, however, is that we cannot leave the situation as it is. CalMac's services breach European Community rules on state aids. The European Commission wrote to us in June 1999 and we have been working since then to ensure that we develop proposals that comply with the EC state aid regulations. I was disappointed by the fact that Bruce Crawford and Fiona McLeod questioned the reason for putting CalMac's services into line with the EC state aid regulations. We have to be able to ensure that we avoid infraction proceedings and the termination of the subsidy for our services. We have to make the case to Europe that CalMac provides lifeline services that are worthy of PSOs. I do not want to take a risk with our right to pay for our lifeline services and to pay subsidies. We are clear that the guidelines to which Bruce Crawford referred will not change the fundamental point about tendering. They will, however, help us to put forward Scotland's unique case. It is vital that we bring to the Commission's attention the importance of CalMac's services and our willingness to bring them within the EC rules.

I have already made the point about the expertise and commitment of the staff. We have to ensure that our proposals deliver the highest possible safety standards. We have had discussions with the Maritime and Coastguard Agency to ensure that we meet the UK standards on safety. It is clear that we must do that within the  tendering process. There has been overwhelming support for the approach that we have taken with the Commission on our package. I believe that our package will provide a robust framework for the continued delivery of high-quality lifeline services to the Highlands and Islands. We are not trying to privatise the system; we are trying to ensure that the investment that we have had from central Government continues. We want to keep the CalMac fleet together and in public ownership—that is the opposite of what Bruce Crawford alleged tonight. I want to ensure that we get our message across to the Commission. I am aware that the Commission understands the importance of our lifeline ferry services, partly because of the work that the Executive has done, partly because of the efforts of MSPs and partly because of the work of the trade unions and local authorities. Many representations have been made to the Commission. I am conscious that the prospect of change is worrying for people in communities that are served by CalMac and for its employees. That is why I met the CalMac work force and the trade unions last month to outline our proposals to them. I wanted to ensure that they were fully briefed about the proposals and to give them the opportunity to put their concerns to me so that I could consider them fully. The meeting was useful and we are working on a number of issues as a result. When I visited Oban last month, I was able to talk to the work force and the management about our proposals. Our proposals aim to keep a single network going. As George Lyon pointed out, we have to persuade the Commission about that. We are mindful of the experience that the Spanish Government had in getting its services into line with European state aid regulations. We have a lot of work to do, which is why I appreciate the support that has been offered from around the chamber and that has been demonstrated in the past few months. Annabel Goldie talked about best value and ensuring that our investment delivers for us. As members know, CalMac has experience of a tendering process. The company recently competed, in a joint venture with the Royal Bank of Scotland, to run the northern isles passenger ferry services. Last December, the Scottish Parliament approved the undertaking with the joint venture, NorthLink, for the 2002 to 2007 subsidy contract. That contract will provide an improved service for a lower subsidy. I hope that that experience has given CalMac some expertise in that area. We have already begun discussing the way forward with CalMac senior management.  Although there are no guarantees, I expect CalMac to put forward a strong and competitive bid. Members asked what would happen if CalMac did not win the tender. In our tender documentation, we will be making it crystal clear that bidders will have to consider the whole issue of the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations when making their bids. While the TUPE regulations are a matter of law, we will ensure that they are highlighted in all the tender documentation. I reiterate the point that members have made about the fact that the CalMac work force is skilled and is uniquely experienced in the routes that it serves. Winnie Ewing mentioned the treacherous nature of some of those routes. Skill and experience are important to bear in mind, given some of the conditions in which services are run. Some members have made unhelpful comments in recent months, which has not helped us to move the debate forward. I want to put on record the fact that it is absolutely critical that any tendering process meets the stringent safety standards that are set for all passenger ferry services, including regulations about crew numbers and experience. It is also important to put on record the fact that safety will never be compromised in the process with which we are about to proceed. I am aware of the comments that the Transport and the Environment Committee has made about the process and I welcome the scrutiny to which the committee will be subjecting our proposals. I have been asked to comment on some issues that Andy Kerr, as the convener of that committee, has raised. He has asked me to comment by next week, and I intend to do so fully. I hope that that will be useful to committee members. Communication in this situation will be absolutely vital, which is why I am happy that we are having this debate and that we are able to bring members up to speed with the discussions that we have been having. It is also important that the CalMac management keep their staff and the trade unions closely informed about developments. Several meetings between CalMac senior management and groups of staff and the unions have already taken place and others are planned. I am aware that the company is making considerable efforts to ensure that all its staff are kept fully informed and to minimise their understandable concerns in what will appear to be a period of uncertainly. Furthermore, I met representatives of the Scottish Trades Union Congress last month. When the tender specification is drawn up, it is  important to ensure that the widest possible consultation takes place with communities, trade unions and local authorities. Issues such as the vital economic lifeline that is provided by the CalMac routes, the importance of protecting levels of service and fares and the maintenance of standards of safety will underpin that process. As George Lyon pointed out, the process provides an opportunity to improve services; we will take that opportunity. I thank George Lyon for giving us all the opportunity to discuss this issue and to enable me to put the Executive's views on the record.  I give a commitment that we will continue to work closely with CalMac and the unions to ensure that staff and Parliament are kept informed as we continue our efforts not only to bring our ferry routes under the European regulations, but to do so in a way that is suited to Scotland's needs.  Meeting closed at 17:53.

Yes.

I will give prominence to cycling, walking and safer streets projects when allocating resources from the public transport fund. The fund itself will be increased to £150 million over the next three years.

I strongly agree. Bristow Muldoon will know that West Lothian Council received £151,000 last year for work to improve safer routes to schools. I am keen to ensure that that kind of work can carry on across the whole of Scotland and over a long period, rather than as a one-off. The critical task is to ensure that safer routes to schools and safer opportunities to cycle and walk are built in throughout Scotland in all  local authority areas.

I will announce presently my decision on Aberdeenshire Council's revised bid for public transport fund support for studying improved rail links between Stonehaven and Inverurie. The new park-and-ride site at Kingswells, which will open this autumn, offers commuters and shoppers an attractive alternative to car use in the city.

I am keen to work in partnership and my objective in meeting representatives of NESDEP later this month will be to follow on from the discussions that we had last year, when I said that I would ensure that one of my officials would work in regular contact with NESDEP. We followed that work up and the First Minister was in Aberdeen last month to talk about partnership work between the Scottish Executive and NESDEP. The key challenge is to talk about individual projects and ways in which we can work together through the public transport fund and the Executive's integrated transport fund to deliver in the short term and the long term for Aberdeen and the surrounding areas.

If Mr Adam had listened carefully to my answer to Elaine Thomson, he would have noted that I said that the task was to talk about individual projects and ways in which they add together. My officials and I must do a lot of number crunching and detailed work with Aberdeenshire Council, Aberdeen City Council and the economic development interests in the area. That is why I will visit Aberdeen this month.

Mike Rumbles is not right. Ideas—which I described as exemplary last year—about putting together an integrated transport strategy have been produced. I repeat the point that I made to Mr Adam. My officials and I need to discuss with NESDEP and the other interested parties the detail of the proposals, the modelling issues and the ways in which the range of projects that are contained in the integrated transport strategy can be dealt with practically.

The Scottish Executive has committed nearly £50 million to 21 rail-related projects under the public transport fund and the freight facilities grants scheme. Later this year we will give directions and guidance to the strategic rail authority on the letting of a new Scottish passenger rail franchise. We intend to deliver major benefits for passengers over the next 15 to 20 years.

Bristow Muldoon is right to say that tackling congestion and giving people high-quality alternatives to traffic jams are priorities for the public transport fund and are key issues that we highlighted in the consultation document. We will carefully consider opportunities to implement schemes such as those that Bristow Muldoon suggested, if they meet our value for money priorities.

I will answer in line with the Presiding Officer's request that we be brief. The new Scottish rail passenger franchise gives us the opportunity to improve our railways in Scotland for the next decade and beyond. We will use our work with the strategic rail authority to ensure that Scotland's priorities fit in with the UK's overall priorities for improving our rail network with John Prescott's £60 billion of investment.

As Mr Tosh is well aware, the consultation does not include specific priorities. Its purpose is to ensure that we have established the right global priorities in tackling congestion and boosting our rural communities with viable rail services. When we have done that and set our key priorities, we will consider individual projects. We spend £200 million a year on rail projects for the franchise in Scotland. We want to see how much value for money we can get from new extensions in a 15 to 20-year rail franchise. We will consider individual projects after we have completed the consultation.

I meet Railtrack regularly and will raise the point that Jamie Stone made when I see Janette Anderson next week.

The prevention of vandalism and trespassing on the railway is the responsibility of the railway industry and the British Transport Police. However, the Executive is committed to working in partnership with the rail industry and the British Transport Police to support the initiatives and campaigns that are being promoted.

I am happy to tell the member that I intend to visit Aberdeen shortly, when I will meet representatives of the north-east of Scotland economic development partnership. I will be happy to take the member up on his offer, to ensure that we examine the partnership work on railway safety that is being carried out throughout Scotland, and particularly in his constituency.

I am well aware that personal safety, as much as safety on the rails, is a critical issue for passengers and train drivers. The Executive is committed to working with the industry so that closed-circuit television is spread throughout the country. Many stations that do not have staff at night now have CCTV. People who  use the railways can be assured that staff are monitoring those stations with CCTV at all times. Help buttons are also available. We want to extend such provision throughout Scotland. That is work in progress.

I announced the successful bidders to the tendering process last week and I made it clear in the debate in the chamber last Thursday that, before awarding the contracts for the work, Scottish ministers would consider the audit report that I commissioned last week in response to the widespread concerns that had been raised. I expect to receive the audit report shortly.

I reiterate once again how disappointed I am, particularly as a Labour minister, that there was such a huge gap between the winning and losing bids. I am fully aware of the implications of that for local authorities and I note that there are many local authority representatives in the public gallery this afternoon, who have been meeting members. As Minister for Transport, I have the responsibility to ensure that all the tenderers are treated fairly and properly. We have audited the majority of the process that we have been through thus far and, before we move forward to contracts, we will look at the last part of the audit, which I spoke about in the chamber last week. The process has been thoroughly scrutinised, and I expect further scrutiny in the weeks ahead. We are where we are and the existing contracts  expire on 31 March. Extension is not an option and we now have to take the process forward within the law. [Interruption.]

As a minister, I have to receive and consider the legal advice that I get and I then have to act within it, as do all Scottish ministers.

I point out to Murray Tosh that this year's local government settlement included an additional £70 million for local authority roads and maintenance, in particular for roads and bridges. Local authority direct labour organisations will also be able to tender for work worth £150,000 or more. On his substantive point, any money that we are able to release through the process will be invested in vital services across Scotland.

I am keen that we should be able to give as much information to members as possible. When the process comes to a conclusion, that is exactly what I intend to do. We are looking to see how much information can be revealed about each bidder, within the commercial confidence procedures that we operate, so that the maximum amount of information is available to members.

The Scottish Executive has regular meetings and frequent exchanges with Caledonian MacBrayne on a wide range of issues relating to its delivery of lifeline services.

Let me be clear about why we have announced our proposals to the Commission this week. It has taken some time to analyse the feedback we got during the summer. There was an almost universal view that we needed to ensure  that we retained the integrity of CalMac services. We had been told by the Commission that it did not see how we could meet the competition rules without splitting the services up into separate bundles. I have been clear from day one that we would be totally opposed to cherry-picking or splitting off the routes from CalMac. Over the past few months, we have managed to carry out further work to consider closely the competition element of the process. Our argument to the Commission will be that to retain reliable, guaranteed, lifeline services at a good cost to the Scottish taxpayer, we think that having one network makes a lot of economic sense. How competitive the different process would be depends on which part of the ferry industry we ask. Splitting it up into lots of individual routes makes sense for localised ferry operators, but we are arguing that—within the Commission's own rules—there is scope for ensuring that we have an integrated network that lets us deal with fares and reliability. We will push that case strongly with the Commission.

Maureen Macmillan's point is interesting and important. Over the past few months, a series of different organisations representing communities, trade unions and councils have engaged with Brussels and worked with the Executive to propose a coherent case to the Commission. As a result of that, we have seen evidence of more flexibility in the Commission. I am keen for that process to continue. If back-bench MSPs and MEPs are happy to work with us on that, I would be happy to work with them. In fact, I had a videoconference with an all-party delegation of MEPs in Brussels this week. It was extremely useful for getting the message across and I received positive feedback from the MEPs. Specifications are critical to fares, safety and guaranteed routes. The specification process and the process of consultation will be vital. All the points that Maureen Macmillan raised are key issues for that consultation process.

I am going out there as soon as I can find a space in my diary. George Lyon will know that a number of other meetings, in which he was involved, took up my time yesterday, but I was able to speak to people in a videoconference. I intend to follow that up with MEPs and with the Commission directly. It is important to get our case across coherently and I am happy to work with people over the next few weeks and months to ensure that we do precisely that. There has already been some flexibility, particularly on the application of the mainland-to-mainland routes. In Scotland, mainland-to-mainland routes are like mainland-to-island routes; the alternative of travelling very long distances, as George Lyon knows from his constituency, means that we must make a strong, robust case. We have started to do that with the Commission and I look forward to the support of members in continuing that process.

The Scottish Executive has no plans to review the criteria for the installation of tourist signposting on trunk roads.

I certainly do not want to get into a debate in the chamber about detrunking routes. The subject would be of huge interest and a lot of people could be alarmed at the prospect. The process was reviewed in 1998, which is quite a recent review of our approach to trunk road signing policy. The consultation process for that review involved the Scottish Tourist Board, the area tourist boards, local enterprise companies, planning authorities, local road and traffic authorities, tourist attraction operators and Scottish Natural Heritage. A wide range of people were involved in that process quite a short time ago. I am keen to examine the operation of the policy and to see that it is effective, but it is a bit early now to begin to review the policy.

It is our general policy not to have a proliferation of signs in any given place, which would have implications for safety on our trunk roads and motorways. I am happy to write to Mr Welsh about the issue that he has raised. It seems to me to be a local issue, and I would prefer to give him a proper detailed answer in writing.

This is primarily a matter for Aberdeen City Council, which has now agreed remedial measures with Cala Homes Ltd to reopen the Grandholm bridge. For our part, the Executive has been pressing ahead urgently with planned traffic improvements on the A90, including the extra slipway on the southbound carriageway, to improve access to the Bridge of Don park and ride.

It is important to acknowledge that we are already working with Aberdeen City Council. The member will know the route of the A90 and will know just how critical congestion in Aberdeen is. We are concerned, which is why Executive officials were in Aberdeen last week, talking to the city council and seeing how we can work in partnership to ensure that we do not get gridlock. There are particular difficulties in Aberdeen—I am sure that Richard Lochhead is well aware of them. The massive turnout at the meeting in Aberdeen demonstrates the extent to which there is frustration about congestion. I reassure the member that, through our allocation of £70 million to local authorities for their roads and bridges, we are showing that we are concerned that local authorities should be able to invest in their transport infrastructure. The work that we are doing in partnership with local authorities will be critical in ensuring that the work that we do on the A90 is in tune with the local transport strategy for Aberdeen.

I could not agree more with the member. Our plans are costed; they are programmed and are capable of being implemented. I met the north-east Scotland economic development partnership because I was keen to meet people who are involved in economic development on the ground and in the councils. Their views are critical. I am well aware that they are working up plans for Aberdeen and the north-east and I am keen to meet them again in the near future. I have ensured that our officials are in regular contact with them; indeed, they meet them at every meeting of the partnership to make absolutely sure that the Executive is fully involved in the development of a modern integrated transport network for the north-east of Scotland and for Aberdeen.

The £70 million that my colleague Angus MacKay announced before Christmas is part of the local authority settlement. It will therefore be distributed to local authorities equitably; it will be up to the local authorities to ensure that they prioritise the greatest needs in their area. The member will know from correspondence that there are a host of pressing issues in his area; I hope that the money will be of great assistance to councils in advancing local bridge and road projects where urgent investment is required.

The comments made this morning demonstrate the value of conducting some of the discussion in public. The past few weeks have been extremely difficult. Before a decision was reached, and until the matter had gone through the courts, it was not possible for me to enter into a public debate. I am grateful that I can begin to answer members' questions. A critical reason for the Executive's amendment S1M-1584.1 is to allow me to answer the detailed questions that members have asked. Members have put questions of detail and of principle to me over the past few weeks, and I deeply regret that I have not been able to answer them. In my response to the debate, I will cover as many points as I can. If I am unable to address specific points that members have raised, I will ensure that those members receive an individual reply, as they deserve nothing less. We will also have the opportunity to debate the matter further, which is the essence of the last line of the Executive amendment S1M-1584.1.

I cannot possibly give way before I get to my final comments. Euan Robson talked about base quantities, which ties in with the court case. Let us be clear. It is the Executive's view that the courts ruled that the three-council consortium had not established a prima facie case on the issues raised. The only exception was in relation to the base quantities applied in the tender process, on which the court said that there might be arguments to hear. The court also said that the Scottish ministers might have a good argument on the issues raised by the consortium, which made no difference to the validity of the process. As a minister, I needed to test the point about base quantities properly, by independent audit, before I could sign contracts. I would love to live in a world without lawyers. For the past five to six weeks, the Scottish ministers have explored every legal opportunity available and we will consider those issues further. Quality has been assured throughout the tendering process. Only those who were assessed as capable of delivering quality were shortlisted. The specifications were of the same standard or higher than those in the current contracts and ran to two volumes. Tenderers were allowed to explain  their proposals and submit them prior to tenders being submitted, so that we could highlight any shortcomings before their final submission. At the core of the contracts is the intention to ensure that there is no reduction in levels of safety. The winning contractors will have to demonstrate a track record on trunk road safety in England and on the M74 in Scotland.

No. I must respond to questions that have been raised already. David Davidson asked a question that I have also been asked outside the chamber, concerning the extension of local authority contracts: what opportunity do I have to do that? The majority of the contracts have no facility for extension beyond 1 April. Because of their value, they are subject to the European procurement rules that regulate the way in which the Scottish Executive may act. To extend the current local authority contracts would almost certainly be regarded, under those procurement rules, as awarding a new contract without competition. It would therefore be a breach of European rules—

That is the advice that I have been given. I would love to live in a world without laws. However, the Parliament must operate within our law and within European law. Murray Tosh made a point about consultation. I am not saying that everyone agreed with the tendering process, but, in responding to the consultation document "The Road Ahead", 15 local authorities said that they favoured the use of operating companies in some form. Although they would have preferred contracts to have been given to the companies without competition, that would not be possible under European rules. I shall now address the motion and the amendments. The SNP motion condemns the Scottish Executive for failing to keep people informed. My opportunities to talk openly to people over the past few weeks have been limited. The Executive was involved in court action in the new year, during which proceedings it was impossible for me to comment. Several MSPs have written to me and the First Minister has written to COSLA, and we will ensure that that correspondence is dealt with properly. The Tory amendment is breathtakingly hypocritical. I strongly agreed with the comments of Kate MacLean and Andy Kerr on that point. It was the Tories who broke the long-standing agency agreements with local authorities by putting out to tender the contracts that the local authorities won in 1996.

No, thank you. The Conservative amendment seems to suggest that there is a unified structure, but there is not, and that is at the heart of the matter. The fragmentation of the approach to roads maintenance was begun by the Tories' abolition of the regional councils. The consultation paper issued in 1999 was intended to gather experiences in the aftermath of reorganisation and to establish a more rational and coherent approach to the maintenance of vital trunk roads and motorways throughout Scotland.

No, thank you. I will not take lessons from the Tories, given their track record on running down Scottish roads maintenance and decades of underinvestment in infrastructure. I am surprised that the Tories have even entered the debate today. Let me respond to the comments that were made by Andy Kerr and Kate MacLean. The Executive amendment goes further than the SNP motion, and I give the commitment that I shall continue to explore the options that are open to the Executive. We have considered our options over the past five weeks and we will continue to do so.

No, I will not. I have given a commitment on the audit. If there are other issues that I can consider beyond the debate, I shall do so.

I have already delayed the signing of the contracts to ensure that we properly address the base quantities audit and that that information is available to Scottish ministers before we take the final step: that is important. We are exploring the opportunities and have been doing so for the past five weeks. I recognise that the debate has been difficult for everybody. This has been the first opportunity to debate the issue in the chamber. I will respond in writing to those comments to which I have not been able to respond in my final remarks. I am conscious that I am running out of time, but I have tried to respond to all comments.

I say to the member that the consultants have a professional reputation to defend. The people who have been allocated to the review were not involved in the tendering. Such practice is well established and is standard in commercial consultancy organisations. The consultant has in the past made robust recommendations to the Executive, upon which we have subsequently had to act. The review is not a way for the Executive to avoid examining the process closely. The review is independent and will be robust and we will respond to it.

Will Mr Kerr explain how he thinks the lump sum processes work? My information is that the lump sum element for the successful private bidders ranges from 17 per cent to 26 per cent—nowhere near the 80 per cent that he alleges.

In speaking to the Executive's amendment, I will place on the record the facts. I emphasise that, because so much inaccurate information has appeared. I welcome the debate, as it gives me the opportunity to raise some key issues. Bruce Crawford's speech repeated some inaccurate comments that have flown around in the past few weeks and relied a great deal on rhetoric. The contracts that local authorities won in 1996 expire at the end of March this year. The consultation on re-tendering began as long ago as April 1999. The consultation paper received 66 responses, 27 of which came from local authorities. Many of the respondents saw advantage in the four operating companies concept. The Executive undertook further analysis in a value management workshop, which included local authority practitioners. It was clear from the outset that we would adhere to the Public Works Contracts Regulations 1991, which implemented European Community competition requirements. They require the placement of new work to be subject to open competition between competent service providers.  Competition rules apply to the process, and the Scotland Act 1998 would nullify any other course of action.

To be fair, I will not, because I would like to get into my speech, and I know that members will have many points. The decision to proceed to tender for four operating companies was announced in December 1999, and tender documents were issued in May 2000. Officials responded to 433 tender inquiries, issued 30 tender bulletins and held three consultation meetings with each tenderer. All tenders were submitted by 31 October. They were assessed before cash bids were evaluated to ensure that they met the stipulated quality standards. Quality ran through the whole process. The quality proposals were carefully scrutinised, and clarification was sought from tenderers as necessary. All met the quality standard, and only then were the cash bids assessed. Ministers have been aware of the outcome of the competition for more than a month. We took that period to question our officials closely about the rigour and the fairness of the competition and the extent of the external validation. The courts have also examined the competition, and their judgments vindicate the Executive's report.

I am happy to clarify that point. The member misinterprets the legal judgment. Four actions were taken against the Executive. The Executive appealed against and won the first action and was awarded costs. I do not regard that as the Executive's position being overturned in the courts. That led to our announcement on Tuesday that, subject to the external review of the quantities issue, we intended to award two contracts each to Amey and Bear Scotland Ltd.

No. Those bids will provide the same or higher standards of maintenance, for lower costs. We are getting a better deal for taxpayers' money. Amey is experienced in motorway maintenance in Scotland and England, and Bear Scotland has  conducted ringway construction and has experience in England.

No, I have already taken interventions. The Amey bids for the south-east and south-west are worth £176 million over the five years and offer savings of £50 million over the existing arrangements. The Bear Scotland bids for the north-east and north-west units are worth £182 million over the five years and offer a saving of £25 million over the present cost. The Executive is committed to delivering best value for every penny that we spend. How could we or any other Administration justify accepting bids that offered significantly poorer value for money?

Members will all speak later. I will reply at the end of the debate. There is no member who has not lobbied me on roads expenditure in writing or in the chamber. The demand by members for investment is enormous. This week alone, I announced that the extension to the M74 would go ahead, for which members lobbied hard. Like every other minister, I must work within my budget and the Executive's agreed priorities. The impact on staffing is a concern to me and to members. I refute Bruce Crawford's interpretation of what I said the other night. However, some of the figures that have flown around have been totally irresponsible.

No. I have read about figures of between 3,500 and 35,000. Those suggestions have heightened the concerns of employees and the trade unions. In its briefing to MSPs, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities made it clear that it estimates that well in excess of 500 full-time staff are involved in trunk road work. I do not pretend for one minute that the issue is not major and that potentially major change does not affect local authority employees. The new and the existing operators must address the impact properly and resolve it quickly. I fully expect the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of  Employment) Regulations to apply.

No, because Murray Tosh will speak next. I want to respond to the comments that I have heard and received from COSLA and the local authorities. I acknowledge that in the Executive's amendment. I understand well their deep concerns about the importance of the contracts. However, it is untrue that the process was flawed and skewed against the local authorities. The process has been transparent, and extensive consultation took place before and during the tendering process. I have a direct question. Have any of the Executive's critics stopped to ask why civil servants would seek to disadvantage local authorities and abuse the contract rules? That is the suggestion that is being made. There is no evidence to support that assertion and I refute it. Numerous detailed points have been made about the tendering process, and I ask why they were not raised during the extensive consultations. [MEMBERS: "They were."] As a Labour minister, I am extremely disappointed with the bids that the local authorities submitted, especially because they were substantially higher than current spending. Local authorities are the existing contractors. They could share depots and staff to exploit economies of scale, and they have direct labour organisation operations that use best-value principles. Local authorities have all those advantages, so I am deeply disappointed, because they should have been well placed to win the contracts. We are nearing the end of a long and complicated tendering process. The contractors must meet the standards and the quality specified at the rates quoted. As I announced in a written answer this week, the one remaining element of the audit process must be conducted before the contracts are signed. We will continue to respond to the points that members raise. I fully understand the disappointment of local authorities about the results of the competition. It is important that the rigorous process of assessment and audit is properly carried out before the contracts are signed. Local authorities will have the opportunity to tender for the repair contracts and subcontract work across the motorway and trunk road network, which are expected to be substantial. The Scottish Executive manages that work by setting its framework. In addition, the Executive is investing heavily in local roads maintenance through the capital and revenue allocations that Angus MacKay announced on 7 December. That capital allocation includes an additional £70 million for local  authorities over the next three years. Local road work is the major part of local authority maintenance activity. I do not pretend for one minute that the issue is not difficult for all members, particularly those in my party. As Minister for Transport, I have to make difficult choices all the time. I have to manage the competing demands we face in renewing, maintaining and investing in our vital transport infrastructure. In acknowledging that local authorities and trade unions are concerned and that we will continue to respond to those concerns, I move amendment S1M-1584.1, to leave out from "expresses" to end and insert: "recognises the strong concerns expressed by the local government consortia and trade unions about the award of the contracts for the management and maintenance of the trunk road network; in particular notes their concerns about the contract assessment process, the future operation of the trunk road services and the potential knock-on implications for local authorities, and calls upon the Executive to continue further exploration of all outstanding issues."

In March last year, the Scottish Executive and the UK Government announced targets for road accident casualty reductions in the period to 2010. The targets and a strategy for achieving them were set out in the document "Tomorrow's Roads—Safer for Everyone".

I agree with Bristow Muldoon on that point. The Scottish Road Safety Campaign has developed a strategy called Foolspeed, which aims to change people's attitude towards speed on the roads. The strategy aims to make drivers drive more safely, not just by looking at the maximum speed limit, but by considering the speed that is appropriate in the circumstances in which they are driving. That campaign is linked to our objective of trying to reduce the accident rate, particularly for children. We aim to reduce the current rate by 50 per cent. Changing the attitude of drivers is important, but local authorities can also work to create a different experience on the roads.

Work is being done to identify the extent to which drug-related incidents are an issue on our roads. Scottish police forces are aware of the problem, which must be considered in addition to the work that is being done on drinking and driving.

The Scottish Executive is in regular contact with the UK Government about a wide range of issues, including the new Scottish air traffic control centre at Prestwick.

This is a matter for the UK Government, with whom we are in discussion. We are keen to ensure that we have a facility in Prestwick that provides safety and important facilities. We are well aware of the importance to the local economy of the construction jobs that will be created when the Prestwick air traffic control centre is developed.

That is decisively a matter for Westminster. Alex Neil might want to suggest that some of his colleagues take up the issue, since they still have seats there—perhaps Mr Salmond would be able to.

I repeat that we are in regular contact with our colleagues at Westminster. The issue is a matter for them and I do not think that some of the speculation has been helpful. The key point is that we can work with the UK Government to ensure that we have the right facilities for Prestwick.

Policy and legislation relating to drinking and driving is the responsibility of the UK Government, although enforcement of the law is the responsibility of the police in Scotland. The GB road safety strategy, which was published last year, includes a commitment to strengthening police powers for roadside testing.

I certainly agree with the suggestion that we should discourage anyone from drinking and driving. The fatalities on our roads are horrific and we all want to work to stop them. The police have to develop an approach that they believe will be sensitive. We now have the figures from the festive safety campaign and can compare them with those of last year's summer campaign. The police have taken a selective approach to target major events and to use their information to target people who they know to have prior convictions for drink driving and to try to ensure that they are not still out on our roads, endangering people. This is a huge issue, and the work that the police have done will be monitored using the information that we have received from the Christmas period. I agree with Mr Home Robertson that this has to be one of our core priorities.

I made it extremely clear, both in my opening speech and in the amendment, that the Executive recognises the strategic nature of the A75 for the south-west of Scotland and further afield. However, given some comments today, I feel that I have to restate that. Many negative comments have been made about route action plans. I say to members that those plans are an important way of assessing priorities and of identifying future investment. We do not need one-off schemes for our trunk roads; we need sustained investment over the years. The purpose of the route action plans is to allow the Executive to judge how to prioritise schemes in considering our future roads programmes.

No. I must answer other members' questions. Several members have mentioned the European nature of the route. We have successfully accessed European funding for the A75 in the past—for example, the Glen project received European support. We applied for TENs support for our route action plan, but did not get it. Let me emphasise to members that, although TENs money is helpful, it amounts to only 10 per cent of the cost of the scheme—we still have to come up with the other 90 per cent. We have tried to get money out of Europe, which has identified the route as strategically important. However, we have not been successful in securing that money. We will consider that again in the future. That is the current position.  Let me take up the point made by John Farquhar Munro about the strategic roads review. The review was an inherited list of schemes—it was not an analysis of priorities throughout Scotland, but merely a list of the outstanding roads programmes left by the Tories, which had not been financially prioritised. Out of that list, we took action on the A75. We considered the A75 and the Creagan bridge to be top priorities. In November 1999, we also gave the go-ahead to the A830—a matter in which John Farquhar Munro has a great interest—the A96, the A78, the A1 and the A77. Last September, I also gave the go-ahead—as part of the £500 million of new money—for additional funding for roads and bridges to be made available for local authorities to spend. That is new money for local authorities. We need sustained investment in the A75. John Farquhar Munro said that local authorities should have greater say in trunk roads decisions. I am happy to listen to local authorities and to consider their views. However, I must make decisions relating to the whole of Scotland. I am keen to ensure that there are discussions and dialogue across borders. There is no ambivalence in our priorities. Adam Ingram suggested that there had been little investment. There has been nearly £117 million over 20 years—£7 million in the past two years, £5 million in the next two years and more to come with the route action plan. That is the sustained investment that we need. Alasdair Morgan made a thoughtful speech and acknowledged that we have made progress over the years, although not as much progress as he would like. However, I note that no member has suggested an alternative approach to our route action plans—members simply listed other roads and other schemes. We need to prioritise. Elaine Murray asked for commitments on two issues: that I would talk to Dumfries and Galloway Council about funding and timetabling and that I would address the issues on which we disagree. I am happy to do so in the future. She said that she was content for the time being and that that was as much as I could expect from her—I am very grateful for that. Donald Gorrie said that the inter-parliamentary delegation had suggested that the Executive intended to downgrade Stranraer. Nothing could be further from the truth. I have already answered a parliamentary question on the matter and I have ensured that the local press is kept informed on the issue. It is fair to say that that parliamentary delegation did not have as firm a grasp of priorities in Scotland as members of the Scottish Parliament would have. One of the comments that was made to me was that we had invested too much money in the A9 over the past few years. I cannot think of many members who would agree with that  comment—certainly not John Farquhar Munro. Dialogue is important, but we should not expect every delegation from outwith Scotland to know better than members of the Scottish Parliament. I did not invite members to list every rural road. George Lyon took things a little too far. I merely made the point that all members have a wish list for their constituencies. I have to wrestle with priorities. Mike Russell mentioned safety. There have been safety improvements on the A75 and those form part of the route action plan. It is important that we do not talk down Stranraer and the south-west of Scotland. We may not all agree on the future priorities, but it is important to put on record the fact that there has been sustained investment and that there will be future investment. I am happy to talk to the local council about the matter. In asking me for more money, members should not make the mistake of downgrading the whole area by talking it down. There is a real debate with important issues for people living in the area. We must also acknowledge that private investment is going into the area. I welcome that. I want to ensure that jobs are secure for the future. Let us ensure that the debate helps rather than hinders that process.

I welcome the opportunity to discuss the A75 today. I am well aware of the arguments for more investment on such a strategic route and I recognise the importance of the ferry ports at Stranraer and Cairnryan, not just to the local economy but to Scotland as a whole. Murray Tosh asked me for that commitment; it is implicit in our amendment. I want to put on record our acknowledgement of the work done by Dumfries and Galloway Council and the north channel partnership in raising the profile of the economic importance of the route. Dumfries and Galloway Council has consistently pursued the issue; as Minister for Transport I have heard from others, including the north channel partnership, the British-Irish Council and the Northern Ireland transport minister. Clearly, life in the chamber would be a great deal easier for me if I could respond positively to every trunk road issue raised with me by members. Unfortunately, that is not the real world. My job is to try to ensure that we have the best investment across Scotland. Understandably, Dumfries and Galloway Council wants significant improvements to the A75, to give guaranteed journey times and to speed up traffic on the route. However, for large parts of each day the route has more than enough capacity for the volume of traffic. The main delays occur when ferries arrive. Around Dumfries, there is the additional issue of congestion caused by people travelling to work. The investment strategy for the route has acknowledged those issues and brought important benefits. Crucially, the accident rates on the A75 have fallen since 1997 and are below the average for that type of route. On occasion, critics ignore previous Governments' investment, much of it by the Tories, who were working on a broadly similar strategy for investment in the A75, as Murray Tosh will be aware. The 1997 Labour Government also invested in the A75. One of the only two projects that escaped the moratorium that we introduced on the massive road building programme—without the resources to implement it—that was left by the Tory Government, was on the A75. The Glen, a £7 million scheme, was one of the two projects built  while the strategic roads review was under way—the other was Creagan bridge in Argyll. We are implementing the route action plan quickly. The short-term measures are due to be completed this year, and the two highest priorities for the medium term are in the two-year programme that I announced last March. The funding for that work—the Cairn Top to Barlae route and the Chapelton to Bush O' Bield route—is just under £5 million and is guaranteed. The Chapelton to Bush O' Bield route will be first. I am pleased that the council is working with our consultants to deliver those two improvements by 2003. I know that more investment for the A75 is the top priority for Dumfries and Galloway Council, but I restate a point that I made earlier: as Minister for Transport for the whole of Scotland I must consider competing demands for trunk road improvements elsewhere. Other investments are going into the south-west, for example, work on the A/M77, the M74 and A76. All three are routes of importance to Dumfries and Galloway and its economy. The Conservative motion raises the question of future plans. An additional £68 million is available for motorway and trunk roads in the period to March 2004 but, as members are aware, there are enormous and costly pressures throughout Scotland. I do not underestimate the challenge. If I asked them, every member of the Parliament would come up with a trunk road project that they saw as the top priority in their area. We could go to all the councils and they would all come up with several top priorities. I will be more than happy for members to support the transport budget today. I caution that some of the press coverage of it is ill informed and exaggerated—that will not come as a surprise to anyone here. The route action plan was commissioned in 1997 and was completed by external consultants who consulted a wide range of bodies before producing their final report in December 1999.

All the route action plans throughout Scotland must be prepared so that we can prioritise, not just on the route concerned, but across all of Scotland. We cannot ignore the budget implications. The RAP takes account of our core criteria: economy, environment, accessibility, integration and safety. It identifies a clear strategy  for improvement that the Executive has already begun to implement. As I said, we have begun work on the short-term measures identified in the plan and two schemes identified as medium-term priorities should be completed by 2003. That work will provide overtaking opportunities between Stranraer and Newton Stewart and between Newton Stewart and Dumfries. I am well aware from discussions with members and officials from Dumfries and Galloway Council that it takes a different view of the priorities. I will announce, by the end of March, the roll forward for further minor schemes identified in the A75 RAP, as an addition to the programme that I announced in March last year. In considering that, I will take into account the council's views and look at the scope for additional work.

No, I am coming to a conclusion. I will be happy to meet the council again to discuss its economic strategy. It would seem best to do that when the new economic strategy is available—it has not yet been passed to me, but I know that it is to be issued shortly. I hope that the council will send it to me so that we can take a long, hard look at it and see whether there are issues that can be built into our programme. However, I do not want to build up expectations. I stress the point that I made earlier—we have record levels of investment and new money in the trunk roads programme, but there are also new demands and commitments. I am keen to ensure that we consider fully the issues raised by Dumfries and Galloway Council, but I will not make commitments today that are unrealistic and cannot be implemented. There will be further work on the issues by the Executive and the prospect of further discussion with the council. Through that, we will make sure that if we have the opportunity to deliver more than we are delivering at present, we will take it. I move amendment S1M-1547.1, to leave out from "notes the concern" to end and insert: "welcomes the Executive's decision in the Spending Review 2000 to increase expenditure on transport by £500 million in the period to March 2004, recognises the progressive improvement of the A75 most recently through the scheme at The Glen completed in 1999 and the measures covering the next 10 years set out in the Route Action Plan , and notes that the Executive has already completed the short term measures and is now implementing the medium term priorities in that Plan."

None.

rose—

Mr Welsh's question demarcates the difference between the nationalists and the rest of the Parliament. As Mr Welsh discovered when he asked a similar question in Westminster, the European regulations stipulate that the distinguishing sign must be that of the member state. Under international treaties, for us the sign is "GB" for vehicles that are registered in Great Britain. That does not rule out people being able to use "SCO" or Saltire stickers and will allow Scottish motorists still to display on their vehicles the signs that they wish to display. I think that we all agree on that point.

If Mr Canavan so wishes, I will be happy to write to him about L-plates and whether national symbols should be displayed on them.

I acknowledge all the comments that have been made in this debate. Consideration of the Transport (Scotland) Bill has been an interesting process. We consulted widely.  Members who are not members of the Transport and the Environment Committee will sense that, in its huge number of debates, the committee delivered consensus where it was possible and agreed to disagree where consensus was not possible. The bill was improved by extensive pre-legislative discussion and by the work that was done by the committee. I will add to the list of people who have given a major input to the bill and mention my officials. Members of the committee thought that they represented an army, but I remind them of the very tight time scales involved. If there is one thing that would sometimes help our legislative process, it would be occasionally to have an extra 24 hours. We are all horse trading on our amendments to improve them, but with more time we could get them right rather than almost right. The bill will be a testament to the Parliament. It will give local authorities, transport operators and communities the opportunity to deliver the step change that we all agree is needed. I commend the bill to the Parliament.

I am delighted to be speaking today at the culmination of 18 months of hard work on the Transport (Scotland) Bill. The bill will be a major achievement of our Parliament and will deliver great improvements to transport throughout Scotland in the years to come. The Executive's commitment to improving our transport network is clear. This year, we have announced significant increases to our investment in transport. In September, I announced a £500 million spending package—a 45 per cent increase in real terms by 2003-04. That will deliver free off-peak bus travel for pensioners and people with a disability as well as long-overdue road repairs. An additional £60 million will be put into the public transport fund, increasing it to £150 million over the period to March 2004. There will be £75 million for the new integrated transport fund, to develop key projects to improve air, rail and bus travel in Scotland as well as increasing our opportunities for integrated transport. The rural transport fund will deliver further improvements outside our urban centres. In the period to March 2004, £68 million of funding will be available for our motorways and trunk roads. That is in addition to the £444 million that is already earmarked for Scotland's roads over the next two years. We have not forgotten local roads and bridges, an issue close to the heart of many members of this chamber. Local authority capital allocations include an additional £70 million over the next three years for roads and bridges.  The figures that I have just outlined represent substantial and unprecedented levels of investment that strike the right balance between our commitment to improving conditions for Scotland's motorists and our commitment to improving the quality of public transport alternatives. We cannot solve our problems overnight, but after years of neglect under the Conservatives, the problems facing our transport network are finally being addressed. However, it is not just about money. The bill will provide the statutory framework that we need to make a step change in transport a reality. The bill lies at the heart of our efforts to develop an integrated transport system, allowing for local solutions to local problems where that is the best way forward. We have reached this point after extensive debate. The bill offers an inclusive framework within which we can all work—local authorities, the private sector and other stakeholders—to plan and invest in the transport network. Wherever people live in Scotland—whether they travel by car or by bus, whether they cycle or whether they walk—there is something in this bill for them. We have an ambitious agenda. The bill will make possible more effective co-operation between local authorities in tackling shared transport problems, through the delivery of joint strategies. It will enable local authorities to work in partnership with bus companies to develop the bus market while safeguarding the interests of passengers. It will allow a balance to be established between quality partnerships and quality contracts, depending on local circumstances, along with improvements to ticketing systems and the provision of passenger information, to deliver clear benefits. The bill will also enable local authorities to introduce road user charging to tackle congestion in our worst-affected areas, subject to approval by Scottish ministers and on the understanding that there is a transparent contract with the motorist. We must take action now; we cannot leave it to future generations. We have crippling future congestion levels and alarming traffic growth projections, which will cause long-term damage to our environment. Charging schemes will be one way of addressing those issues effectively. Not only do they offer a robust means of reducing congestion, the revenue raised from charges will be ring-fenced for transport improvements. Local authorities will be able to put into practice their vision of successful, modern transport systems. The bill will also enable ministers to set a minimum level of travel concession for pensioners and those with a disability. The other provisions in the bill will allow us to tackle congestion problems on the Forth road bridge through a new joint board  that is able to act in an integrated way. Its activity will no longer be limited to the management and maintenance of the bridge and it will have the power to deliver real improvements to the surrounding area. That recognises the fact that problems on the bridge and the massive traffic congestion there cannot be viewed in isolation. Today we have also agreed an amendment on home zones, which holds out the prospect of a better quality of life for local communities. Those are some of the highlights of the bill. They demonstrate the Executive's commitment to delivering real transport improvements. However, the bill cannot be seen in isolation. Transport must link up with social inclusion, land use planning, the environment, education, health and economic development. Integration should not be limited by transport modes, administrative boundaries or the different needs of the variety of communities in Scotland. I believe that the discussions that we have had on the bill before bringing it back to the chamber today have delivered a more integrated approach to policy development. I would like to pay tribute to the Transport and the Environment Committee for its contribution to ensuring that the bill meets Scotland's needs in the 21 st century. We had lively, detailed and, for the most part, constructive debates at stage 2. We also had detailed scrutiny of the bill, line by line. I have outlined the many ways in which the bill will help provide the improved and integrated transport system that Scotland needs and deserves. We are already providing the resources and policies. This bill delivers the legislative framework to get Scotland moving. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Transport (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I am sure that members will be glad to hear that amendment 57 is the last on the groupings list. It clarifies that section 211 of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, which relates to the breach of statutory duties by local authorities, will apply for the purposes of this bill. Without further ado, I move amendment 57.  Amendment 57 agreed to.  Amendment 74 moved—[Sarah Boyack]—and agreed to.

These amendments are technical in nature. They make it clear that it is the job of Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive—rather than Strathclyde Passenger Transport Authority—to prepare and submit reports to ministers, and to acquire from operators the necessary information relating to services in their area. It is consistent with similar provisions in the bill. I move amendment 55.  Amendment 55 agreed to.   Amendment 56 moved—[Sarah Boyack]—and agreed to.

The amendment would narrow the uses to which a joint bridge board could put surplus toll income. That is the purpose of Bruce Crawford's amendment. As drafted, schedule 1 allows the joint bridge board that would be set up under section 69 of the bill to use the net revenue from a charging scheme to facilitate directly or indirectly the achievement of policies in its local transport strategy—in other words, to have the same powers as a local authority with a charging scheme. Surely that is how it should be. Why should a joint bridge board be limited to funding public transport? Traffic management will be key on the Forth road bridge. It will be key to the success of the reconstituted bridge board, but under the amendment, it would be intended that the board would have no money to spend on setting up dedicated multi-occupancy car commuter lanes, on cycle lanes and on targeted improvements to the road infrastructure that directly serves the bridge. Donald Gorrie and Margaret Smith spoke eloquently and made valid and sensible points about the history of developments around the bridge. There are massive congestion problems—more than 60,000 vehicles cross the bridge daily, many of them extremely slowly. The local authorities in the Forth transport infrastructure partnership have not asked for the amendment. They want access to the charging powers so that they can begin to tackle the ever-increasing congestion problems they face. The amendment would only hamper them in that goal. For those reasons, I ask members to reject the amendment.

No, I am coming to my last sentence. The amendment would consign motorists to continued frustration and delay. I ask members to reject it.

I sympathise with Robin Harper's aspirations, but I question whether his amendment is the right way to proceed. I agree that travel to and from work and travel during work are central to an integrated transport strategy. Green travel plans have an important role to play in promoting attractive and realistic alternatives to the car. The Scottish Executive is committed to working with employers throughout Scotland to encourage more use of such measures. Last year, we held a conference on green commuter plans. We invited a range of companies to discuss best practice, to share ideas and to discover what works. Last month, I launched a Scottish Executive report on the practice and effects of green travel plans. The research highlighted several examples of what can be achieved if companies engage effectively. Let me give members two examples. Over a two-year period, Hewlett Packard—which is now called Agilent Technologies UK Ltd—at South Queensferry increased rail use by its employees from 8 per cent to 14 per cent. Staff driving alone to the Royal Bank of Scotland at the Gyle in Edinburgh decreased by 10 per cent. Those are good examples of initiatives that have worked. Robin Harper gave some other good examples of policy mechanisms. We need to encourage other companies to do more. However, the amendment would not change practice on the ground. It would merely give rise to a potentially expensive paper chase, with benefits that were—at best—questionable. The requirement to submit data does not distinguish between travel by car and lorry and travel by train and bus. It does not distinguish between the different purposes of travel, which is important for employers who are considering how to change travel patterns, and it does not make clear how amounts of travel should be recorded. For example, would companies have to report the number of journeys made or the total distances travelled by their staff? That would depend on the needs of the companies—that is not identified in the amendment. There would be significant costs for the organisations concerned and for the Scottish Executive. To give members a sense of the numbers, there are more than 107,000 business  enterprises in Scotland that have one or more employees, of which more than 5,500 have 50 or more employees. Even if we consider only the bigger firms with 50 or more employees, we would still catch a huge number of companies in the amendment's net. All we would be asking them to do would be to carry out a survey of their travel patterns; we would not be asking them to do anything that would deliver sustainable travel patterns. We already have the statistics—we know the total amounts of freight transport and passenger travel. Those statistics are already collected by the national travel survey, the Scottish household survey and the road freight survey. The statistics have all been published, so we do not need to find the information. What we do need is to persuade people to act on that information. We need to help companies and give them examples of best practice. For all the reasons that I have given, I ask Parliament to reject the amendment if Robin Harper presses it to a vote.

I have much sympathy with the objectives that Bruce Crawford has set out in his amendment. We are all aware of the recent tragic incident—any such incident is one too many. We must do what we can to ensure that children can travel safely to and from school. That is why it is important that we are debating the issue in the context of the Transport (Scotland) Bill. However, the wording of the amendment presents certain difficulties. As we are at stage 3 of the bill, there is no opportunity to improve on the amendment and slot it into the bill. That is a pity. I accept the points that were made by Bruce Crawford and Donald Gorrie and I think that we will revisit the issue in future. However, we need to think very carefully about making new law, particularly in the complex area of road traffic and safety, where driver behaviour is influenced by a host of factors. The amendment seeks to introduce a scheme that is similar to the school bus system that operates in the United States of America, where vehicles are prohibited from overtaking a school bus that has stopped to pick up or drop off pupils. There is a major difference between their buses and ours. In the United States, school buses are very visible and readily identifiable and they are not used for any other purpose. In Scotland, local authorities already have a statutory duty to consider the safety of children when making arrangements for school transport. However, many of the buses that they use for school transport are used in ordinary service and are not readily distinguishable as school buses. That deserves some thought in the future. The Scottish Executive is committed to improving the safety of children travelling to or from school. However, to pick up on the point that Donald Gorrie made, it is clear that there are a few practical difficulties. There is an issue about educating drivers and creating a new framework. If we were to introduce the provision as it is currently framed in the amendment, it is likely that some drivers would try to overtake buses before they stop completely to avoid being held up. Drivers might also take risks to get ahead of a school bus when entering from a side road and that could increase the risk of road accidents. A ban on overtaking would not affect the flow of traffic travelling in the opposite direction. Given the fact that many roads have only two lanes, that could have an adverse impact on safety. There might be difficulties in enforcing the prohibition on overtaking, particularly in congested towns, where  we do not have the road capacity. In Scotland, the times at which children travel to school coincide with peak commuter travel. A requirement to stop while a school bus is stationary would add to congestion, which would have adverse safety, environmental and economic implications. Under the amendment, the overtaking ban would apply simply to a stationary school bus, rather than to one that is stationary for the purpose of picking up or setting down children. That is a slightly picky point, but it demonstrates the importance of drafting. As the amendment is drafted, vehicles would be prevented from overtaking buses that are parked. That would risk discrediting the new provisions and it would undermine the intention behind the amendment. As the amendment is drafted, trunk roads could not be designated as school bus priority routes. While relatively few schools are located on trunk roads in Scotland, many school bus routes involve travel on trunk roads, including places where children are collected and dropped off—particularly in rural areas. Finally, pursuing a different approach in Scotland from that in the rest of the UK raises road safety issues. It is likely that difficulties would arise in relation to long-distance lorries and people who travel around the UK. There are many potential down sides to the amendment in its current form. That is not to say that we should not do anything on the matter. It is worth noting that the American system is not foolproof. Children still die in school bus related accidents each year in the United States. In most cases, the children are hit either by vehicles passing the bus illegally or by the bus itself. There is no panacea, but that does not mean that we should not consider the issue carefully. Bruce Crawford is right in saying that FirstGroup is working on the issue. I understand that the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions and FirstGroup are working on the introduction of American-style school buses on a trial basis. We must consider how that trial plays out. FirstGroup is not looking for a ban on overtaking such buses, but we must consider the whole picture. There is much room for improvement in the safety of children on the roads—on the way to school and at other times. There is scope for action now, in terms of traffic-calming features, to safeguard children in the vicinity of schools. The safer routes allocation that I made earlier this year enables local authorities to take action to improve safety in and around schools. The home zones provisions that Parliament has agreed will also improve conditions for children in the streets outside their homes. We are making progress, but we need to get it right. I invite Bruce Crawford to  withdraw his amendment, on the basis that we will be taking this issue forward. There is much that we need to consider and, while I have suggested that the amendment as it is worded is not appropriate, that is partly because we are discussing it late in the day. It is something that we can come back to in future.

I am grateful to Des McNulty for lodging these two amendments. The issue of road safety was indeed discussed at stage 2, and I strongly support what the amendments are trying to achieve. Challenging targets for reductions in road accident casualties were set earlier this year. We want the incidence of fatal and serious injuries to be reduced by 40 per cent over the next decade and that of fatal and serious injuries to children to fall by 50 per cent over the same period. Local authorities have a major role in achieving those targets. I agree with Des McNulty that the Executive should be able to make grants to assist authorities with particular projects, especially those that are targeted at vulnerable road users such as children, pedestrians and cyclists. Those projects are likely to bring worthwhile benefits. The safer routes to school scheme, for which I announced additional resources earlier this year, provides an excellent example of projects that would be eligible for a grant under the new power. In that case, funding was provided to local authorities by means of capital consents, as there was no simple mechanism to pay grants for specific road safety measures. Amendments 52 and 58 will enable the Scottish ministers to support worthwhile local authority projects by way of grants. I believe that the new power will be welcomed by local authorities and by others who are engaged in road safety. For those reasons, I support amendments 52 and 58.  Amendment 52 agreed to.

I am delighted to support amendment 53. It will provide the opportunity for local authorities to designate formally home zones in which speed limits may be set at 10 miles per hour or 20 miles per hour. Like Nora Radcliffe, I want there to be more home zones throughout Scotland. This amendment will help to secure that aim. Home zones will bring key benefits, such as improvements to the environment outside people's homes by ensuring that road space can be used  safely by all. That could lead to an improvement in the quality of life, to the development of vibrant and inclusive communities and to improvements in health, by encouraging more walking and cycling in a safer environment. For all those reasons, home zones are an excellent idea. I want to pick up Robin Harper's point on policy guidance. In Scotland, home zones are being piloted in Thurso, Edinburgh and Dundee in order to enable us to examine before, during and after the pilots the experience of how home zones work. That will enable us to learn from the consultation process how local authorities work with communities and how to make the schemes right technically for individual local circumstances. From those pilot studies we will produce guidance for local authorities, so that each local authority will not have to reinvent the wheel and will be able to gain experience and knowledge from other home zones. It is important that we pass amendment 53, which makes provision for Scottish ministers to make regulations to prescribe the procedure to be followed by local authorities when designating a home zone. The amendment is not about red tape or bureaucracy. It is important that local authorities have proper and common procedures when designating home zones to ensure that their proposals have been consulted on properly. Where objections are raised, they should be dealt with properly, openly and transparently. Local people must be involved in shaping the changes that are designed to transform their neighbourhoods and streets. That will require consultation not just on the principle of home zones but on the detail. With the powers provided for in these amendments, we will introduce regulations that will build on best practice in the rest of the UK and Europe. Donald Gorrie raised child safety issues, and home zones will provide a wonderful opportunity for children to play in their own area. However, home zones will not take away the need for road traffic and safety training to take place in schools across the country. Children will still need to learn how to interact with cars and other vehicles, but I believe that home zones will be a major benefit. To answer Murray Tosh's question, our intention is that local authorities will be able to designate within a home zone any part of a road that they think appropriate. The designation order would have to specify clearly exactly what was to be within the home zone, and what was not, in order to consult local residents effectively when proposals are made.  Amendment 53 agreed to.

Amendment 48 is entirely technical and is designed to ensure consistency of drafting throughout the bill. I move amendment 48.  Amendment 48 agreed to.

Section 69B is a very important section of the bill. There has been strong pressure from disability groups for us to improve the discussions that take place in Scotland and the policy objectives, and to deliver better transport for people who have disabilities. I am aware that disability groups have been pressing for a statutory underpinning of the Scottish advisory group on the transport needs of disabled people, which I indicated this summer that I am keen to establish. Initially, I was not convinced that that group needed a statutory underpinning, but I have listened carefully and have read the submissions from disabled groups and individuals on the issue of whether the group should have statutory status. Subsequently, I have lodged an Executive amendment to achieve that. Earlier this year, we consulted on the role, remit, membership and work programme of the proposed non-statutory body. I appreciate the work that was put in by all those who responded to the consultation. It is important to act on the responses to that consultation. If amendment 49 is agreed to, the next step will be to produce draft regulations for the establishment of a statutory body, which I aim to do in the first quarter of 2001.  It is my intention to consult widely on the draft regulations before returning to the Parliament with detailed proposals. I would like to retain a degree of flexibility in establishing the group, which amendment 49 would allow. It is important to draw to members' attention the fact that the Scottish group's remit will overlap with that of the Disabled Persons Transport Advisory Committee, which operates at a UK level. That committee contains two Scottish members, but it has a considerable work load and it will be important for the new Scottish group to consult DPTAC about the two bodies' programmes of work, to ensure that they build on and complement rather than duplicate one another. It is important that we get that process going. I shall consult on arrangements for the publication of the advice of the group, when it meets and produces that advice, and I shall produce draft regulations at that point. I expect the Scottish Parliament to take a close interest in the work of the group, and I am happy to commit the group to enabling that to happen. The Transport and the Environment Committee and the Equal Opportunities Committee will be especially interested in the work of the group. I hope that the Parliament will support the amendment. I move amendment 49.

Robert Brown said that the group will involve people with disabilities. I am keen for that to happen. Part of the consultation exercise on the regulations will be to establish the balance in the committee and ensure that we get the right mix. It is important that we get people from a range of disability groups and ensure that we have a degree of representation from the transport companies. Getting that balance right will be tricky as there are a lot of people who want to be involved in the process. We want to be inclusive from the start. I know that the Scottish Accessible Transport Alliance and Disability Scotland are keen to ensure that we get the balance right. It is important to log with the Parliament that standards for buses and trains make up the core work of DPTAC at the UK level. I want the focus to remain there to ensure that we have universal standards and safety standards across the UK. We will tease out that issue when the two committees are set up and working. We will have to ensure that they liaise properly. If we get the right people on the committee and get the regulations right, that should be possible.

Although I had finished speaking, I will respond to Mr Canavan. On that issue, I was clear in the committee that we have a strong commitment to delivering a free scheme for pensioners and people with disabilities. There is  the scope for the expansion of that scheme, but that would require more resources. I cannot commit the Executive to the provision of those resources.  Amendment 49 agreed to.

Current legislation in the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984 allows roads authorities to promote redetermination orders, which could change the designation of a pavement from one that is used solely by pedestrians to one that could be shared by pedestrians and cyclists. I have received representations that this power is too restrictive. Unlike other road traffic orders, it gives no powers for roads authorities to make experimental redetermination orders to test their effectiveness before promoting a permanent order. The amendment would enable that to happen. I must stress that it will not allow the introduction of an unwanted redetermination order through the back door. Experimental redetermination orders will be valid for a maximum length of 18 months with a further period for the roads authority to promote a permanent redetermination order under existing legislation. That legislation provides for dealing with objections. At the end of the 18-month experimental period, should the authority decide not to promote a permanent order, the amendment is drafted to ensure that any reinstatement work to return the footway to its original condition—by removing markings and signs—should be carried out.  I know that, sometimes, pedestrians can find cyclists intimidating. I believe, however, that shared-use facilities can and do work well in appropriate circumstances—a good example is the Meadows in Edinburgh. It is important for local authorities to be given appropriate guidance, and such guidance is provided by "Cycling by Design", which we issued last year. That stipulates the minimum width of footways for which shared use can function safely. It also outlines measures to ensure that cyclists and pedestrians are properly segregated. Amendment 50 is not a measure to encourage indiscriminate cycling on pavements. That is an offence, and will remain so. It is a measure to encourage local authorities to think about how to encourage and promote cycling where appropriate, and to enable them to test out the effectiveness of their ideas without having initially to go the whole way to promoting a  redetermination order. I move amendment 50.  Amendment 50 agreed to.  Amendment 51 not moved.

I share Donald Gorrie's aspirations in lodging the amendment. That was the view that I took when we discussed the amendment at stage 2. We agree that, if we are to tackle transport problems effectively, local authorities must consider the transport implications of facilities or projects. However, I do not think that only local authorities should be required to do that. I also do not think that amendment 3 would do what Donald Gorrie hopes. In fact, I think it would do quite the reverse. I am mindful of the fact that at stage 2 there was a tied vote on the issue, so I will deal in detail with the points that are made in the amendment and say why I do not think that they are appropriate for the bill. Amendment 3 is both too narrow and vague. It refers only to public transport. There is no mention of cycling, of walking or of situations in which freight may be an issue in local authority development. There is also no reference to cars. Donald Gorrie mentioned them in his speech, but they are not included in his amendment. Projects that are not funded or supported by local authorities, such as national health service projects—Donald Gorrie spoke about hospitals—and university, private sector and Scottish Executive projects, would not be covered because of the way in which the amendment is drafted. The definition of publicly funded projects could be loose enough to include parades or hogmanay festivities, if they are supported financially by a local authority. All local authority funded projects would be caught, from the local creche to the community library to the 1,000-pupil school. Donald Gorrie gave the example of pensioners' lunch clubs, which would also be affected by the amendment. Public transport might not be the most appropriate form of transport in that situation. A community transport initiative might be more  effective than a registered, regular bus service. It is important that we think through the implications of the amendment very carefully. Donald Gorrie also cited the example of the new Edinburgh royal infirmary. There is investment in public transport for that project. This year the Executive gave the City of Edinburgh Council £8 million, in part to allow the creation of a high-quality bus corridor that will include the new Edinburgh royal infirmary. There are ways in which we can help public transport reach local authority funded projects. Paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (2) amendment 3 suggest that local authorities must, in any documents that they are preparing—including documents that describe or promote a project or facility—indicate exactly what public transport facilities are available and say whether they are any good. That could have undesirable implications for tourism and other activities. We want promotional literature advertising council-supported theatre, tourist attractions or festivities. All of that would have to include the council's assessment of the adequacy of public transport services and related cost figures. That would take up space and might detract from key promotional messages. I will come on to other ways to deliver that. Our ability to enforce amendment 3 is also doubtful. The resource implications of checking each local authority project or facility would be significant. Checking would lead to more bureaucracy, more form filling and more report writing, and would not deliver the long-term transport benefits that Donald Gorrie seeks. There are better ways to address the transport implications of travel-generating developments. For example, national planning policy guideline 17 already promotes an integrated approach to land use, economic development, transport and the environment for new developments, whether public or private. A transport assessment must be prepared as a matter of course for significant travel-generating developments. That assessment must indicate the expected travel demand and the mode shares that are deemed acceptable, including any actions that are required to achieve those mode shares. We are keen to promote green travel plans for existing developments—the use of public transport, cycling, walking and shared car use by employees, suppliers and customers, both for commuting and during the working day. There are many better ways in which we can deliver the objectives behind amendment 3. It raises important issues, but it would be a mistake to incorporate it in the bill. Dennis Canavan asked about taxis. They are  not specifically covered in the bill as drafted, but ministers could bring them into the scope of a scheme by order under the definition of "eligible services". Members should examine section 68(6). By widening that definition and using the order-making process that is identified at line 23 on page 40, we could address that issue if we and local authorities felt that it was important. Our public commitment is to off-peak bus fares within the currently identified local authority concessionary areas. That commitment is in the bill. We had many discussions in committee about the extent to which it could be amended. We have had a report from consultants about different costings. I am keen to consider with local authorities the most efficient schemes that we could deliver and to debate those issues with them, but that is not specifically covered in the bill. That was Dennis Canavan's key question, but the way the bill is drafted does not prevent us from doing that in the future. We have scope to expand on what is currently in the bill. I hope that that answers Dennis's question.

It would not so much be about a delay; it would be a matter of priority depending upon how important it was at the time. There would also be discussions with local authorities. How we proceed with the order-making process is clear in the bill. We have not seen that as a top priority. We will discuss involving people with disabilities and disabled issues in transport later this afternoon. We would expect that group to discuss this issue and many others. We did not discuss the matter in detail during the committee stage of the bill.

Although I am happy to sign up to the wider aspiration behind Mr Gorrie's amendment and to work with local authorities to deliver it, the terms of amendment 3 do not cover his points in the way that he suggests.

I understand and sympathise with the reasons for which Robin Harper has lodged amendment 70. There is a need to manage traffic growth in such a way as to reduce its harmful effects on the environment and to make Scotland cleaner and safer. I strongly support his motivation in that respect, as do the other members who have spoken. However, legislation already exists to achieve those aims—the Road Traffic Reduction (National Targets) Act 1998. That act requires Scottish ministers to set and publish in a report targets for road traffic reduction. It also makes provision for Scottish ministers not to set a target if they consider that other targets or measures are more appropriate for the purpose of reducing the adverse impact of road traffic. In that case, ministers are obliged to publish a report that explains their reasoning and includes an assessment of the impact of the other targets or measures on road traffic reduction. The act requires ministers to have regard to the adverse impact of road traffic in a number of areas, including the emission of gases that contribute to climate change; the effects on air quality, health, land and biodiversity; traffic congestion; danger to other road users; and social impacts. In that regard, the act encompasses a wider range of effects than Mr Harper envisages in his amendment. On the issue of national targets, Mr Harper's amendment is too restrictive—it takes too narrow a view. I agree with some of the comments that members have made on that point. The target to reduce the total miles travelled is, in isolation, not very meaningful. The improvements that we are working towards will be brought about by a number of policies working together and are not simply to do with distance driven or the number of cars on the road. Our traffic management policies should not be seen in isolation from our air quality strategy or the climate change programme. For example, the new emission standards being adopted by car manufacturers and newer cleaner fuels will have a major impact on emissions. Local authorities have powers to set up local authority air quality management areas. Other measures will tackle vehicle use. For instance, new planning policies will ensure that economic development and transport planning work together and there will be better facilities for more environmentally friendly travel modes. Road safety is being addressed through the UK road safety strategy, which was published by the Government and the Executive earlier this year. All those measures play a part. I should also  mention the other parts of the bill that have already been accepted, such as the regional transport strategies and the bus improvement toolkit. The new ScotRail franchise and the targets to double the use of bicycles between 1996 and 2002 are also important. As Robin Harper said, we need a step-by-step approach. The public transport fund, the rural transport fund, freight facilities grants and a range of other measures are being acted on—I hope that that reassures Donald Gorrie. We are doing our bit to try to manage traffic growth. Another reason why I do not think that a single national target is the best way to achieve our ends is that it would create a totally inflexible situation, which would not bring the desired benefits. What is appropriate in Glasgow or Edinburgh cannot possibly be appropriate in the Scottish Borders or in the Highlands. We live in a country with a diverse geography and there are significant differences in road traffic levels in different areas of Scotland. There are also different economic and social needs, which are bound up with road traffic and must be taken into account. Policies need to be flexible enough to take account of those differences. Cathy Jamieson mentioned rural areas, where social inclusion considerations put constraints on traffic management, as do the requirements of tourism and primary industries such as fishing and forestry. Our cities demand totally different solutions to deal with the problems of congestion and pollution. We need local solutions for local problems and we need to be flexible. The Executive wants to target road traffic growth in ways that are relevant to the situation in each different area, rather than by producing blanket plans and targets that could be detrimental to some parts of Scotland. The Road Traffic Reduction (National Targets) Act 1998 allows for a single national target if that is considered to be the appropriate solution. Once we have the final versions of the local transport strategies that are being prepared by local authorities, which will be accompanied by the proposals that each local authority is required to work up under the 1998 act, we will pull them together. At that point, we will announce our proposals to identify what is being done through the bill to implement the 1998 act. We will engage in reasoned discussion to implement the measures that we are currently taking. That is a more responsive approach to the concerns of our varied communities. I know that Robin Harper is keen to pursue the amendment and that he raised the issue at stage 2 as well. Given the reassurances that I have given, I invite him to withdraw his amendment. I hope that he will do so.

I see that he does not intend to. On behalf of the Executive, I give a commitment to provide more detail on progress on the objectives. We have a national delivery plan for transport. Road traffic reduction is a key part of that approach.

It is impossible for me to address every point that members have made. However, there are some issues that we need to deal with. Over the past year and a half, we have debated extensively the principle of an enabling bill that would allow road user charging. The debate has been lengthy, but very public, in the Transport and the Environment Committee and beyond. We are absolutely clear that local accountability, hypothecation, fairness, transparency and investment in public transport before a charging scheme is introduced are the principles that underpin the charging powers for which the bill provides. We have given motorists key guarantees in advance of road user charging powers being exercised. We have also given a raft of commitments on the regulations that will follow the bill. There is a general consensus in the chamber on the importance of local accountability. The bill is required to deliver that. Donald Gorrie, Mike Rumbles and Des McNulty highlighted one of the key issues that the bill tackles—regional transport partnerships. This is about Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire working together and about the south-east Scotland transport partnership. The bill will enable local authorities to work together on broader issues that cross their boundaries. Des McNulty made a point about transport management in the west of Scotland. For the past 50-odd years, Glasgow has had the benefit of sustained investment in a railway network around the city. Edinburgh now has to catch up. The west of Scotland offers some key lessons about regional transport investment and about local authorities working together across boundaries. Our bill will deliver that. It is important that we remember that it provides for an enabling power. I want to touch briefly on the points that Fiona McLeod made, because she asked me a direct question about the classes of users. The exemption will apply to vehicles and the regulations will require exemptions for specific classes of vehicles. One class will be vehicles displaying a badge. I hope that that reassures the member. I take her point about the information that is needed in advance. We hope to provide for that  through the regulations that will accompany the bill. The issue has been discussed extensively in committee. The amendments that I have lodged give the chamber a sense of how detailed the discussions have been about what information is needed up front and what it is appropriate for local authorities to tell local people when they are consulting them about the content of a scheme.

Will the member give way?

It may help if I give Mr McLetchie the information that we set out in our paper to the Transport and the Environment Committee on delivering integrated transport initiatives through road user charging. In that paper, we outlined the consultation and approval process for road user charging schemes. We made it clear that the bare minimum that authorities will have to do is consult those who are likely to be affected. Among those, we cited residents, business, commuters—including  commuters from outside the charging authority—neighbouring local authorities, emergency services and public transport operators. I hope that that gives Mr McLetchie some comfort.

Amendments 45 and 46 are of a technical nature. Amendment 45 is drafted in the same terms as an amendment that was tabled to the Westminster Transport Bill. It clarifies the powers that may be conferred on the regulations under section 47(1). It tightens up the circumstances under which any equipment required by a charging scheme may be examined. Amendment 46 is consequential on a number of amendments that were agreed to at stage 2 on the effective enforcement of charging schemes. It makes it clear that the power to seize evidence does not apply to a motor vehicle in the public service of the Crown. I move amendment 45.  Amendment 45 agreed to.  Amendment 46 moved—[Sarah Boyack]—and agreed to.

I will take David McLetchie's amendment head on, before I discuss the five other amendments in the group. Mr McLetchie made a rather laboured speech. His amendment strikes at the heart of one of the defining principles of the charging provisions, which would significantly devolve power to local authorities that have pressing congestion problems. Mr McLetchie referred to the consensus in the chamber—it is somewhat unusual for Labour, Liberal Democrat and SNP members to agree in principle about something. I suggest to Mr McLetchie that Robin Harper—who is not here at the moment—would be somewhat offended that he was left off his list. There is broad consensus because, on charging, we have had one of the most extensive consultation periods in the Parliament's history. There has been a huge debate throughout the country, which I am sure Mr McLetchie has not missed. It is recognised that we must give local authorities the opportunity to consider how to tackle congestion and how to generate significant funds for long-term investment, which will improve public transport choices. I understand that we will return to that issue later today when we have the final debate on the bill. I believe strongly that responsibility for local policies lies with local authorities. It is for them to consult locally and to win over opponents locally, because the charges will be raised locally.

If Mr McLetchie has studied the bill in detail, he will know that the regulations will specify the fair process for consultation. Parliament has discussed that extensively in the past few months, as has the Transport and the Environment Committee. Neighbouring authorities that have an interest in any scheme will be consulted. We have made it clear all along that the principle of fairness applies to consultation and to public transport improvements. Detailed schemes will be submitted to Scottish ministers for confirmation only when local authorities have won support for them. There is a two-stage approval process—there must be approval on the principle and on the detail. In exercising the power of whether to approve or give local authorities the power to go to the next stage, ministers will be accountable to Parliament. Evidently, Mr McLetchie thinks that that is not  enough—he wants Parliament to have a veto over any local road user charging scheme. He wants, for example, an MSP from the Highlands or the north-east to have a say in whether charging should be introduced in Edinburgh or Glasgow—never mind the fact that people in Edinburgh or Glasgow, or the people who will be affected by the scheme, will have to be consulted. It is important that we get those facts straight. Mr McLetchie has given us notice today that he will run a campaign in the Lothians—I am sure that members are most interested to hear that. Mr McLetchie should, however, run a campaign in the City of Edinburgh Council—perhaps he should consider that for the future. The bill, if enacted, would be enabling legislation. The importance of that is that Parliament would give powers and set frameworks through the provisions in the bill and through regulations. It would then be up to local authorities to make their case to local residents. There has been extensive consultation. We have got the balance right in the bill—the detailed proposals that flow from it will be discussed at local level; that is where such discussions should take place. I suggest strongly, therefore, that the chamber should not support Mr McLetchie's amendment. I turn to the five amendments in the group that I wish to move. There are three issues—I will take each of them in turn. Amendments 40 and 44 would tidy up section 44(1)(f), which was introduced by Fiona McLeod at stage 2. I want to say at the outset that I am happy with the spirit of Fiona McLeod's amendment and I hope that she acknowledges that what I propose in its place in no way compromises her initial intention, which was to ensure that any charging scheme specified who was entitled to exemptions from or concessions on road user charges. As I have made clear on many occasions, we believe that national exemptions should be limited to the emergency services and those whose mobility is impaired. I explained at stage 2 that we will enshrine those exemptions in regulations. In the case of people with disabilities, that will follow the UK-wide review of the blue badge scheme. Our road user charges apply to vehicles—not to people. Therefore if, for example, a national exemption was applied to all blue badge holders, that exemption would apply to the vehicle in which the badge holder was travelling, but not the badge holder. However, as drafted, section 44(1)(f) refers to persons as well as classes of vehicle. The amendment to section 44 merely corrects that anomaly. The deletion of section 45(2) is consequential on agreement to the amendment to section 44(1). Amendment 41 would revise section 44(1)(g) to section 44(1)(i), which was also introduced by  Fiona McLeod at stage 2. We decided to lodge the amendment after strong representations from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the City of Edinburgh Council. They are concerned that, as drafted in the bill at present, sections 44(1)(g), (h) and (i) would place severe constraints on the ability of any authority to produce the most effective operational arrangements for the management of a charging scheme. The Executive shares those concerns. In effect, Fiona McLeod's amendment would—as it stands in the bill—freeze the scheme in time. If new technology became available, it would not be possible for an authority to take advantage of it without going back through the full approval process. If an authority decided to introduce a new payment or billing procedure, it would have to go back through the full approval process. The same would apply if an authority wished to transfer some key technical risks to the private sector. If an authority wished to renew a contract to collect a charge, even if no other changes of substance were made to the scheme, it would have to go back through the full approval process. I do not think that that is what Fiona McLeod intended. That would inhibit the charging authority from seeking best value from the public sector. I want to make it clear that amendment 41 would in no way undermine the probity or transparency of any charging scheme. It would enable locals and commuters who were affected by such a scheme to know about the given scheme and its efficient operation. Amendments 42 and 43 would allow a charging authority—if it so wished—to bring forward a charging scheme that provided for a road user charge to increase in line with inflation. We touched on that issue in committee at stage 2. At the time, the interpretation of section 44(1)(d) was that it would enable an authority to raise charges in line with inflation. On reflection—after stage 2—we believe that a specific amendment is necessary to put that issue beyond any doubt; the amendments would do that. As I made clear at stage 2, any authority that wishes to introduce a charging scheme must leave local people and commuters in no doubt as to what is being proposed—the process must be transparent. Any consultation on the detail of a proposed scheme must clarify the level of the charge and, if the amendment is agreed to, whether that charge would be increased in line with inflation over the lifetime of the scheme. The amendments specify that the precise measure of inflation will be the retail prices index, so that there can be no dispute once the bill is in place. It is important that local authorities are not given a blank cheque and that we are specific in the bill. I am sure that local authorities will welcome the  amendments, because they offer the degree of flexibility that the authorities have been looking for. It is important to say that agreement to the amendments would give local authorities the ability to work with the private sector to pay for local transport improvements on the back of charging schemes. Everybody will agree that private lenders are more likely to lend money on a 10-year revenue stream if it is clear at the start that they have some form of insurance against inflation, if that is critical to the operation of the scheme. I therefore ask Parliament to reject David McLetchie's amendment—it is inappropriate and it is a wrecking amendment—and to support amendments 40, 41, 42, 43 and 44. In the context of the bill, enabling legislation is appropriate—that is what we have discussed at every stage of the bill.

It is important that I respond to the questions that have been raised. First, I wish to clarify that the power that is suggested in Cathy Jamieson's amendment 39 is an enabling power; it is not a power that I would expect to see automatically applied en bloc across Scotland. It is a power to be used in the event of a major problem in a local authority area, where action is required and where a local authority has been able to make an extremely good case that we need to have a special order. I emphasise that I do not foresee a blanket application across Scotland. We certainly did not discuss the power in those terms at stage 2. We were considering issues such as school holiday changes and interaction with other modes of transport that have less frequent timetable changes. I reassure the bus industry that I do not feel that there will be a blanket application of the  measures across Scotland; I see this as a power to be used when a good case has been made that it should be used. The comments about exceptional circumstances are important. The role of the traffic commissioner is important, as someone who stands apart from local authorities and the bus companies and acts in the public interest. The examples that Nora Radcliffe gave were examples where there is scope for adequate notice to be given. If a new shopping centre is being built, it will not appear overnight. As a minister who formerly was responsible for planning, I know that those things take time, and changes can be anticipated. School holidays are planned well in advance. Where a case can be made that there is an exceptional circumstance, the case will still be able to be made. I stress that the power that we are supporting is an enabling power, and it must be seen in that light. One of the interesting points that has emerged in the past month when we have all been looking at the issue is that, as Nora Radcliffe said, 50 per cent of the changes that are made to timetables are made at the behest of local authorities, so it is important that the discussion is kept in proportion, and that it is not elevated. There is a balance to be struck in the bill, and I see the power being used when there is a good argument to use it. It is a power that can be used where there is a specific issue, and I do not expect to see it being applied in a blanket fashion across the country. I hope that my comments reassure the bus industry, which has a vision of set dates when every single change will be specified. That is not at all what we have in mind, and it is not what the provision would enable. I will comment briefly on Trish Godman's points. I am aware of the concerns that have been expressed by people who are served by the Arriva bus company. The decision that Arriva took on bus services to Erskine was a commercial decision. It is worth stressing that under the bill, advance notification of withdrawals and route changes to local bus services will be required to be registered with the traffic commissioner subject to 56 days' notice, which is an increase on the current notice of 42 days. That is not a huge change, but it is an important change for local communities. Less than 56 days' notice could be given only in exceptional circumstances, when notification is agreed at the discretion of the traffic commissioner. We are keen that stability is maintained by the new powers in the bill. There is the opportunity to have quality contracts where a local authority can make the case that it is in the wider public interest, but again, there must be ministerial agreement before that option is used. There is a toolkit of measures, and it is important that they are used  where appropriate. It might be helpful if I tell members that in Scotland as a whole, the figures suggest that local authorities are spending less on tendered bus services than they did several years ago, and that the volume of subsidised services across Scotland, measured in bus kilometres, is higher now than it was in the 1980s, so we have strong support for subsidised bus services across Scotland. Our bill gives a range of options to local authorities, for example, the requirement that operators that are cancelling services give 14 days' notice to the relevant transport authority. That is important because, as I said earlier, it gives local authorities time to plan, so that they are not landed with an instant withdrawal. If a local authority feels that it is an important social service, and it is not being provided by a private bus company, it can step in and provide a tender process to replace that service. We are improving the opportunities for local authorities to work with bus companies. The regulations are being tightened up, but that is reasonable, and it is in the interests of having a healthy bus market and a healthy relationship between local authorities and the bus companies.  Amendment 68 agreed to.  Amendment 39 moved—[Cathy Jamieson]—and agreed to.

Amendment 66 is a technical drafting amendment to new subsection (3A). Under section 36, the penalty that the traffic commissioner can determine in respect of unregistered or unreliable local services can be varied from a minimum of 1 per cent to a maximum of 20 per cent. The traffic commissioner's adjudication will depend on the severity of the offence. The use of the word "determined" rather than "mentioned" ensures drafting consistency in section 36 and emphasises that the amount is a formal decision of the traffic commissioner.  I move amendment 66.  Amendment 66 agreed to.

The bus user complaints tribunal is an important addition to ensure that customers who use buses have a proper place to make complaints. The amendments enable the regulation of that process to be established. The tribunal will enable bus users to have their complaints properly considered and acted on. It is important in the context of the wider powers and improvements in the bus industry. I move amendment 36.

It is important that such reports are brought to the Parliament, so that it is aware of what is being proposed. We are keen that the new requirements are transparent and that we can monitor them. It is an opportunity for the Transport and the Environment Committee and the Parliament to have sight of what is being proposed.  Amendment 36 agreed to.  Amendments 37 and 38 moved—[Sarah Boyack]—and agreed to.

Amendment 67 was suggested to the Executive after stage 2 by the Association of Transport Co-ordinating Officers. It extends the circumstances in which information about journeys, fares and distances that a local authority may have collected from a bus operator can be disclosed to third parties. Section 37A allows a local authority to obtain information on the patronage, fares and routes of an operator of local services. If the existing operator notified a local authority or the traffic commissioner that they were about to cease to operate a service, or if they ceased to operate a service without giving proper  notice, this provision would come into effect. It would allow the local authority to use information that it had obtained under section 37A in immediate negotiations or tendering procedures with potential new operators that might step in to run the service on a supported basis. The amendment will allow more speedy and effective action for the local transport authority to secure continuing bus services. I move amendment 67.  Amendment 67 agreed to.

Amendment 68 is important to the pursuit of better bus services. It adds a new condition to the registration of bus services. Although the wording is rather complex, the effect is clear. The amendment will require any new bus service or variation of service to be run for a minimum of 90 days. That provision will give bus passengers greater security in the knowledge that the bus service will not be subject to chopping and changing. The measure will go a long way towards ensuring greater stability in the bus market. I am grateful to Cathy Jamieson for lodging amendment 39, which I fully support. We discussed the issue at stage 2 and I accepted the principle behind the proposal to provide Scottish ministers with enabling powers to impose fixed dates for bus timetable changes. I must emphasise that we recognised—I noted the comments from the Confederation of Passenger Transport and others—that although in some circumstances there could be disadvantages in limiting flexibility, in other circumstances there might be positive benefits to users in limiting timetable changes. At stage 2, I said that the Executive would be willing to support such an amendment, provided that the intent to provide stability was maintained, while enabling a degree of flexibility to respond to unanticipated circumstances. Amendment 39 goes a considerable way towards achieving that. An important part of the amendment is the power for Scottish ministers to set by order fixed dates for changes within one or more local authorities. Neither the local authorities nor I would want to destabilise local bus services that are operating satisfactorily. However, within a specific area, if bus operators are not able or are unwilling to deliver a suitable and satisfactory level of service for customers—and, in the light of the provisions of the bill, potential customers—the amendment will enable transport authorities to request my approval for the option of fixed  registration dates. Amendment 74 represents a further tightening of the registration and information framework. The local authorities tell us—this has been disputed by bus operators—that, often, the first indication that they receive that a service is to be changed or withdrawn is when they receive a copy of the new registration details. Local authorities argue that that makes it very difficult to plan and deliver supported services where that is considered appropriate. Amendment 74 allows me to make regulations in connection with applications for the registration of services, among other things. I intend to use that to introduce a statutory requirement for operators to consult transport authorities 14 days before they register changes with the traffic commissioner—that would be 14 days on top of the 56 days' notice that they are formally required to give. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Association of Transport Co-ordinating Officers have expressed support for such a measure, as has the Confederation of Passenger Transport. There is a general agreement that, in order to encourage growth in the use of public transport, we need to ensure stability in bus services. People need to know what services are available and when they will turn up. The research and consultation that we have carried out indicate that stability and reliability are key factors in generating confidence among users. Together with our provisions for better information, ticketing arrangements and access to quality partnerships, amendments 68 and 74, in my name, and amendment 39, in the name of Cathy Jamieson, will be welcomed in helping to secure improved bus services on a voluntary basis. The bill is about working in partnership. If local authorities and bus operators approach their operations in such a way, I am confident that the quality and quantity of bus services in Scotland can be improved significantly. I emphasise that although I am keen to see progress in the partnership approach, I will not hesitate to use the powers when I have been persuaded that it is necessary to do so. They are an important backstop. The ball is in the bus operators' court; there is an opportunity to work in partnership with local authorities. In our best practice advice, I will encourage local authorities to do that. That provides us with a new toolkit to allow bus operators and local authorities to work together. I support amendment 39 in the name of Cathy Jamieson. I move amendment 68.

Amendments 59 and 60 were promised in response to amendments lodged by Bruce Crawford at stage 2. His amendments highlighted the fact that the previous drafting of the bill was not as tight as it might have been. Section 4 concerns consultation on proposed quality partnership schemes. Section 13 concerns consultation on quality contracts. Both provisions provide for consultation in certain circumstances with certain English authorities. In particular, they provide for consultation in cases in which the relevant Scottish authority considers that the proposed scheme is likely to affect any part of the area of the English authority concerned. Amendments 59 and 60 make it clearer to which English authorities that requirement will apply—those authorities that have substantive transport functions. I am grateful for the thoughtful amendment—amendment 17—that Des McNulty has lodged, which revisits the logic behind the duration of quality partnership schemes. At stage 2, I accepted the principle of Des McNulty's earlier amendment. His revised amendment removes any doubt about the ability of local authorities to set up a quality partnership scheme for a minimum period of three years and for a maximum period of seven years. That allows for a much more flexible approach than does the current drafting. A minimum of three years will enable local authorities to test the water and to explore whether a quality partnership would be effective in their area, without either the local authority or the bus operator having to commit to large-scale investment. The maximum period of seven years for the operation of any individual quality partnership enables local authorities and bus operators to review the success of existing partnerships with a view to deciding whether they should be improved further. I move amendment 59 and commend amendment 17.

Amendments 18 and 19 are small technical amendments that require local authorities to consult and give notice to operators that are likely to be affected by the postponement of a quality partnership scheme. They reflect the amendments made to section 16, which deals with the postponement of quality contract schemes, which were discussed at stage 2. I move amendment 18.  Amendment 18 agreed to.  Amendment 19 moved—[Sarah Boyack]—and agreed to.

The purpose of the amendments in this group is to clarify the process for exclusions under quality contract schemes. They are relatively technical amendments. I move amendment 21.  Amendment 21 agreed to.  Amendment 22 moved—[Sarah Boyack]—and agreed to.

Amendment 23 makes it clear that the date on which a scheme will come into operation applies to each local service within the scheme. Policy is not affected by amendments 61 and 62, which are technical. I move amendment 23.  Amendment 23 agreed to.

This is a small group of amendments, most of which are technical and do not deliver any material change in policy. Amendment 63 deals with situations in which a quality contract scheme does not specify the date on which a particular quality contract will come into operation. Section 15A(1)(b) provides for a date to be negotiated between the authority and the operator. Amendment 63 ensures that that date is "as is specified in or determined under the quality contract" rather than simply the date that is notified in local papers. The notification provisions are still required. Sections 15A(2) and 18(7) relate to notification of the commencement of a quality contract. Amendments 24 and 28 consolidate those provisions in a single section—section 15A. The amendments do not effect any change in policy. Amendment 25 is a technical amendment that adjusts the running order of the quality contract provisions so that the flow is more logical and is consistent throughout the quality contract process. I move amendment 63.  Amendment 63 agreed to.  Amendments 24 and 25 moved—[Sarah Boyack]—and agreed to.

Amendments 26 and 27 are consequential to amendments that were made at stage 2. They must be read together and aim to clarify section 18(3) on the date on which a quality contract scheme comes into operation. That section already specifies that the maximum period of a quality contract shall not exceed seven years. Amendment 29 requires local authorities that make quality contracts that are urgently required, in response to a situation in which action is needed to secure bus provision, to specify in any tender that the contract must not exceed seven years. The amendment ensures consistency with the maximum length of contracts in other  provisions for quality contracts. I move amendment 26.  Amendment 26 agreed to.  Amendments 27 and 28 moved—[Sarah Boyack]—and agreed to.

The amendments clarify provisions on consultation about ticketing schemes and the provision of information about local bus services. I am grateful to the Royal National Institute for the Blind for drawing the Executive's attention to two sections of the bill where, inadvertently, it might not require sufficiently wide consultation on the implementation of ticketing schemes and information about bus services. Although I have not used the exact terms of the amendments suggested by the RNIB, we acknowledge that in section 27 we may not have expressly encompassed potential bus users; the amendments seek to remedy that. Amendments 64 and 65 set the scene for wide consultation, and again I assure the Parliament that I will be urging local authorities to consult very widely. We have already discussed consultation today and the bill makes wide provision for consultation on various aspects. We have deliberately not sought to be prescriptive about every single special interest group, but I want to make it clear that I expect consultation to include groups representing those who do not currently use bus services but who might do so if appropriate improvements were put in place to make it easier for them to travel by bus. More people now have the choice to travel on buses—I am sure that everyone in the chamber agrees with that. Section 30 is about the provision of local bus information that local authorities consider should be made available to the public. As currently drafted, the definition of local bus information does not specify the provision of information on fares for local bus services. Along with good information  about bus routes and timetables, most people want clear information about fares, especially if there is an exact fare requirement. Amendment 31 extends the definition of information on local bus services to include fares and, I hope, will encourage more people to use bus services. I move amendment 64.  Amendment 64 agreed to.

Amendment 32 clarifies that, in issuing invitations to tender for local bus services, authorities should have regard to their local transport strategies and to the general policies formulated by the local authority. Amendment 33 is a technical amendment; the definition of "local transport strategy" is given in section 76(1). I move amendment 32.  Amendment 32 agreed to.  Amendment 33 moved—[Sarah Boyack]—and agreed to.

This is a very straightforward issue. We debated a similar amendment at stage 2. Although I was happy then to acknowledge the central importance of environmental, social and economic considerations, I was concerned that the amendment that was proposed at that stage would have been unduly prescriptive. I certainly do not want to be unreasonable. I agree with the objectives of amendment 1 and am pleased that Bruce Crawford has agreed to a minor drafting change to the amendment that was originally lodged. There is now no disagreement between us on the substance of the amendment and I am happy to support it.  Amendment 1 agreed to.

During stage 2, Bruce Crawford,  Fiona McLeod and I engaged in long-running debates on the consultative provisions in the bill. Both Bruce Crawford and Fiona McLeod sought absolute assurances that X would consult on this or that issue, or that X would always consult Y, but we cannot cater for every conceivable circumstance—that would lead to legislative madness. It is impossible to guarantee in primary legislation that absolutely everyone who has any interest will be consulted in every conceivable circumstance. That is why in this bill, as in others, the primary powers are crafted in general terms and the details will be set out in guidance and regulations. Consultation goes to the heart of the new transport policies that the Executive is pursuing. We cannot hope to achieve our aspirations for transport across Scotland without the widest possible support from those who will be affected by them, whether they are motorists, public transport users, young people, elderly people or people with disabilities. We must consider each proposal to enshrine consultation in the primary legislation in its own terms. During stage 2, Bruce Crawford made the point that natural justice suggests that ministers should consult relevant bodies before introducing an enforcement direction under section 2. I do not accept that consultation is required where there has been a failure to prepare or submit a strategy, as failure to do either would be a clear breach of the duty to prepare a joint strategy under section 1. However, I accept that it would be appropriate for the Executive to consult the public body and, by extension, any other appropriate persons, should the Executive propose to issue a direction on the ground of "other exceptional circumstances" as set out in section 2(1)(b). Amendment 8 would require the Executive to consult in such circumstances. By contrast, amendments 6 and 7 merely tinker with the bill, and to questionable effect. Amendment 6 requires public bodies to consult, but amendment 7 requires them to consult only such "individuals and agencies" as the public bodies "consider to be representative". The use of "consider" in amendment 7 might undermine a requirement. Amendment 7 would allow public bodies to consult those who are "representative of those who have an interest in the proposed strategy" rather than appropriate persons. That is more, rather than less, restrictive. With the best will in the world, I cannot see what value amendment 6  or amendment 7 would add to the bill. I ask Parliament to reject both and to support amendment 8.

These amendments, which are technical, relate to the making of orders under the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984. They reflect the fact that, under section 121A of that act, the traffic authority for the making of such orders on trunk roads is both the Scottish ministers and/or the secretary of state, depending on whether the functions are devolved or reserved. The secretary of state could be the responsible traffic authority in respect of Crown roads, which may be trunk roads such as those in and around Ministry of Defence property or establishments. The Scottish ministers are the traffic authority for the exercise of other traffic authority functions. The amendments clarify the position. Amendment 20 is a small, technical but important amendment that I lodged to clarify that section 8(4) does not apply to variations of the type to which section 8(3) applies. Section 8(3) variations involve those who require a traffic regulation order, while section 8(4) involves all other variations, such as those that do not require a traffic regulation order. I move amendment 9.  Amendment 9 agreed to.  Amendments 10 to 14 moved—[Sarah Boyack]—and agreed to.

There are a number of detailed points to which I wish to respond in winding up. It is important that I clarify that the process has not been rushed through unfairly. It has taken nearly two years to get to this stage. I am aware that colleagues feel that the process has been lengthy, but the detailed specifications and the importance of the routes are such that it was important to get the new tendering process and the construction of the new boats right. On Bruce Crawford's point about design capacity, ferry yards throughout Europe are applying for European intervention fund support. Hindsight is a wonderful thing, but with regard to those particular proposals, we have been able to get the third vessel secured by a yard that has appropriate design support.

The contracts will contain a detailed commitment on the timing and delivery of the new vessels. It is not possible to extend that time scale without invoking the other clauses in the undertaking that members have in front of them. The contract is being signed between the Executive and NorthLink—it is up to NorthLink to sign appropriate contracts to demonstrate that it can deliver on the contract, so that we do not have a direct relationship with Fergusons, Akers or any other shipyard. We are aware that, prior to conferring preferred bidder status on 5 October, there was a great deal of discussion with relevant yards. Quotations had already been sought from different yards by NorthLink, to determine the different bids that were available. At that stage, Fergusons would have made a bid in good faith as a business proposition. Time scales have been pressing, but all bidders were aware of that from the start. It is important that we meet the obligations of the international convention for the safety of life at sea, and the Stockholm requirements that were introduced after the tragedy of the sinking of the Estonia, so we cannot hang about. It is important that we get moving. As Bruce Crawford rightly identified, we need to make sure that the Finnish Government secures its intervention support so that the two larger vessels receive that support to the full. Bruce Crawford asked me about one matter in particular that I must respond to, which is the price of the tender and the level of subsidy. I reassure the chamber that there is considerable headroom between the price in the tender and the tender bid of the next tender. Therefore, there is no question of that being a problem. Kenny MacAskill asks whether NorthLink is financially robust. Its plans have been thoroughly scrutinised by CalMac, the Royal Bank of Scotland and the financial arm of that bank, which is funding the new vessels. The Scottish interest is with CalMac. All parties are confident that NorthLink is financially robust. Tavish Scott asked several questions, one of which covered training for operation of the vessels. We have time for training the new crews, and that issue will be studied when the implementation plan is produced, after the contracts have been signed. The points that Tavish Scott and Jamie Stone made about harbours are extremely relevant. NorthLink has had detailed discussions with the relevant harbour authorities about access to  harbour facilities and the dues that must be paid for those facilities. Some significant improvements will be required. Jamie Stone mentioned that, as did Tavish Scott.

No, I am well on the way, and I am four and a half minutes into my speech. Satisfactory agreements about the need to progress the work have been reached with the harbour authorities. I look forward to future applications and discussions. I am sure that there will be hardball discussions in the future. The Scottish Executive has told the relevant harbour authorities that it will consider applications for grant funding to part-fund necessary improvements. That commitment is important. Rhoda Grant and Jamie Stone both mentioned the Scrabster Harbour Trust. An offer of £13.8 million in pier and harbour grant support has been made and accepted. The Executive will consider the need for additional capital consent for the Orkney Islands Council. Those matters will be dealt with at future dates, but the work is well in train. Rhoda Grant asked about disabled access. I can assure the chamber that the design for the new vessels takes full account of that issue. The contract will not subsidise freight. Extensive arrangements for freight are already in place, which were not brought about by the contract. Kenny MacAskill suggested that substantial changes have been made that could have changed the nature of the tendering process, but I am not aware of any such changes. I thank all members—their questions have been relevant. We look forward now to ensuring that the contract is signed and that the services come into play from 2002, when all those in the area will be able to benefit from the new vessels, the new fare arrangements and the new opportunities to maximise tourism, which Jamie Stone mentioned.

Will the member give way?

I was going to answer Bruce Crawford's questions.

I thank the parliamentary authorities for agreeing to let us present this draft undertaking for debate today. I should explain to those members who have not been involved in the consideration of an earlier draft of the undertaking why we had to present a new version. This is the final parliamentary process for awarding a subsidy for the future operation of passenger ferry services to the northern isles from 2002. It is the culmination of a long tendering process, which contained many complex issues that we have had to resolve. I thank all those who have been involved in ensuring that we could debate this today. On 6 October, I announced that NorthLink Orkney and Shetland Ferries was the preferred bidder for the subsidy award. NorthLink is the joint venture of Caledonian MacBrayne and the Royal Bank of Scotland. Our negotiations with the company were concluded at the end of November when we brought forward an earlier draft undertaking. A problem arose late on Monday 11 December with the collapse of NorthLink's plans to build one of three new vessels at Fergusons. On Tuesday, I expressed my disappointment about that development to the Transport and the Environment Committee, and explained that plans were being made to find an alternative yard. I am pleased to say that NorthLink has agreed terms and a price with an alternative yard, on the basis of the same specification. A letter of intent has been issued to Aker Finnyards, which is the Finnish yard that will supply the other two vessels for the routes. However, we have had to take account of the effect of the new price for the Pentland firth vessel—the 100m vessel that Aker will supply—in the grant agreement. An adjustment to a clause in the agreement has been required, which in turn has meant that we have had to introduce a new undertaking. The change that is required is in clause 3.8 of schedule 1 to the draft undertaking. It reflects a sharing of the extra costs of providing the new vessel by the Executive and NorthLink. If funds are needed for the final price, the effect will  be to increase the subsidy by a maximum of £400,000 per year above the average annual subsidy, at April 2000 prices, of just less than £10 million per year. On the time scale, we have been working to the target of securing parliamentary approval by the end of the week. That allows the other contracts that are involved to be finalised, and the timings for the shipbuilding intervention funds to be met. We plan to be in a position to sign the relevant agreements next week. We do not have the scope to delay the timetables past the target dates of 1 October 2002, because at that date the current vessels will not be able to continue under the international safety requirements for all passenger ferry services.

Of course, that decision does not rule Fergusons out of consideration for any future ferries that might be commissioned. The Scottish Executive is keen to ensure that all our ferry services in Scotland have boats that are fit for purpose. Although the decision was regrettable, it will not stand in the way of future contracts. I will emphasise some of the key benefits that the contract will bring to people in the northern isles. It is a good deal for people. This is a major opportunity to make improvements in the services. I set out many of the details to the Transport and the Environment Committee. I apologise to members of that committee who are present and will have already heard these points, but I think that it is important to make other members aware of them. There will be three new vessels on the routes. They will be the first new vessels serving the routes since the early 1970s. I know from members for that area just how important that is for people who rely on these services. There will be services and timetable improvements. There will be improvements to the Pentland firth crossing time and additional journeys; an increase in the number of Shetland services and improved departure and arrival times in Shetland; and an increase in the number of services from Aberdeen to Orkney. Lower fares are planned. There will be a reduction in average passenger fares from April 2000 prices of 18 per cent. There will be a lower subsidy. At present, the Executive subsidy is £11 million; in future, the average subsidy at April 2000  prices will be just over £10 million per year. Many of those improvements reflect detailed consultation with the local communities, councils, and others who rely on the services. We made a commitment on that at the start of this process and it was important to follow it through. This has been a fair and open process. We have closely followed the relevant procurement and competition requirements under European Commission rules. We have also gone to significant lengths to have separate arrangements in the Executive for dealing with the contract and the sponsorship of Caledonian MacBrayne and its role as joint venture partner in NorthLink. Overall, this represents a good deal for the islands and I hope that everybody who is concerned will welcome it. I pay tribute to P&O Scottish Ferries, which has served the islanders on these routes for many years. It is right for Parliament to recognise that. The fundamental issue is that we are delivering on our key policy of supporting lifeline ferry services. That policy is delivered by the undertaking that we are considering, which represents a good deal and value for money. I move, That the Parliament approves the Draft Undertaking by the Scottish Ministers under section 2(1) of the Highlands and Islands Shipping Services Act 1960.

While there is no legal entitlement for STG pension scheme members to share in the surplus, ministers are continuing to work closely with HM Treasury on the issue. As I said in this chamber on 25 October, "I hope that a substantial sum will be distributed"— [ Official Report , 25 October 2000; Vol 8, c 1166.]  to pension scheme members.

It is very much our intention to bring this matter to a speedy resolution. The assiduous way in which Dennis Canavan has pursued this issue has ensured that it is at the top of our agenda. I give him the assurance that we will continue to work to bring this matter to a speedy conclusion.

Every member who has spoken in the debate has invited the SNP to say how it would use such powers. Fiona McLeod has yet to do so. Would she set up a separate health and safety executive in Scotland? Would she set out separate guidelines on safety specifications for Scotland? She has not answered those points.

What about the detail?

Many important points have been made in this debate to which it is worth replying. It is rich of the SNP to criticise the powers that come to us through the McLeish settlement and the UK Transport Act 2000 without analysing the extent to which we are using them or saying how it would use the list of powers that are identified in the motion. Bruce Crawford seems to be obsessed with the framework of directions and guidance to the strategic rail authority. I make it clear that Scottish ministers have sole responsibility for issuing directions and guidance to the strategic rail authority in relation to the franchise that operates rail services that start and end in Scotland, and for sleeper services that are run by that franchise within a national framework.

No. The member will sum up in a few minutes. The powers are the same as for franchises across the UK. Members—Bruce Crawford more than anyone—will know that when we discuss bills in committees, we change the wording. The critical point is how we use our powers and how they mesh into the wider UK framework. Murray Tosh spoke about the importance of tapping into the SRA and about how it will identify the criteria for new investment. That is critical and that is why we are discussing with the shadow strategic rail authority freight strategy and the criteria for its investment programme. The Executive is prepared to invest huge amounts of public sector money in the rail industry.

It is right that we should get value for that investment. That is why we need a regulatory framework. One of the weaknesses that we have inherited is the fact that the lack of  investment in the railways has left us with a backlog of maintenance work. It is now being addressed. It is vital that there should be a regulatory framework. The franchise process works. Lord Cullen's inquiry will give pointers to the future, which the UK Government can take on board. The Government is working through the railway recovery plan and, on the Scottish franchise, in discussion with us to provide future investment. John Farquhar Munro made some critical points about the freight industry. Given the events of the past few weeks, it is absolutely right that most of our attention has been on passengers, but freight is also vital for the future not just of the north of Scotland, but of the whole of Scotland. That is why we are making £36 million of investment available to freight services over the next three years and why we have invested £19 million already.

No, thank you. We are keen to work with the whole rail industry. We set up the rail industry forum in Scotland to enable the rail industry's passenger and freight interests and direct passenger interests to participate in discussions with the Scottish Executive. That will allow us to work together. Robert Brown made an extremely important point about the ability of the train operating companies to obtain new rolling stock, the need for which is another legacy of underinvestment. Creating manufacturing capacity from a standing start is a tough job. Massive investment, through the various franchises, is being made in new rolling stock across Scotland and the UK. No one from the SNP has been prepared to say what that party would do with the powers that it seeks. We are absolutely clear that we are using our powers to the full. Scotland's railways will benefit from being part of a dramatically reshaped rail safety regime across the UK. We are in a loop with the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions and UK ministers and are involved in the discussions on how that regime will be progressed. We will benefit from the £60 billion that will come through the GB spending plan for railways. Light rail is an issue that we must deal with in Scotland. We have already held a debate on light rail in Scotland and I am sure that there will be others. In England, the proposals are much further ahead than they are in Scotland. I say to Bruce Crawford that that is the simple reality—it is the challenge that faces us in Scotland. Light rail is referred to in our rail franchise paper as one of the key issues that the new franchise must take on board.  The money will come from Scottish investment—from the Scottish block—but there are no proposals in front of us. Fiona McLeod might want to address that when she sums up the debate for the SNP. The direct investment that we will make in the Scottish franchise is worth £200 million in public support in the current financial year. We will look to the new franchise to increase the supply of rail services across Scotland. Over the next three years, £150 million will be invested through the public transport fund.

No, thank you. In Scotland, we benefit from having the best train operating company in Great Britain after Island Line on the Isle of Wight. Broadly speaking, ScotRail has done a good job over the past few years. Even during the current crisis, nearly all ScotRail's services operated a normal timetable within a short period. The points made by Gil Paterson about the Edinburgh to Glasgow line are relevant. That line was disrupted because of track speed restrictions but, as Gil Paterson knows, given that he is a regular user of the service, the journey time is getting back to just over an hour and the line should operate at full capacity in the new year. Passengers in Scotland and across the UK have had a tough couple of months. However, the critical point that people should take from the debate is that we have new powers and new investment. We will use those powers to their full extent. Scotland's railways must be part of an integrated UK transport system. Rail can help to reduce congestion, peripherality and social exclusion. It can assist economic development and will generate environmental gains. However, Scotland's railways will achieve those broad objectives only if they are an integral part of a GB network. Therefore, we must have powers in Scotland, as well as liaising with the UK Government. That is precisely what we are doing and I call on the chamber to support the Executive's amendment.

I welcome this opportunity to respond to the SNP's motion and to set out the Executive's progress in building a system of integrated transport in Scotland, including the development of a 21 st century railway that is fit for our needs. My suspicions that the motion has far less to do with the railways and much more to do with the SNP's agenda have not been dispelled by Bruce Crawford's remarks. It is not possible to discuss the current state of our railways without reflecting on why we are experiencing what Sir Alastair Morton, the chair of the shadow strategic rail authority, described a couple of months ago as "a nervous breakdown". The current crisis has been caused by decades of underinvestment in rolling stock and track development and maintenance, and by a fragmented rail industry resulting from the  privatisation of the railways, which even the Tories—the policy's architects—acknowledge was a botch job. That legacy led to Paddington, and more recently to Hatfield and Mossend, and to two months of rail chaos, passenger delays, overcrowding and uncertainty on railways across the UK. That is the legacy that the Labour Government in Westminster in connection with the partnership in Scotland has inherited and is now working hard to sort out. Although that poses a massive challenge, I absolutely refute the suggestions in the SNP motion that we have been inactive and complacent and are not interested in sorting out the situation. The solutions do not start and end at the border and they will be of no use whatever if we in Scotland pretend that we can separate ourselves from the rest of the UK network and from the investment and standards of safety that are needed throughout Scotland.

No—the member has had his time. What about the thousands of passengers who travel from Scotland to the south every day? Although Scotland needs its fair share of investment, we should not pretend that massive investment is not needed throughout the UK and that such investment on the east or west coast main line will not deliver for passengers in Scotland as well. I do not underestimate the challenge for a minute. However, the Scottish Executive is playing its full part in the recovery of the rail network. Although John Prescott has made it absolutely clear that the recommendations in Lord Cullen's report will be implemented, he is not simply waiting for that report and has already started to sort out the network. Bruce Crawford made much play of the current crisis. However, he has failed to take account of what has been happening not just in the past 18 months of the Scottish Parliament but since the Labour Government was elected in 1997. The rail recovery action group has been formed with the objective of returning the railway to normal, safe operations as soon as possible, and we are in regular contact with UK ministers and officials from the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions on the group's progress. The SNP did not mention the fact that, on 22 November, the National Rail Operators announced a £50 million compensation package for passengers, which has been funded jointly by the SSRA, Railtrack and the rail operators. Many ScotRail passengers have already secured  significant payments from that package.

No. The chair of the SSRA, Sir Alastair Morton, is working with the rail industry to remove the obstacles within the current arrangements in order to provide a safe, punctual and better service. We are being kept fully informed of the SSRA's work. Bruce Crawford did not even mention that new railway safety regulations come into force on 31 December. Furthermore, the transfer of responsibility for the approval of train operator safety cases will move from Railtrack to the Health and Safety Executive. A new rail safety company called Railway Safety is expected to be set up with the primary objective of promoting rail safety throughout the GB rail network. It is vital that we have the same standards in Scotland as across the UK. In his recent review, the rail regulator, Tom Winsor—

No. In his recent review, the rail regulator, Tom Winsor, is ensuring that Railtrack delivers on its investment plans—

In his opening remarks, Bruce Crawford did not refer to anything that I have said is being done or has been proposed. It is important that we take into account what is being done. The changes that I have mentioned are  being introduced before the outcome of the Cullen inquiry—

I am sorry, but Bruce Crawford should be aware that things have moved on. He needs to take account of the current situation. In advance of the outcome of the Cullen inquiry, the UK Government is introducing some key mechanisms to deliver higher safety standards on our railways, all of which must apply to Scotland as well as to the rest of the UK. Those are the benefits of being an integral part of a GB rail system. I doubt that we would have any of those benefits if Bruce Crawford had his way.

No. The SNP has not told us what it would do differently. All we have heard is that it wants Scotland to have certain powers; we have heard nothing about how it would exercise them. That is the critical difference. There has been no acknowledgement of the massive effort of railway workers throughout the country to ensure that rerailing is implemented.

Yes.

The railway unions also want action on the recommendations of the Cullen report. Although everyone accepts that safety is the top priority, we need the mechanisms to deliver it; the trade unions must be part of that process. There has been massive investment in the railways. All the changes demonstrate that the £60 billion investment programme for Britain's railways will be critical in putting our railways back on a secure footing. Bruce Crawford talked extensively about our powers in Scotland. I asked him to tell me the differences between Scotland and the rest of the UK in relation to directions and guidance on franchises to the SRA. He could not do so. The answer is that the wording is exactly the same; exactly the same wording in the Transport Act 2000 applies to negotiations on franchises. Bruce  Crawford did not even know that.

It is vital that we decide on franchises within a UK context. That is John Prescott's overarching power. Scotland has devolved powers within that UK framework, under what is otherwise known as the McLeish settlement. It is important that we have such powers. We have the ability to influence and set the key terms for the rail network in Scotland and we have new investment from our public transport fund and freight facilities grants. Although we have the opportunity to define the shape of Scotland's railways through the passenger franchise system, it must be done within an overall UK framework. We need to exercise our devolved powers to get the best possible deal for Scotland. However, we intend to exercise those powers within the context of a GB rail network that delivers for every passenger and freight company throughout the UK. We are working towards that objective. Although rail passengers have had an appalling time of late, I have outlined what the UK Government is doing—and what the Scottish Executive is doing in partnership with Westminster—to ensure that, over the next generation, the railways in Scotland are transformed into the kind of railways that people want. That is the purpose of our consultation exercise. I move amendment S1M-1461.2, to leave out from "with concern" to end and insert: "the progress being made by the Scottish Executive to build a sustainable, effective and integrated transport system which provides genuine choice and delivers a safe, accessible and expanding Scottish rail system as an integral part of the GB rail network."

Will Mr Crawford tell the chamber the exact details of the powers that John Prescott has in negotiating franchises for the rest of the UK?

It is a material point.

Our integrated transport strategy recognises the need for good road and rail links to ports and harbours. The transport aspect of ferry services that have origins or destinations outside Scotland is a reserved matter, but the Scottish Executive and the Scottish Enterprise network have an interest in the potential economic development benefits.

There is a range of opportunities to develop all those routes. On the A75 in particular, the major problem is platooning, which happens when vehicles come off the ferries. That is why the Executive is promoting schemes to ensure that we can get good overtaking opportunities that will make that route more attractive. On Rosyth, Donald Gorrie might be aware that there are proposals for ferry opportunities there. I am keen that those proposals should be pursued. They would bring major benefits and offer opportunities for an east-west road connection across the country to create access between Ireland and Europe. There are also opportunities to improve the rail network to provide an east-west link. We are keen to consider those opportunities and see what can be progressed.

Alasdair Morgan will know that the Scottish Executive was supportive of that new document, which sets out new opportunities for ports developments in Scotland and the rest of the UK. We have ensured that there is investment in the A75 because we see it as an important route.

An application for freight facilities grant that would contribute to reopening the Stirling-Alloa-Dunfermline leg is currently being considered. I have increased freight facilities grant awards to £36 million over the next three years. If a good proposal were put forward that could be built into the existing proposal for the Stirling-Alloa-Dunfermline route, I would be very interested in looking at it.

We keep under close review all areas where there are accidents. We receive reports and consider route accident reduction plans, where remedial work on the trunk road network could reduce accidents in the future. Our major contribution to road safety on the west coast is the upgrading of the A77, which we intend to pursue as soon as we can. Work on the project is already under way and I am keen for the major improvement to the A77—which will cost £60 million—to be implemented as soon as possible.

I can give the member the commitment that the Scottish Executive will continue to work in partnership with Brian Wilson in the Scotland Office, with Argyll and Bute Council and with the authorities in the north of Ireland. We are keen to see a partnership approach to this issue. That requires the support of all the key agents, which is why the Scottish  Executive takes a keen interest in the project.

I commend Tommy Sheridan for securing tonight's debate, which allows us to look beyond the current crisis on the railways to think to the future about new investment and opportunities for development. As there have been summaries of the project's history, I will not go into that in detail. However, it is true that in 1994 SPT promoted at Westminster a draft Strathclyde tram provisional order, which sought permission to construct and operate a tramway from Maryhill through the city centre to Easterhouse. At the time, the cost was estimated at between £150 million and £170 million. After a two-month inquiry, the parliamentary commissioners refused to grant the necessary powers and declined approval of the order. We could spend our time debating whether the commissioners were right. However, that was then and this is now. The Scottish integrated transport policy has moved on since the mid-1990s. The Scottish transport white paper of 1998 set a new framework for public transport. The Transport (Scotland) Bill, which will be discussed in the Parliament in a couple of weeks' time, puts much of the vision of that white paper into practical effect. In the past two years, Glasgow has received major investment from the public transport fund. Awards have been made totalling £90 million to 52 projects throughout Scotland, and Glasgow has so far benefited to the tune of £20 million from that £90 million pot. Of that £20 million, £15 million has been allocated for four quality bus corridors, £3.5 million has been used to develop Partick station as a transport interchange and £1.8 million has helped SPT to improve trains across the network. Over the next three years, £150 million will be made available by the Scottish Executive for public transport projects throughout Scotland. The Executive is keen to consider the contribution that light rail and trams could make to an integrated approach to transport. We need to understand how those forms of transport could link into heavy rail, bus services and park-and-ride schemes, to make the most of those opportunities. We are seeking practical proposals and are keen for people to promote those ideas and to come to us. Almost every member has mentioned that our congestion problems are increasing and will not get any easier. We need high-quality options to give car drivers a real and better alternative to clogging up our streets. I agree with the members who say that we must learn lessons from England and from European cities. They are right to say that 25 light rail and tram projects are now being promoted by local  authorities and passenger transport executives throughout England. We can learn from that experience. The development of local transport initiatives rests with the relevant local authority, and in the Strathclyde area it rests with the SPTE. I look to the SPTE to identify opportunities and to promote relevant options. A range of funding opportunities is available.

No. Members have raised a lot of points and I want to address them all. I understand that the SPTE supports a joint venture whereby light rail services would run on existing heavy rail infrastructure. That sounds eminently sensible, as it would make the maximum use of existing infrastructure. Bill Aitken asked for further research. The SPTE has deferred that issue until it has examined other major public transport proposals. The SPTE has commissioned a wide-ranging study on cross-city demand, which will consider the subjects that Sandra White referred to and other rail options in Glasgow. It will also evaluate the broader impact on the existing network. The SPTE expects to receive that report by the end of this year. The fact that the tram project failed in 1996 should not put the SPTE off reconsidering the project in the context of the wider transport opportunities in Glasgow. As Robin Harper said, we must ensure that we get the right public transport schemes. Those schemes should be on the agenda. The experience of 1996 should not deter other local authorities, in other areas of Scotland, from exploring the potential of tram and light rail projects. I know that such projects are under discussion in areas outside Glasgow. Tommy Sheridan asked about the Parliament's powers. That issue is critical. Murray Tosh was right to suggest that the Scottish Parliament assumes responsibility for granting the permissions that are required for the construction of railways and tramways. I expect that that power will be effective by spring next year. Decisions on proposals in Scotland will be made in Scotland, as is appropriate. A tramway would have the potential to deliver a commercial return and I expect the private sector to play a full part in developing the project. Other potential funding options are coming through the Transport (Scotland) Bill. I agree that we must consider new transport projects on their merits, as Robin Harper said. One of the new opportunities that will come through the bill is congestion charging. We need to consider seriously the potential of trams and light rail in Scotland's major cities and the Scottish Executive is prepared to consider any serious approach for developing a scheme that would bring improved services to the  public. It could be argued that we are behind the game in comparison with England. However, we can learn from the experiences there. A number of light rail projects already exist in England and we must learn from their experiences. A proper evaluation must be carried out by the SPTE, as the relevant transport authority. There are funding opportunities and a range of choices, which the Executive will consider when proposals are put to us. To date, that has not happened, but that does not mean that it will not happen.  I am glad that Tommy Sheridan lodged this motion, which puts the issue firmly back on the agenda as a matter in which MSPs and the public are interested. That will ensure that light railway is considered as part of the range of new public transport opportunities in Glasgow and that local authorities in the area and the SPT give it proper consideration. They can then come to the Scottish Executive for support and advice to take those opportunities forward.  Meeting closed at 17:30.

No. We already have a strong UK-wide statutory framework for regulating safety standards for all ferry operators. Safety standards on ferries are the responsibility of the Maritime and Coastguard Agency.

No. Bruce Crawford should do his homework. We already have a statutory process. Every year, the Maritime and Coastguard Agency must issue a passenger certificate of safety for every ferry; it also carries out periodic checks. That regime applies not only to CalMac ferries, but to every ferry that carries passengers in the UK. That is a long-established process which also applies to P&O, which has been operating routes to the northern isles for more than 30 years. We must ensure that the statutory regulatory framework works and we must never be complacent, but the UK has a very good ferry safety record.

I am happy to assure members that we have no plans to privatise CalMac. In the tendering process we will listen to local communities, trade unions and local authorities to ensure that we get the specifications absolutely correct. That is the process that we have followed for the northern isles. It is important that we listen to people to make sure that lifeline services meet their needs. If I may, I will pay tribute to the people who, following our consultation exercise on CalMac, have helped the Executive over the past few months to put the message to the European Union that the services on the west coast of Scotland and in the Highlands are vital lifelines. On particular issues, such as mainland-to-mainland routes, their support has been invaluable. I look forward to submitting our proposals to the EU at the end of this year or in the new year.

We have long recognised that fuel prices are of special significance to rural businesses and rural communities and the Executive has used its devolved powers to help to mitigate their impact. As part of our three-year £500 million programme of public transport investment—and investment in transport generally—we have increased the public transport fund to £150 million, invested £18 million in the rural transport fund and announced an additional £55 million for lifeline services in the Highlands and Islands.

That is another new policy from the SNP while the Government is delivering. Following Gordon Brown's pre-budget statement, major benefits will be experienced directly by motorists and businesses throughout rural Scotland. The benefits for the haulage industry are equivalent to an 8p per litre reduction in fuel duty. That means that more than 30,000 lorries will have  a 50 per cent reduction in their vehicle excise duty, which has been abolished for tractors and agricultural vehicles. For Scottish motorists generally, the Executive is ensuring that it lobbies Westminster. I note that Calum Macdonald secured a debate at Westminster on fuel duties the week before the pre-budget statement—not one SNP MP attended.

The draft strategic priorities for Scotland's passenger railways will be issued for public consultation in the near future. The consultation will last 12 weeks.

There are standard procedures that must be followed when any timetable change is proposed. I understand from ScotRail that it intends to address the particular constituency issue to which the member referred in the new timetable, when it is introduced.

I understand that during the recent severe weather conditions, the national rail inquiry service received many more calls than the system was capable of handling. Regrettably, that prevented provision of a normal service to the public. However, the implementation soon of a sustainable timetable, as part of the national track recovery plan, will assist with the provision of reliable information to rail users. In addition, as part of our programme for government, we intend to implement a multi-modal public transport information system, covering the whole of Scotland and the rest of Great Britain, by the end of December.

One of our objectives with the  new public transport information project is that, by the beginning of next year, people will be able to get information on bus and rail travel. For 2002, we intend to ensure that that information is available more widely on the web, and that any passenger delays can be conveyed using that technology. I am keen to progress the objective that Sylvia Jackson suggested. By 2002, the internet, digital television and public access terminals should be plugged in to that information, not just for trains, but for bus, ferry and domestic air services.

Dennis Canavan raises the relevant issue that when train times are altered, that information should be communicated efficiently and accurately to passengers. That was one of the key points that I made when I met representatives of the rail industry three weeks ago. It is important that the industry communicates its plans accurately. People who are undertaking journeys have a right to know that their trains will run and about any time delays that will be incurred. That is one of the core problems that we have had over the past few weeks. Dennis Canavan is absolutely right; there have been horrific problems. There are track speed restrictions arising from work that is being carried out. We had the Polmont landslip, which was complicated further by the Winchburgh flooding incident. All those incidents mean that we need more accurate information for passengers, so that they know when their journeys will begin and end. That is only reasonable.

That is a valid point. All the operators must work together. A key objective of the Transport (Scotland) Bill, which is going through stage 2, is to provide a much more stable environment in which the bus companies will operate. The companies will be required to provide information to local authorities, so that information can be posted where people are catching buses. The point about trains and buses linking together is important. We are keen to act on that, to deliver a more integrated, seamless travel opportunity for the public.

An independent business survey and retail sales sources suggest that the initial economic impact of September's fuel blockades has been limited. The effects have not yet been fully reflected in Scottish Executive statistics. It is too early for the economic costs of transport disruptions caused by rail safety works and floods to be picked up, either in surveys or in economic statistics.

I am happy to confirm that the funding for the railway stations at Inverurie, Dyce and Stonehaven is to go ahead, and that all three stations will be upgraded to a much higher standard. That should be a definite improvement for the passengers who use those stations. We have asked those who are involved with the bid for the rest of Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire to talk to the rail industry and to the shadow strategic rail authority, to consider some of the operational issues and to come back to the Scottish Executive next year for further discussion on opportunities for extending that award.

A number of properties have been disposed of since 1991. Most of those that remain are adjacent to the latest section of motorway to be constructed. Surveys to establish the full extent of surplus land in that area are continuing and should soon be completed.

Mr Mundell sent me some very interesting illustrations— [Laughter] —which I passed on to the relevant officials. The member's point is correct. When a major project such as this is being constructed, land is acquired to enable the operations to be carried out. We are now trying to identify the exact boundaries of some of the properties in which his constituents have a practical interest. We will pursue the matter with the contractor as soon as possible, so that such properties can be valued and go through the Crichel Down rules to be released for sale, where that is appropriate.

Along with other members, I congratulate Sandra White on securing today's debate. Although it might seem difficult to be positive about the opportunities for rail given the current crisis on the railway network, we need to think to the long term. As Robert Brown observed, the rail industry has now been posed the huge challenge of restoring public confidence in the safety and reliability of rail travel. We are not talking about quick fixes; the problems are deep-seated and are a consequence of years of under-investment in and fragmentation of the industry. A root-and-branch review of the rail industry's structures and systems, which is now under way in the aftermath of Ladbroke Grove and Hatfield, will result in a railway that is much better equipped to handle progress and manage expansion. Much is already in place that members should know about. The UK Government's 10-year plan will pump more than £28 billion into the railways over the next decade. The Scottish Executive has committed £150 million to the public transport fund in the next three years. An additional £36 million will be spent on freight facilities grants in the same period—I included that point especially for Mr Jamie McGrigor. We have already committed more than £30 million to the public transport fund—including the £10 million for new projects that I announced last week—and £19 million in freight facilities grants to rail projects in the past two years. We are turning the tide and beginning to invest in our railway network. The Scottish Executive will take responsibility for the full cost of the ScotRail franchise, worth £200 million this financial year, which includes support for SPT rail services worth £79 million. Stronger regulation of the industry and devolution of important rail responsibilities to Scotland provide us with a much more effective basis on which to develop and implement strategies for growth. That is the context in which we must consider the Glasgow crossrail and links to the airport. Last month, I outlined my thoughts on the future of Scotland's railways. I want rail to play a key role in an integrated transport system. I want a rail system that is safe and accessible, supports economic development, meets social needs and helps to relieve road congestion. I want to secure more investment in the railway network. I will publish a consultation paper later this month, which will help us to take people's views into account when we set out our guidance and instructions to the strategic rail authority on the Scottish franchise. We have a new strategic context in Scotland that is much more positive for railways; the north-south Glasgow rail links and airport links must be considered in that context.  Our strategic priorities and our directions and guidance to the strategic rail authority will be our statement of how we plan to take forward Scotland's passenger rail system. As I said, Glasgow crossrail and the airport link need to be considered in that light. Sandra White is absolutely right to say that both projects have been under consideration for at least the past 10 years. They are viewed by many as the missing links in Glasgow's and, by extension, Scotland's rail system. SPT has been the principal promoter of both projects and has commissioned studies to explore options. It has done a great deal of work with Railtrack, Scottish Airports and the British Airports Authority, and plans to do more. I understand that SPT wants to wait for the outcome of that work before it comes to a decision on how to proceed with promoting both projects. I commend SPT on keeping both projects alive. In the past 10 years, promoting new railways was not an easy task. Many people think that the projects now need to be considered as one project. Indeed, it has been argued that they are much more viable if considered together. The costs are estimated at well in excess of £120 million. A project to link Glasgow Queen Street and Glasgow Central at an estimated cost of £500 million is also being considered. That project is at a much earlier stage of consideration, and many people believe that it will be overtaken by the crossrail airport link project. A new context in which the Executive can promote railways exists not only in Scotland, but at national level, where national policy supports the need to improve transport links to our city centres and airports. That is why a strategic surface access study is being conducted as part of the Scottish airports and air services study, which is sponsored jointly by the Scottish Executive, the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions and the shadow strategic rail authority. The study is examining the potential for rail links across Scotland at Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Inverness airports, but focuses primarily on the potential rail links from the city centres of Glasgow and Edinburgh, neither of which can be considered in isolation from the other. The study takes the approach that such links are of national significance and must be assessed at national level. The points made by Robert Brown, Bill Aitken and Frank McAveety highlight the importance of such strategic links. It is right to compare ourselves with other European countries. Scotland and the UK cannot be under any illusion about the catching-up that must be delivered if we are to begin to match the quality and range of infrastructure available at comparable airports abroad. We are also doing multi-modal work on  the M74, which I hope will consider road and rail connections in the round. That is vital, particularly in the context of freight. Much work is continuing and will be completed shortly. The findings of the airport study will be published early next year, when we will conduct a formal consultation process. It is important that members know what our current time scales are. I share the frustration about past lack of progress on rail projects. They are major infrastructure projects and support will have to be considered alongside other rail and public transport priorities. We need to consider those much more positively. There is an argument that links to airports might generate commercial returns for the private sector. It is important that we consider opportunities for the private sector to work in partnership with the public sector. Such a joint venture could be an effective way of developing crossrail as a complete and integrated package and might be a way in which to lever in private sector investment. The Scottish Executive has not yet been approached for financial support by SPT or the shadow strategic rail authority. It is important to place that fact on the record. Any future bids from the public transport fund or any other public sector programme will have to be considered against our eligibility criteria and will have to compete with other bids. Another opportunity for considering the projects is the replacement of the ScotRail franchise, on which we will consult later this month. We must consider the projects in the context of the range of choices and opportunities.  The rail projects that can demonstrate benefits and value for money will receive support. That does not mean that there are no tough decisions ahead. It means that the climate in which those decisions will be made has been transformed dramatically. That has been brought about by John Prescott's investment programmes for the rail industry, by the strategic rail authority that will be brought about through the UK Transport Bill, and by our public transport fund. There are now opportunities for real investment. That does not mean that every rail project that someone wants will go ahead; it means that the projects that can demonstrate economic opportunities, social inclusion benefits and environmental advantages are the sorts of projects that, provided with robust analysis and good appraisal, will be considered by the Executive. The climate has changed. We are no longer managing decline; we are managing expansion of the railways. The challenge for the next few years is to find the best projects to work on. That is the context in which this debate needs to be placed.  Meeting closed at 17:42.

Our rural transport fund and public transport fund are providing significant additional resources to improve transport in rural Scotland. We are also providing the highest ever level of subsidy for lifeline air and sea services.

I am happy to say that, as part of a £33 million public transport fund award, significant new money will go into transport interchanges in Aviemore and Inverness. Major amounts of money are being put into Orkney to ensure that flights in and out of Kirkwall airport will be less disrupted by bad weather. I am sure that that will be welcomed in the islands. In addition, Gordon Brown announced yesterday that there will be a cut in duty on low-sulphur, environmentally friendly petrol. That is crucial. He made the point that, by this time next year, he expects 100 per cent take-up throughout the UK. For people in rural areas, we will continue with our  rural petrol station grant awards. So far, 18 petrol stations have benefited from those awards and 34 applications are in the pipeline.

I am happy to say that today, I announced £1.9 million to assist Scottish Borders Council in progressing work on the Borders railway line. It is an important announcement, which is not only about further study; it is about examining the opportunities to draw on developer funding and private sector funding and looking at a range of public sector funding opportunities. Crucially, it is also about enabling the Scottish Borders Council to promote a parliamentary order, which is crucial if we are to see progress. I remind Christine Grahame that the major feasibility study that was carried out by the Scottish Executive pointed out that the line to the central Borders would be economically viable if somebody could identify £73 million to put it in place. That is a major challenge. The announcement that I have made today is of great help to the Borders, which is why it has been welcomed by all sections of the Borders community—especially by Scottish Borders Council.

In the context of our public transport fund, our agenda is to build step by step. Some of the small announcements will lead to bigger announcements: £33 million is the biggest public transport investment that we have made. It is appropriate that the Borders rail link is included in it.

I hope that that was not an invitation to the farming community to drive tractors around on our main roads. I am sure that that was not the point that was being made. The crucial point in yesterday's announcement is that there are real cuts for the haulage industry and agricultural community, which will enable them to compete better. That has been welcomed by many. The Brit disc is also important in giving our haulage industry the competitive advantage that other European countries have. It is a major step forward, which is why it will be welcomed by all those who will benefit from the measures in Gordon Brown's budget announcement yesterday.

The Scottish Executive is responsible for the maintenance, including replacement, of bridges on the trunk road network. We are increasing funding to ensure that trunk road bridges continue to meet the needs of the travelling public.

The reason why I allocated £70 million over the next three years to local authorities was to give them discretion to introduce urgently required maintenance projects. I expect to discuss the outputs of those projects with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, in order to ensure that that £70 million is spent on essential road and bridge projects. COSLA lobbied the Executive on the urgency with which the money was required—£70 million has been allocated and I want the work to be progressed now.

To answer Alex Johnstone's last point, I am familiar with the bridge—I know where it is and how essential it is as a local bridge. It is important for the council to take the opportunity that will be created by the £70 million of new resources that is being provided in addition to the existing money that councils should allocate through their budgets to work on local roads and bridges. I want to ensure that that critical process continues.

The Scottish Executive has no plans to review the procedures for approving signposting of tourist attractions from motorways and trunk roads.

It might be helpful for me to explain how the procedure works. It has been changed in the past few years to give greater attention to tourism and to ensure that quality is considered. That is why the STB looks first at any proposals for signing on motorways and trunk roads. If it approves and considers that the sign will lead to a tourist facility, as defined in the regulations, and so should be constructed, our roads engineers will then look at the safety considerations. So the procedure focuses on two issues: whether tourist quality is identified, and secondly, whether safety considerations are met. I see no reason to change the procedures. After a meeting with Elaine Murray and local representatives from Dumfries and Galloway and from Moffat community council, I agreed to look at the specific issue of sign design where we have trunk roads with directional access to two areas. That work is under way, but we do not intend to review the overall procedure.

There are ways in which towns can be signposted. I had expected Mr Mundell to mention Moffat today, as it has now got a lovely thistle sign. The criteria specify that for a particular location to be signed it must be a tourist location, not a retail site. There is on-going correspondence with Mr Morgan. If there is something new he would like me to consider, he should write to me and I will be happy to do so.

I would like to add my congratulations to those given to Dennis Canavan on securing this debate. I also congratulate him on the determined manner in which he has pursued this matter over recent months. He may not expect that sort of comment from a minister; but from my mailbag, and from discussions with many members in the chamber who have been representing their constituents, I know how important it is that we resolve these matters. Compared with the usual, the attendance today is very good for a debate at the end of the day's business. In addition, SBG members and their representatives are in the gallery. There is huge interest in this issue. Let me start by making it absolutely clear, as Dennis Canavan and Sylvia Jackson asked me to, that I think there are important issues of equity in this particular case. Scottish pensioners have contributed to the fund throughout their working lives and I can well understand why they have expressed a claim on the moneys. Members across the Parliament have alluded to the fact that the administration of the fund is a complex matter, particularly post-devolution. It might help members if I provide some background and add some clarity to the points raised when we discussed the issues previously. We have pursued the matter during the summer and I would like to report on our progress.  The Scottish Transport Group, which is now owned by Scottish ministers, was established in 1969 and brought together the interests of 10 bus companies in Scotland and the ferry interests of Caledonian MacBrayne. In 1988, the then Conservative Government announced its intention to privatise the bus companies that were owned by the STG. The companies were sold off and the trustees of the two pension schemes—the transport operatives pension scheme and the staff pension fund—made arrangements to secure the existing benefits for scheme members whose bus companies were taken over. Some 12,000 scheme members stayed with those schemes, while a further 2,000 opted to transfer their entitlements, in most cases to pension schemes with new employers. Following the privatisation of the bus companies, the only substantial business remaining is the wind-up of the pension funds. It is fair to say that the STG pension scheme trustees have been very keen to resolve the matter for some time. I share the views of the trustees and the members that the matter should have been addressed a long time ago—the scheme should and could have been wound up in 1995 by the Conservative Government. Perversely, it is only because there has been such a long delay that management of the funds in the interim has provided a surplus that we must now deal with. As nothing was done, devolution and the transfer of responsibilities over what was and is unfinished business has made the legalities even more complicated. We should not forget—as Lord James Douglas-Hamilton mentioned—the inherited terms of the Transport (Scotland) Act 1989. The act makes it clear that the proceeds from dissolution of the Scottish Transport Group should be paid to the UK Exchequer. Several members have commented that the matter is further complicated by the fact that different outcomes have emerged north and south of the border. The initial STG settlement in Scotland was regarded, at the time, as a good one. Members approved the settlement at meetings in 1989, after the STG took the necessary steps to ensure that members were able to vote on the proposed changes. The meetings and proposal were advertised widely and explained fully; trade union representatives were involved. In England, that did not happen. Accordingly, members of the equivalent English schemes were able to argue that their trustees had not acted properly and that was upheld by the pensions ombudsman. In settlement of the potential litigation in England, the Deputy Prime Minister agreed with the trustees, through the High Court, that a payment should be made to the beneficiaries. The Scottish schemes were settled properly and  there has been no similar threat of court action in Scotland. However, that does not mean that we cannot act. I have already mentioned the requirements set out by the Transport (Scotland) Act 1989, overseen by the then Conservative Government. Under that act, the proceeds arising from the dissolution of the STG, including the pension schemes, should be paid to the Exchequer. When drawing up the Scotland Act 1998, the new Labour Government recognised the importance of the matter and ensured that any such receipts may be taken into account in terms of settling the Scottish Executive's budget. There are restrictions on the Parliament and on ministers' powers to make provisions in relation to the pensions. However, the Scottish Parliament has the competence to authorise ministers to make ex gratia payments where appropriate. As the Scottish Minister for Transport and the Environment, I am concerned to ensure that Scottish pensioners are not left significantly worse off as a result of the fact that they and the trustees of the Scottish schemes have at all times acted properly in respect of the STG schemes. Accordingly, I believe that in those exceptional circumstances, ex gratia payments are appropriate. I hope to come to Parliament this autumn to seek members' permission to make such payments. At that point, we will be able to answer some of the detailed questions and points that members have raised. I hope that I can count on members' support when I do that.  The winding-up of the schemes has commenced and we have been working on that over the summer—that process will be concluded as soon as possible. The late First Minister was as concerned as I am to ensure that Scottish pensioners do not lose out. In the last days of his life he was in discussion again with the Treasury about the details of the settlement for STG pension members. Tragically, he was unable to finish that work. However, Jack McConnell and I expect to conclude those negotiations soon. Ultimately, I hope that a substantial sum will be distributed.  Meeting closed at 17:40.

I will meet representatives of Dumfries and Galloway Council tomorrow.

I hope that I will be able to please Mr Mundell with all my answers to his questions. The key issue is that I need to talk to Dumfries and Galloway Council about a range of matters. As Mr Mundell suggests, the issue regarding the A75 and Stranraer is important. He may remember that last week I announced new resources for trunk roads and motorways investment for the next three years. I must now sit down and think about the best way of allocating those resources across the whole of Scotland.

I was keen for my officials to talk to people in Dumfries and Galloway so that they could set out the work that has been carried out on the route accident reduction plan. It would be highly inappropriate to expose officials to questions on issues for which I should be accountable to this Parliament. The answer that I gave to David Mundell's question indicates that I am considering issues such as the A75 in the context of the extra resources that we have to spend, which I announced in my statement on transport expenditure last week.

I assure Elaine Murray that Henry McLeish and I meet regularly to discuss transport and economic development issues. The future of the A75 was one of the issues flagged up in the paper published by Henry McLeish on the strategy for economic development in Scotland.

Over the next few weeks, I plan to meet the main bodies that represent the Scottish road haulage industry, to ensure that we are fully aware of the industry's concerns and aspirations.

That subject has not yet arisen under the transport brief. However, I am aware that there are many proposals under the new deal. If Mr MacAskill has any specific suggestions, I would be happy to read and respond to them.

I am happy to tell Mr Stone that those discussions are on-going.

No.

The Scottish Executive has no plans to repeal current road tolling legislation.

We have no plans to take that action.

I am sorry. I missed that question.

It deals with the M77—I see that we have moved on. My apologies to Mr Scott. The effect that the aggregates tax will have on the cost of the proposed extension of the M77 between Fenwick and Malletsheugh is unknown. It will depend on the extent to which the contractor adopts the use of recycled aggregates.

I do not agree. The construction of the road is likely to create local employment.  Our view is that the aggregates tax will be taken on board when contractors bid for contracts. The issue of the A77 will be taken forward in the competitive tendering process, when contractors evaluate the best methods of constructing the road.

The information requested relates to the concessionaire's private financial arrangements and is therefore not readily available. However, those figures can be calculated, in the main, by examining Skye Bridge Ltd's annual directors report and financial  statements, which are publicly available at Companies House.

I will certainly not answer for the decisions taken or the contracts signed to start the bridge off, which happened before the Labour Government was elected in 1997 and before this Parliament was established. The Executive has fulfilled its commitment to freeze the tolls on the Skye bridge. We have never said that we would buy out the contract, which would involve a major amount of money. As we know from the DTZ Pieda Consulting report, which is available in the Scottish Parliament information centre, the benefits of our commitment to freeze the tolls and to ensure that people have cheaper access to the bridge are now being delivered and are being welcomed.

I am happy to say that we are currently considering that matter. I will report back to the Parliament when we have taken a decision on it.

The concessionaire indicated in its 1997 report that it expects the concession to end by 2013. The actual date depends on future traffic levels. I repeat that we have delivered a freeze on tolls, which means that the toll does not rise every year and impact on local communities. That is a delivered commitment, which this Parliament should welcome.

I understand that Railtrack intends to hold discussions with Argyll and Bute Council on options for rebuilding Taynuilt station.

That is a matter for Railtrack. I hope that Railtrack will initiate improvements in passenger facilities at Taynuilt and that matters are taken in hand as soon as possible to ensure that those improvements are delivered speedily.

I wish to make a statement on the Executive's transport spending priorities to 2004. Two years ago, the new Labour Government set out a new vision for transport in the white paper "Travel Choices for Scotland". That vision is of a modern, integrated transport system that is the equal of any in Europe; that fully reflects our commitment to social inclusion, to the environment and to the economic well-being of Scotland; and that recognises Scotland's geographical diversity. There will be new ideas, new powers and a new approach to transport. The vision is now becoming a reality, with 33 major public transport projects across Scotland. More than 350 new or improved rural transport services have been introduced. More than 8 million lorry miles per year have been moved from Scotland's roads on to rail. Thirteen motorway and trunk road schemes have been delivered and major repairs have been made throughout the network. There is a two-year programme of 49 motorway and trunk road schemes, delivering safer, modern roads. We are building for the long term. The Transport (Scotland) Bill currently before Parliament marks another step towards that long-term vision. It will deliver major improvements to bus services, improving journey times and reliability and allowing improved joint planning across local authority boundaries. It will provide the powers to put in place a national minimum level of concession for pensioners and people with disabilities, and powers to enable local authorities to introduce charging schemes to tackle congestion. Those new powers will equip Scotland's transport system for the 21 st century. We know that the demand for travel will increase. Road traffic is likely to grow by more than 50 per cent in the next 30 years. Rail travel is likely to grow by the same amount, but over 10 years. Those projections have huge implications  for the way we live and work and for our environment. We have made our commitments on reducing carbon dioxide emissions over the next decade. Transport must be part of that picture and we need to plan now for rational and sustainable ways to manage demand and offer people real transport choices. We have new policies, new powers and now new resources. We inherited a public transport system that suffered from decades of underinvestment and a total lack of vision. Too little was spent for too long. Tory underinvestment and fragmentation has left us with huge bills to improve these vital public services. Jack McConnell's statement of 20 September provided the total figure for transport. I now want to set out the detail of how we intend to invest in transport. We will increase resources to local authorities by around £200 million in the period to 2004. The public transport fund is already supporting transport innovation throughout the country. All types of transport have benefited, but there have been too few cycling and walking projects, so I have decided to give more prominence to cycling, walking and safer streets in allocating the fund. We have committed £58 million to the fund for 2001 and we will increase that fund to £150 million over the next three years. The priority for future investment must be projects that will do most to alleviate congestion, our most intractable urban problem, giving people real travel choices. I will announce more successful projects next month. I do not need anyone in this chamber to tell me about the appalling state of our local roads and our bridges. Years of neglect have led to a backlog of repairs and we will make £70 million available over the next three years to enable authorities to begin to tackle it. I expect local authorities to build on this year's level of current and capital expenditure on roads and bridges. Those new resources must not displace existing provision, but must be genuinely additional. The detail, including the expected outputs, will be worked up in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. Transport is also about accessibility for people and about delivering on social justice. Last year, we delivered concessionary travel for blind people. This year, the spending review settlement means that I can go further, and I am delighted to tell the chamber that the Executive will now extend concessionary travel even further. I want one of the legacies of this Government to be one of the best concessionary fare schemes for pensioners and people with disabilities. From October 2002, all Scottish pensioners—nearly a million people—will be able to benefit from free bus travel. This Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition will spend around £300 million more in the period to  March 2004. In real terms, that is a 45 per cent increase. We will deliver new resources to transfer more freight from our roads—£36 million more for the freight facilities grant. We will increase our target for transferring freight from our roads from 15 million to 18 million lorry miles a year by March 2002. We will also extend the freight facilities grant to cover short sea coastal shipping. Delivering new resources means delivering for Scotland's rural communities, to enable people to have access to jobs, family and vital local services. Our spending review decisions will mean an increase in the rural transport fund of £4.5 million over the next three years, an increase of almost £1 million annually to meet the costs of conversion to liquefied petroleum gas, and an increase of around £60 million over the next three years for transport in the Highlands and Islands. We will also deliver new resources for a modern, strategic road network. We have already announced an investment package of £444 million in the period to March 2002. In the two years following, we are further increasing trunk roads expenditure by £68 million. That investment will deliver vital maintenance and key improvements across the network that our economy needs. However, we need an integrated approach that will deliver improvements in public transport and our roads. I will deal first with the issue of the M74 completion. I accept the principle of a strategic link between Fullerton Road and west of the Kingston bridge, but I have no intention of negotiating through the newspapers on the scale and nature of that link. That is why I am inviting the leaders of Glasgow City Council, South Lanarkshire Council and Renfrewshire Council to meet me on 10 October to discuss this issue. We need to discuss the best way forward. The road must be sustainable and affordable. There are clearly regeneration benefits to be gained in the area and the contribution that public transport could make to reducing car usage has not yet been fully explored. Let me be absolutely clear this afternoon: this project will be delivered. I believe that to prepare for the future in a sustainable way we need to examine the transport problems of Glasgow and west central Scotland in the round. That is why I have decided to broaden the transport corridor studies on the A8 and A80 to include the M74 corridor. That has been suggested by many during the first phase of consultation on our studies. Carrying out such studies is not about avoiding action; it is about acting responsibly. I am prepared today to give the Parliament the key commitment that the Executive, directly and with our partners, will implement the decisions flowing from the studies into the needs of the A8, A80 and M74 corridors.  We need public transport and roads investment. The scale of congestion in the west central Scotland area demands nothing less. Concurrently with our studies, we will begin the necessary preparation for building the road, including the statutory procedures that apply to all routes such as the M74. We will implement with similar urgency the recommendations flowing from the study into the Kincardine bridge. That will deliver a welcome relief for people in Kincardine, who have suffered poor air quality, noise and congestion for long enough. To help meet those and other commitments, I have established a new integrated transport fund of £75 million over the next three years. That will enable the Executive to support transport initiatives that deliver on widely accepted local or regional transport solutions; that clearly contribute to our vision of a modern, safe, reliable and integrated transport system; that will allow us to consider new opportunities and to lever in private investment; and that will pave the way for the introduction of congestion charging or workplace parking levies. I will meet the cities in October and will discuss with them the new opportunities that this fund presents. Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Glasgow are beginning to identify coherent and co-ordinated approaches to dealing with their congestion problems. The City of Edinburgh Council, for example, aims to tackle congestion by introducing charging for the use of road space within congested urban areas. Work by external consultants on behalf of the council has shown that, in addition to reducing congestion, £30 million to £40 million per annum could be raised by charging around £1 per vehicle for entering the city. The Transport (Scotland) Bill guarantees that income from charging will be ring-fenced for transport investment. That means that the step change that we need in Scotland to deliver on public transport can be in our grasp within 10 rather than 50 years. In February, I announced that the Executive would provide grants to assist the development of charging scheme proposals. I will respond to the City of Edinburgh's bid shortly. I want to emphasise that support is also available to other councils developing similar schemes. New policies, new powers and now substantial new resources: the Executive has delivered the key tools, which begin to meet Scotland's transport needs, but we alone cannot deliver the transport system that Scotland deserves. We need a long-term vision and a genuine partnership between the Executive, local authorities, transport operators and the private sector, working together for the whole of Scotland. I am committed to that. This morning I met an all-party delegation from the  City of Edinburgh. Tomorrow I will meet the south-east Scotland transport partnership and Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire Councils. Next month I will meet Glasgow City, South Lanarkshire and Renfrewshire Councils and the west of Scotland transport partnership. Working together, we can deliver for Scotland.

I welcome Bruce Crawford to his position as Opposition spokesperson on transport. I look forward to his constructive and consensual contribution to our debates. Not every statement that I make will include an announcement of a major infrastructure project in the region that he represents as a list MSP. The Kincardine bridge project, which he did not mention, will be warmly welcomed in his area. The Government is listening. I do not underestimate the scale of the challenge that we face to improve our transport infrastructure, but the package that I am announcing this afternoon is a major step change for Scotland. It sets us on the way to delivering high-quality investment across the whole of the country. I do not want to follow exactly the routes that are taken by John Prescott; I want to do what is right for Scotland. If one takes out the money that is being invested in railways, from which Scotland will benefit through the strategic rail authority, it is clear that the money that we are allocating represents a fair deal for people in Scotland—for motorists, for ferry users, for walkers, for bus users, and for cyclists—and will allow major investment in transport across Scotland. I know that pleas have been made for local resources. That is why I have listened to local authorities and allocated £70 million over the next three years. That lets us start to deal with the major problems of potholes, crumbling bridges and local roads, about which members from around the country have told me in letters and parliamentary questions—and in lobbying at the back of the chamber. They have all done it. I have listened to members and that is why today we are starting on the major investment that is required for the long term. We have a long-term plan for transport. Two weeks ago, I said that I would present proposals for a delivery plan for the whole of Scotland which will cover not just our investment in roads, buses and public transport, but rail issues and long-term strategic air issues. The investment that I have announced today represents a step change in transport investment.  The public transport fund that Bruce Crawford mentioned will be doubled—it will increase by £10 million to £40 million next year, by £20 million to £50 million in the following year, and by £30 million to £60 million in the year after that. That is an opportunity for councils throughout the country to consider major investment in public transport. Next month, I will announce the next round of the public transport fund awards, which will address some of the issues that have been raised. That is when we will deliver a step change in the public transport fund.

I thank Mr Tosh for his welcome of our concessionary travel scheme for pensioners and people with disabilities. It marks a step change in the life chances of pensioners and disabled people across the country. The £68 million for trunk roads will enable us to make progress on a number of schemes—not just a major trunk programme, but action to address some of the key safety issues that regularly arise in parliamentary questions, such as route accident reduction plans and tackling some of our key accident areas. It will allow us to do more, as it is additional to the £444 million that I have already allocated to be spent over the next two years. That is good news for Scotland's motorists and for other people who use our major trunk roads and motorways.  There are critical upgrades. My statement gives a clear commitment that we will implement the outcomes of the multimodal studies on the A8, the A80 and the M74. That commitment means that we will make progress on the critical routes and the improvements that are required. That work is budgeted for in today's announcement. We believe that the M74 must be a strategic road. It must be upgraded in partnership with Glasgow City Council, South Lanarkshire Council and Renfrewshire Council if we are to maximise the benefits for west central Scotland. However, it is a major project. When we considered it last year in the strategic roads review, the price tag for the route was £177 million. The paper that I have received suggests that the current preferred route of the three councils would cost £307 million. That is a huge amount of money. I want to explore with the councils the most sustainable and acceptable route that will deliver the strategic link that business in the west of Scotland is crying out for, but which would be a responsible route. There are specific issues that I want to explore with the councils. For example, a spur that goes back to the Kingston bridge in Glasgow—which is already one of the most congested routes in Scotland—would not make sense. The Executive has spent more than £30 million securing the Kingston bridge and making it safe; the last thing I want is to channel yet more commuter traffic back to it. The strategic link is to Renfrewshire and Paisley, to the key areas where business opportunities need to link back up to the Mossend rail connection and the rest of Scotland. I want to talk to the councils about the cost of the route, as I think £307 million is not value for money. It would not deliver the benefits the road needs to deliver and it would have an environmental cost that need not be paid. I want to consider a reduced scale for the road and the project that we assessed last year in our strategic roads review. That review talked about the benefits to integration, accessibility and the economy that that route could bring about.  I have read the comments in the newspapers. I want to make it clear that I am not going to negotiate with anybody in this chamber or through the newspapers. We must sit down and talk about this. I believe that consensus can be built. We can work in partnership to identify a funding package that will deliver the safe, sustainable and affordable route that businesses in west central Scotland, the councils and this Executive want. There must be partnership, consensus and agreement—that is how we will get moving on the route. Mr Tosh asked me to comment on the time scale. This is a major project. The orders that have to be passed for a project such as this need to be  discussed democratically. Regardless of which of the road schemes is chosen, people will have to be able to exercise their right to contribute to that democratic process. We must get going on that and sit down and talk about the detail with councils. There need not be a delay; we must get on and get moving with the route.

I would have been disappointed if Mr Scott had not pushed me on all those issues. I recognise the urgent need to make an announcement on the northern isles ferry service and we are working very hard on the matter. Indeed, Mr Scott will be one of the first people to know when I make that announcement. On the general issue of coastal shipping, we intend to introduce a provision for the freight facilities grant in the Transport (Scotland) Bill, which will give Scotland the necessary competence. We delivered a voluntary concessionary fares scheme for blind people last year. Nevertheless, I acknowledge Tavish Scott's points. Although I want to go further than the scheme that I have announced today, it will enable people across Scotland to access the local services that every pensioner and person with disabilities needs. They will now be able to visit shops, local areas and their friends and families without needing to worry about the cost. That is a huge step forward for social inclusion. I want to discuss the precise allocation of the £70 million expenditure on local roads with the  Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. As the organisation knows the problems that exist across Scotland, it must be very involved in the process. Although we will be able to do an awful lot more with the £170 million than we can do under the current public transport funding arrangements, we must go further. The strategic rail authority and the funds that it will have and the next ScotRail franchise must also be part of the big picture. Although we will give local authorities the chance to make bigger bids for public transport funding to exploit certain rail opportunities, there must be partnership between local authorities to develop strategic routes. Furthermore, local authorities must interact with the strategic rail authority and be involved in the ScotRail franchise. If we have a long-term vision and can look beyond the three-year horizon, the public transport fund, in association with other available funds, can present major planning and transport opportunities and bring about a real step change in rail services in Scotland that will help to meet the 50 per cent increase in passenger demand that John Prescott announced only a few weeks ago.

I am happy to agree that the work of Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council is visionary and strategic and begins to consider how to tackle some of the problems in the north-east. Partnership is the way forward and the extent to which both councils have involved transport operators and the business community is a model for other parts of Scotland. I hope that, in the discussions following today's announcement, I can work with both authorities to find out how to work together to deliver on the vision that they have correctly identified.

I want to make it absolutely clear that every time I say we are predicting a 50 per cent increase in road traffic in the next 30 years, I do so to concentrate people's minds. We do not have the road capacity to deal with such an increase and we do not want to suffer the associated problems of poor local air quality and congestion. That is why we need an integrated approach and significant investment in public transport. The predict-and-provide approach has been utterly and thoroughly discredited. We need to manage the demand. That does not mean that we should not invest in roads—we need to address some key links in Scotland—but we need to do so in an integrated way. I hope that the approach that I have set out this afternoon will reassure members that that is at the heart of our transport spending decisions. We want to meet our Kyoto targets. Giving people sustainable travel choices, delivering high-quality public transport, ensuring safe streets and building on the work that we are doing already with safer routes to schools are key parts of today's transport statement. The public transport fund is critical to that. It is also critical to ensure that local authorities' work builds on those elements. Today, we have an opportunity to manage those challenges nationally and locally.

The SNP talks, but it is Labour and the Liberal Democrats that deliver. I want to send a message to councils that I want to talk to COSLA about how we allocate resources and deliver our concessionary travel scheme for pensioners and people with disabilities. We need to do that in consultation with the transport operators. I am happy to reassure people that councils that have delivered concessionary fares schemes for many years—Fife Council is the best example that I can think of—will not be penalised by our scheme. We want to raise the levels of resources across Scotland, not bring them down. The point about teenagers is important and it is why we have carried out research in advance of the Transport (Scotland) Bill that will be presented to Parliament later this year. The powers that I want the bill to grant the Executive will enable us to help people with disabilities and pensioners. I know that many other important groups in society experience social exclusion, but we have to set priorities. We have carried out research and are discussing its findings with the bill team as we consider amendments to the bill.

The funds that we are allocating in this spending statement enable me to take forward the study on the problems of congestion in Kincardine and how to get the most appropriate bridge and bypass for the village. When I visited Kincardine with Scott Barrie, it could not have been clearer that the volume of lorries using the village as a major strategic link is completely inappropriate. We need to address local people's experience and the safety issues that have been raised. Our commitment is now to move forward. The money is available and we will sort out the orders and address the procedural matters that  need to be completed to make progress on the bridge.

David Mundell should recall that I have already announced major investment in the A75. There has been a programme of investment in Dumfries and Galloway. Only last week, my officials visited the area and talked to council officers. Council members were also invited to discuss the future of the A75 with them. The intention of today's announcement is to set the strategic framework. The A75 is an important route and the new resources that I have at my disposal will allow me to address our priorities across Scotland and to add to what we have already done. I do not want to go through every trunk route in Scotland identifying what our future priorities might be before I have had the opportunity to look long and hard at the key issues of the strategic roads review—accessibility, safety, economy, integration and the environment—that will guide our decisions.

I am happy to confirm that every council in Scotland will benefit from the funding. It is intended that every council should be enabled to tackle their particular problems of potholes and crumbling bridges and their need to maintain their roads more effectively. I do indeed wish to discuss with COSLA how we identify outputs so that we ensure that investment is maximised.  The Highlands and Islands and other rural areas such as Argyll and Bute will benefit from the money—it will benefit the whole of Scotland.

It is critical that we work together to deliver the route in partnership between the local authorities and the Executive. A question was asked about benefits to the local area: I am sure that people who live around Rutherglen Main Street will feel the benefit of this major new investment. The time scale is important. The detail of such a major project means that not just the construction stage is important—it is also necessary to ensure that the required procedures and orders are in place. We expect that process to take between seven and eight years in total, regardless of which of the five schemes is suggested by Glasgow. We have examined the time scales extremely closely. The issue for us is to get started on the route, to do it properly and to do it to the right scale. It is important that the route does not feed congestion back into the M8. The last thing we want in Glasgow is for the M8 and the M74 northern extension to become Scotland's M25. We must plan the project properly. It must be a strategic route, which means that the detail is important. I want also to consider the environmental impact. The scheme that we considered last year had some environmental downsides. One of the challenges of a major roads project is to minimise the downsides. The process of building such a road is important. I want to get started on that sooner rather than later. That is why I will meet the councils on 10 October to talk about how we can agree on the best scheme for Glasgow and the whole of west central Scotland.

I am sorry. We are clear that  councils do not want to take the proposals forward on a tolled basis. I retain an open mind on the question of drawing in private sector money. I want a roads scheme that is fit for purpose, that meets the needs of the people on the west coast of Scotland, that is affordable and that the Executive and councils can work together to deliver. That is the key issue. That is why I said in my statement that the Executive is prepared to pay some of the money for the route.

The member may again impress on me the importance of the route; I will again tell him that awards are competitive. I will listen to people and consider proposals carefully to ensure that we get the right strategic links in the public transport fund. As I said, there will be an announcement on that shortly.

Let me be absolutely clear: giving a green light to the scheme today does not mean that it can be delivered tomorrow. This is a major roads project. The significance of my statement is that it allows the three local authorities and me to work together on the best way to deliver the scheme. Regardless of which scheme we go for, there will be planning issues and roads orders to consider. There is no way to short-circuit a scheme such as this. Individual property owners have rights. The process needs to be gone through properly, as with any major roads scheme. I want to ensure that we do not waste time and that we get on with it. That is why the commitment that I made to start the necessary procedures is important and sends out the message that we are serious about this proposal. I mentioned the M25. With 50 per cent traffic increases across Scotland, we need to provide  people with proper public transport choices. The M74 must be a strategic route. It will deliver major environmental benefits in Janis Hughes's constituency. The area around Rutherglen Main Street, for example, is bound to benefit. However, we need to ensure that we plug in the public transport opportunities. The issue around the scale of the route is not just whether it adds to congestion in Glasgow, but about getting the scale that is necessary. If we want to open up west central Scotland, we need to link it to the Mossend rail terminal and to that whole part of South Lanarkshire and beyond, right across to Renfrewshire. That is why the scale is important. If we do not have to go back to Kingston bridge which, I argue, would lead to more problems than we want to contemplate, we should look again at the scheme that was considered in the strategic roads review. That is not about scaling down but about getting the right, strategic road and a scheme that will deliver what the business community and people in Glasgow and west central Scotland want.

I am sure it is only a matter of time before Margo MacDonald lobbies me about potholes. I look forward to it. The Scottish Executive has no further role in the planning processes of the A701, as Margo well knows. The SNP representative was not able to be at my meeting with City of Edinburgh councillors today. I met Liberal Democrat, Labour and Conservative representatives who lobbied me on behalf of the City of Edinburgh transportation committee. I listened. We discussed a lot of strategic issues in detail. It was a very fruitful meeting and I hope it was the first of many consensual discussions in all parts of Scotland. I do not expect that there will be agreement on everything, but there are times when we can agree on the principles and where we are all trying to get to—which is more investment in transport throughout Scotland, more public transport and more investment in the strategic roads network. My statement today opens up real opportunities.

I am allocating £70 million partly because, over the past year and a half, members have raised with me their local roads infrastructure and bridges. The £70 million is designed to help local authorities put more money into local transport, in addition to the grant-aided expenditure that they have allocated to it. I hope that every local authority in Scotland will now spend up to the maximum they can. That will enable them to tackle all sorts of local roads projects. I want to stress that the work in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire is exemplary. It raises the issue of long-term vision and the need for creative thinking and partnership, for everyone to consider what they can bring to the table. That is why I have allocated resources in the transport fund to enable us to talk to local authorities and look at how we enable them to deliver, using the full powers in the Transport (Scotland) Bill. Many opportunities are opened up by my statement. I will work with councils throughout Scotland to fulfil that potential.

As I said in response to an earlier question, I will not make commitments on how we prioritise our spending in the trunk roads programme, but I will listen to members' arguments. Cathy Jamieson's point about lorries is important. In her area, a number of awards have been made through the freight facilities grant. I am keen to see more of them, because they let local businesses develop and get their goods across the country in an affordable way that does not cause localised congestion in key communities on the routes. I am keen to do more—both on our trunk roads work and on the freight facilities grant. The commitment to increase from 15 million to 18 million the number of travel miles that are taken off  roads and put on to rail will bring much-needed relief to communities in Cathy Jamieson's area and many other areas.

In December last year, the Scottish Executive issued guidance on how to run a safer routes to school scheme. In May, I announced additional resources of £5.2 million for local authorities to enable them to implement schemes and, a fortnight ago, I addressed the safer routes to school conference in Glasgow, where practical ideas for implementation were presented and discussed.

I agree that we need a long-term approach to this matter. That is why we have a 10-year target of reducing child fatalities on our roads by 50 per cent. In announcing our allocation of £5.2 million to local authorities, we asked them to submit detailed proposals on how they would implement the scheme in their area. I understand that Aberdeenshire Council proposes the creation of five school safety zones at Banff, Westhill, Alford,  Aboyne and Stonehaven. Those zones are designed to include variable 20 mph speed limits, traffic calming features and additional zebra crossings. The council also proposes to add an additional £50,000 to its safer routes to school allocation of £205,000. Work is continuing, and I suggest that Irene McGugan contacts Aberdeenshire Council about the details of implementation, which is the responsibility of the local council.

Having 20 mph speed zones around our schools would be seen by many communities as a major step forward. I want to ensure that we establish that priority. It is about safer driving, responsible driving, and giving children alternatives that are safer, but crucially it is also about working with parents, local schools and the police to make sure that any local response is properly worked out and meets local circumstances. That is the critical issue, and it is not for me to prescribe to schools what they do, but we have given them a range of options and I hope that the best practice guidance that we have given to schools will lead to them delivering best practice throughout the country.

Yes. SEPA is the waste regulation authority and it regularly monitors Paterson's site to ensure that the conditions in the waste management licence are met. SEPA's monitoring has been enhanced in recent months in response to complaints about odour problems from residents near the site.

It is important to emphasise to Margaret Curran that I am satisfied in the context of the extra monitoring that is now being carried out—largely because of the demands that have been made by her constituents about the problems that have been experienced at the site. Usually, the site receives a minimum of two visits per week, but that has been increased because of the local complaints. I accept the member's point about the need to ensure that the problems are dealt with effectively. That is why it is important that additional monitoring—as well as regular out-of-hours checks—is carried out. Some of the problems do not relate just to daylight hours—there are problems at the beginning of the day.  We need the extra monitoring that is currently being carried out. The dialogue with local residents that Margaret Curran has been involved in is critical in ensuring that the issue is kept to the fore and that SEPA remains well aware of local concerns.

The only point that I would add is that monitoring that is independent from the operators of the site is now being carried out. I am keen that we get decisive action so that residents are content with their experience of living in the area.

We are in contact with the UK Government on a wide range of issues, including the aggregates tax.

The point that was missed out in the question is whether Mr Morgan accepts the need for the principle of an aggregates tax. It is important that we accept that principle. I am happy to write to Mr Morgan about the specific points he has raised. If he accepts that there is a need for the aggregates tax, it is important that we make it work in Scotland's interests.

Absolutely not. The key point of importance for us is that we have been extensively involved in discussing the implications of the aggregates tax for Scotland. One of the reasons we feel that an aggregates tax is an appropriate response is that the proposals that were put forward by the Quarry Products Association were not in Scotland's interests. The proposals did not recognise our land designation system or key issues about procurement guarantees given by the Government in a way that was acceptable to us. The suggestion that we have not considered this issue from the Scottish perspective is unfounded.

Let me make it clear that we are discussing a piece of legislation today, not my transport investment statement. The bill does not detail every single transport investment that we  would all like—it is legislation. There is a distinct difference, and members have to accept that. This bill is not the only thing that the Executive is saying or doing on transport. I also want to make it absolutely clear that we have an integrated approach, but we need to understand the powers of this Parliament and how to exercise them effectively. I made a point to Mr MacAskill earlier about our commitment to a national delivery plan, following the introduction of the Transport (Scotland) Bill and the expenditure statement that Jack McConnell will make next week. We have an integrated approach. Members should not expect to see each investment detailed in the bill. It is not a projects bill, but a legislative bill. It is important to point out that the competence for legislating on rail rests with Westminster, and that the legislation going through Westminster, the UK Transport Bill, delivers us the executive devolution that allows us to deliver on rail in Scotland, and to make it part of our integrated approach.

No thank you, Mr MacAskill. That is why the east coast main line guidance, which we gave to the strategic rail authority, can be found in the Scottish Parliament information centre, and why we will be consulting next month on what the Scottish Executive will deliver in that guidance. We will be consulting MSPs on that. It is not expected for that to be included in the bill, but that does not mean that we do not have an integrated approach, nor does it mean that we are not working on it. We will also have an input into the UK airports review, and we will be reflecting on that in our national delivery plan. We already have transport studies under way, examining the key inter-urban corridors along the A8 and A80. That will also come under our national statement and will be part of our delivery plan. Andy Kerr asked for a strategic approach. I believe that that is what the Executive is delivering. This is not just a bill about local buses, as the SNP has tried to caricature it to be. The whole principle of regional transport partnerships is to enable us to provide local authorities with the ability to work together. Many of our key transport problems are not generated within the boundaries of individual local authorities. Our aspirations as a society and our travel-to-work patterns mean that our travel flows are more complex and longer, and give us more problems than we have had historically. We need to let local authorities work together, and this bill provides the framework to transform and shape  our transport agenda for the long term.

No thank you, Mr Ewing. We are bringing forward practical investment on the ground through our public transport fund and rural transport fund, as well as 350 community rural projects and investment in community transport. The work on our public transport information 2000 project is well under way. That too does not need to be delivered through the bill. A critical issue is the speed of investment.

No thank you. Mr MacAskill and many others have talked about our aspirations in the context of Europe, and I agree with them: we need sensible car use and a world-class, high-quality public transport network. That is what the bill aims to deliver. However, there is an issue about the scale of our ambition. I wish now to address Mr Tosh's comments. It is important that we have enabling powers, and that we target our efforts, prioritising the worst problems of traffic congestion. Our bill provides transparent, bankable guarantees on hypothecation and additionality.

No thank you. I say to Brian Adam that it is not about substituting new money.

No thank you, Mr Ewing. It is about generating more money than we have at the moment and going well beyond the major investment that we will be presenting next week. Our measures allow us to guarantee transparency, to provide annual reporting and to engage in genuine consultation.

No thank you. I will address the point in a minute. I accept members' points about the need to engage with people—

No thank you, Mr Ewing. We need to engage with people and to consult properly. That is why I welcome the SNP's support such as it was and however grudging—

That is why we need a range of mechanisms to deliver locally. I welcome Jamie McGrigor's comments on the proposed Highlands and Islands transport authority. We have a commitment to consult on that. It would have been inappropriate to attempt to deliver a complex range of interactions in the Highlands and Islands through this bill. The consultation and consideration needs to be undertaken properly, which is why we are undertaking it now.

As I have said before, we have had regular discussions with our colleagues at Westminster on a range of issues surrounding fuel duty, and we will continue to discuss such matters. Specific questions were asked by members of the Transport and the Environment Committee, including Robin Harper, who put the issue of home zones on the agenda. I agree that that is an important issue and that improving people's local environments, ensuring safer streets and providing safer routes to school must be elements of a wider package. Local authorities already have considerable powers over such matters, but we must carry out pilot projects and communities must be involved in them. The purpose of our pilot projects is to analyse practical experiences in Scotland and, if necessary, we will introduce legislation to support them. Robin Harper also proposed that we take an integrated approach, to ensure that we have a level playing field. That is precisely what our planning framework is intended to provide. The provisions for charging in the bill are intended to focus on our top priority, which is the congestion that tends to occur in our cities when people are travelling to work. That is the key issue that we have to deliver on. I welcome the support from Mr MacAskill, however grudgingly given, for providing people  with high-quality alternatives and taking an integrated approach. There must be park-and-ride facilities for buses and cars, and for buses and trains. We need to achieve a mixed approach. This bill and the Executive spending plans are designed to bring that about. Mr MacAskill also raised a point about coastal shipping and maritime issues. Some of the powers over those issues rest with Westminster, but I am happy to say that I will introduce provisions at stage 2 of the bill to extend the freight facilities grants to coastal and short sea shipping in Scotland, to complement the provisions in the Westminster Transport Bill. That follows a series of awards that we have made throughout Scotland, and it will allow us to broaden our support and do more to move freight off the roads and on to rail or sea. I emphasise the fact that, through our investment in the public transport fund, we have made investment in ports, airstrips and the new Corran ferry. We have also supported the Berneray causeway.

No thank you. We are also considering 26 new applications. Jack McConnell and I have been working on extra investment in transport, and we will reveal that shortly. The provisions of this bill, in conjunction with the new transport plans that we will introduce to this Parliament, will enable us to deliver high-quality choices throughout Scotland, which will meet people's aspirations. This bill is the culmination of an extensive period of consultation and debate. Last year, we had a robust debate about our charging proposals, and we have incorporated those proposals in the bill. There are genuine and serious arguments to be had at stage 2 about the detail of our proposals, which I look forward to. However, it is striking how much shared agreement there is on the principles of this bill—that common ground is important. We must deliver genuine transport choices for everyone, with the Executive playing a leading role. The Tories are locked into the past; we must join the main stream in Europe. What is good enough for Oslo, Amsterdam or Rome has got to be good enough for Edinburgh, Glasgow or Aberdeen. Transport policy must be about partnership, innovation, forward thinking and high investment. I commend this bill to the Parliament.

I would not normally intervene in an Opposition member's speech. However, I have a brief point of information that might help the debate. In the economic development strategy that Henry McLeish published during the summer, we made a commitment to introduce a national delivery plan for transport in conjunction with the rail franchises on which we will consult MSPs next month. We are introducing such measures, but they do not need to be in the bill.

Will the member give way?

I will take two seconds. Westminster is catching up with us; we are not catching up with it. We are going further.

Transport is essential to everyone's lives. Today's debate is about shaping our transport for the next generation. First, I want to say a few words about the events of the past few days. All members will be relieved that the protesters at Grangemouth have now called off their action. I spoke to Phil Flanders of the Road Haulage Association yesterday afternoon and I made it clear that I was happy to meet the RHA when the current crisis is over. The most up-to-date information that I have is that five tankers went out in the very early hours, three tankers went out early this morning and 20 to 30 tankers are currently ready to roll. The key priority has to be to get fuel to our essential services to keep our hospitals and other vital services working. Today's developments are putting us back on the track to normality, but clearly it will be some time before we are there. My ministerial colleagues and I will continue to monitor the position closely. We had a full debate yesterday on fuel and the causes of the current fuel crisis across the UK, and there is no doubt that we will return to the issue in future. However, I believe strongly that we need to make the most of what is a relatively short debate today on the proposals in our Transport (Scotland) Bill. Widespread consultation has led to today's debate and it is important that members make the most of this opportunity to scrutinise our proposals and consider the recommendations of the Transport and the Environment Committee. I thank those who were involved in preparing the stage 1 report on the bill, particularly Andy Kerr and the other members of the Transport and the Environment Committee, the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, the Local Government Committee, the Equal Opportunities Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee. We should also acknowledge all those who contributed their views in person and in  writing to the Parliament. The Transport and the Environment Committee is to be commended for a constructive, considered and balanced report, which identifies much common ground. Where issues are raised, invariably they are about means rather than ends. I would like to set out the areas where we are in agreement, the topics that I would like to discuss further with the committee at stage 2 in light of its comments and those areas where I remain to be persuaded of the need to revisit our proposals. As there is much ground to be covered, I will focus my opening remarks on our proposals on joint strategies, bus services, charging and concessionary fares. Perhaps we can return to some of the other issues later in the debate. The bill has come from the growing recognition over the past few years that congestion and a lack of genuine transport choices are harming our economy, our environment, our health and our way of life, that the deregulation policies of the previous Conservative Government resulted in fragmentation, which cost us dear, and that we need to restore a balance to our transport policies in the interest of all our communities. The bill is part of a wider strategy to address the needs of urban Scotland, the distinct agenda in rural Scotland and our key inter-urban links. We have already begun to remedy our 1997 inheritance of under-investment and fragmentation. We are committed to doubling the public transport fund by 2003-04. Support for Caledonian MacBrayne and Highlands and Islands Airport Ltd is at record levels. Next week's statement by Jack McConnell on our spending review will establish our spending priorities to 2004. Crucially, the bill recognises Scotland's diversity through empowering local authorities to deliver local solutions for local needs. It will help public transport to become an attractive choice—not a last resort—and to be comparable with the best in Europe. The bill does not duck the hard choices that have to be made but, at the same time, it guarantees fair treatment for motorists. I welcome the Transport and the Environment Committee's endorsement of what we are trying to achieve.

No, I have a huge amount to cover. It may help if I set our proposals on joint strategies in their wider context. The role of regional strategies is vital; our proposals build on work that is already under way in east and west central Scotland and the north-east. The bill's proposals will help local partners to work together to produce a regional view on challenges,  opportunities and priorities. I want to reassure the Transport and the Environment Committee and local authorities that our intention is not to dictate the content of regional strategies, but to ensure that the work is done and the transport improvements are delivered on the ground. I will look again at the arrangements for consultation and at the Subordinate Legislation Committee's concerns about the breadth of the proposed powers. There is nothing between us regarding the intentions underlying these provisions; the issue is how best to achieve them. If we can improve the bill at stage 2, we will. I am wholly in agreement with the Transport and the Environment Committee on the vital role that the Executive has to play in progressing our vision at local, regional and national level. Although we do not have all the answers, it is important that the Executive is an active player in terms of expertise and financial resources. I am determined that we will be full and equal partners in the work that lies ahead. I turn now to our proposals for improving bus services. Our aim is to make buses the first choice for people, not the last resort, and to reverse the historic overall decline in bus use across Scotland. Everyone in the chamber can point to good and bad experiences of bus travel in Scotland. There are excellent examples of partnership working in Aberdeen and we have the Edinburgh greenways and the Glasgow bus priority corridors. There are new accessible buses; record levels of investment—£167 million since 1996; bus lanes to speed buses through congestion; better waiting facilities; ticketing and pricing initiatives; and improved information. There is evidence that our bus companies are capable of working with local partners to turn around the industry's prospects and actively grow the market. However, we need much more of that. Everyone in the chamber will know from their mailbags that those examples of good practice are not the whole story. The committee's report reflects the concern of many that not enough is being done to ensure regular and reliable bus services for all our people. We have already begun to remedy our 1997 inheritance of under-investment and fragmentation. Crucially, the bill recognises the need to attack the perception that, across Scotland as a whole, the bus industry is not delivering the standards available in the best-served areas. I share those concerns. We need a bus industry that supplies a network of affordable, attractive, modern and reliable services. Passengers need to have access to comprehensive information and services that meet their needs. We must ensure that the benefits  extend beyond our major conurbations and reach the whole of Scotland. The bus provisions in the bill are about giving local authorities a toolkit of options to revitalise our bus services. The provisions include: quality partnerships; quality contracts; powers for local authorities to enhance service provision; enhanced powers and focus for the traffic commissioner; and better information for the travelling public. That must be viewed alongside the Executive's commitment on rural transport grants, our public transport fund awards and our bus fuel duty subsidy. We need to get the balance right between partnerships and contracts. Partnerships can deliver innovation and investment, which can bring new passengers on to buses. Contracts can provide a more regulated and guaranteed framework. A key lesson from the deregulation of the bus industry in the 1980s and the privatisation of the rail industry in the 1990s is this: turn an industry upside down and the first thing that is hit is investment. That means fewer new buses, fewer new trains and a poorer service for customers. That is the context in which we have to consider the committee's recommendations on the process for triggering quality contracts. Everyone I have talked to this summer recognises that a universal and simultaneous move to contracts is not the answer. However, that certainly does not mean that contracts do not have a role to play. The bus sector should be under no illusions about that. Quality contracts are there to be used where they are shown to be appropriate and necessary. If the industry fails to deliver a satisfactory service for all, I am prepared to ensure that quality contracts are used where appropriate. Having looked again at the provisions on buses in the light of the comments made at stage 1, I agree that they could be improved. I will therefore be introducing amendments to replace the "only way" test for quality contracts with the more appropriate test that a contract "is necessary in order to implement relevant general policies", and to reduce the handover period after the award of contracts to a maximum of six months, and less where appropriate. That will ensure that local authorities can act quickly if the circumstances require. I am less attracted by the committee's suggestions on including fares and frequencies in quality partnerships. Although that proposal might seem attractive at first glance, it could lead to bad legislation. The bill outlines two different concepts. Partnerships give local authorities new powers to set overall standards for bus services as a  condition of the use of the facilities provided. Contracts give local authorities powers to determine all the details of bus services in an area, including the detailed timetable. Putting fares and frequencies into a partnership would just produce a legal and operational muddle. Such a hybrid is likely to end up unworkable. I shall list some of the problems. Minimum frequencies will, if they are set at a high level, discriminate against smaller bus companies, which might not have the number of buses to meet the specified level. If they are set at a low level, however, they will have next to no impact. Although the Office of Fair Trading could call in quality partnership schemes for competition scrutiny, it has indicated that voluntary arrangements between authorities and operators on timings and frequencies might be acceptable in certain circumstances. Already there is evidence of innovation in that regard. However, schemes that fix fares and frequencies would, on the face of it, entail market fixing. I cannot speak for the OFT, but such proposals might be blocked if the OFT regarded them as disproportionate to the perceived public benefit. I believe that the upshot would be bad legislation; we should not put such provisions on the statute book. I welcome the committee's broad acceptance of the case for our proposals on road user charging. While some members may disagree with aspects of those proposals, I note that Murray Tosh alone chose the luxury of opposition, rather than facing up to the all-too-real problems of our cities. I detect a growing acceptance across the political spectrum that charging has a crucial role to play in tackling the congestion, environmental and health problems that are caused by traffic growth in our major cities.

No. I will come back to Mr Tosh after he has given his speech. Charging also offers the opportunity of new investment, but it must be carefully thought out, focused and accepted by communities. Over the summer, I visited Norway to see the charging schemes in Oslo and Trondheim, both of which have been working smoothly and with local support for some years. Charging is not rocket science. It delivers targeted investment across Europe and is a practical and pragmatic response to problems that are familiar across the developed world. A range of cities across Europe are considering congestion charging. Such a scheme for London has just gone out to consultation, the four main cities in the  Netherlands begin a two-year trial next year and Rome is committed to implementing a full scheme in 2002. Those successful cities believe that charging has a role to play in maintaining their success. Of course, charging is not an answer in itself, but it must be part of a wider package of improvements. Norway's experience brings out the fact that ordinary citizens and businesses will support charging if they can see the practical benefits in improved public transport and roads infrastructure, less pollution in the air that they breathe and safer streets. Surely we can all share that vision. In Norway, charging is just part of the landscape—not loved perhaps, but not resisted either—and I believe that the potential exists for that to happen in Scotland. We will offer practical assistance and funding support to those local authorities in Scotland that recognise the benefits that our charging proposals offer. For the record, I am happy to confirm again that local authorities will retain all the proceeds of charging for investment in their transport priorities. I acknowledge that the committee is less persuaded that workplace parking levies will have a positive impact on congestion problems and that it has asked the Executive to supply further evidence prior to stage 2. I appreciate the committee's hesitation about a measure that is both novel and about which the business lobby has expressed strong reservations. Therefore, I accept the committee's invitation to provide further evidence before stage 2 on the case for workplace parking levies.

The committee asked the Executive to consider undertaking research and to report back before we introduced regulations on the appropriate categories for exemption, and that is what I intend to do. It is important to acknowledge the points made by the committee. We must not have a huge number of exemptions, as that would undermine the principle of exemption. However, I accept that we must identify the key exemptions before proposing any schemes and before the introduction of regulations. The proposals that we put to Parliament included categories such as people with mobility and access problems, whom we would not want to be affected by congestion charging or workplace parking levies.  I will briefly set out the logic of our position. The provision of free parking at the workplace clearly encourages employees to drive to work, and such journeys make up a large proportion of peak-time congestion. Many of those journeys are made by lone drivers, often on routes where public transport alternatives either are available or could be provided. A levy on such spaces, with the revenue ring-fenced for local transport improvements, would reduce peak-time congestion in two ways. First, employers would be encouraged to review their parking provision and to think imaginatively about how their employees get to work through, for example, green commuter plans, which are key to such an approach. Secondly, the levy would generate resources to improve public transport alternatives. The research that has been done into the workplace parking levy confirms that argument. Two recent studies in London and Nottingham suggested that reductions of between 3 and 13 per cent in peak-time traffic might be possible. I will mention briefly some other critical points raised in the Transport and the Environment Committee's report. I welcome the committee's support for the Executive's commitments on hypothecation and additionality and to the sharing of revenues fairly across local authority boundaries. I shall introduce an amendment at stage 2 to clarify that consultation is a statutory duty on local authorities. I shall also consider the committee's other suggestions on consultation and how that should be framed in the bill. There is nothing between us on the principles, but we must decide in detail how best to deliver those commitments in practice. I remain to be convinced that trunk roads should be included in a local charging scheme. In many cases, trunk roads act as through-routes for traffic travelling from one side of the country to another—traffic that is going nowhere near the city centres. In such circumstances, it would be difficult to justify to the motorists concerned why they are being charged. However, I look forward to a lively discussion on this with the committee at stage 2. I welcome the committee's support for our proposals on concessionary fares. We will announce our future plans as part of the spending review, but I accept the committee's suggestion that we take an enabling power to extend eligibility for bus concessionary fares to other groups. I shall introduce an amendment at stage 2, but I want to make it absolutely clear that considerable costs are involved, as the committee recognised in its report, and that those costs will rule out action in this area for the foreseeable future. We will also share our research study on concessionary fares with the committee before we get to the relevant point at stage 2.  The Finance Committee has asked for clarification of the extra costs falling to the Executive and local authorities. As the committee noted, this is in the main an enabling bill. Implementation costs will be met in various ways: through redeploying existing resources, including staffing; from the new sources of revenue being introduced in the bill, should local authorities decide to use their powers; and from the additional resources to be announced by Jack McConnell next week. I previously announced that the Executive would consider providing matching support to assist local authorities with the research and development costs associated with introducing local charging schemes. Specific costs and funding sources will, of course, depend on local circumstances. Our aim is to deliver a step change in transport in Scotland. Much has to be done if we are to remedy the years of Tory neglect and cavalier disregard for Scotland's infrastructure and institutions. Part of the answer lies in further increases in investment, and next week's statement by Jack McConnell will build on what we have already begun. Another part of the answer lies in getting the structures right, and the bill will deliver the vital framework so that central Government, local authorities and the private sector, working together in genuine partnership, can deliver the better transport system that everyone wants. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Transport (Scotland) Bill.

I offer a piece of information. As happens with every subject in the Scottish Parliament, an input being made  throughout the process does not require physical presence. Scottish ministers are involved on a daily basis and are in regular contact with their opposite numbers in the UK Parliament. We do that by attending Council meetings in Europe and by engaging in discussions and meetings with our colleagues in Westminster.

The preferred bidder will be decided shortly. The formal contract will be concluded as soon as negotiations with the preferred bidder are finalised.

Shortly. The issues that Tavish Scott raised give members some sense of the complexity that is involved in making sure that we get this decision right. It is important to us that we do so. On the question of when we move to the next contract, we have had discussions with the current contractor with a view to agreeing an extension of its existing contract to ensure that the  whole process is managed smoothly, so that island residents' and visitors' use of the services is not interrupted.

There would be no tie-in procedure, because we have a clear process for the northern isles ferry contracts. We have been through that process and we are nearing its end, therefore there would be no direct link in the way that is suggested.

Jamie Stone is correct; there are a number of issues that we must ensure we get right. When I visited Scrabster this summer it was useful to see the condition of the existing facilities. The facilities and the ferries are currently under discussion, and we hope to be able to move forward shortly.

As part of an on-going programme of works to improve safety on the A96 trunk road, two schemes between Inverurie and Huntly are being progressed. A junction improvement scheme at Slioch crossroads will be constructed this year at an estimated cost of £370,000. In addition, it is anticipated that construction work on the Newtongarry climbing lane scheme will commence in spring 2001, at an estimated cost of £3 million. The Scottish Executive is also preparing the Coachford alignment improvement and climbing lane scheme, which is approximately five miles north of Huntly, at an estimated cost of £3.5 million. It is expected that draft orders will be published in the summer of 2001 and—subject to the completion of the statutory procedures—construction should start in 2002.

Although that has been considered, traffic flows meant that it was not justified as a priority at the time. However, I can assure Nora Radcliffe that we will continue to identify safety improvement schemes and programme them into the system. We will also review the experiences of last month—the accidents on that stretch of road—and will include the results of that review in our future programme of works.

The purpose of identifying safety audits is to analyse the opportunities to improve stretches of trunk roads. That is an opportunity to make sure that we tackle those roads for the future. As I outlined in my answer to Nora Radcliffe, we are making significant improvements to the A96 and will continue to do so.

We will develop strategic priorities for Scotland's railways. In preparation for that, the Executive has already started discussions with SPT on railway developments.

I am well aware of those and many other projects that are being considered. There are two ways in which to proceed with such developments. One is through the ScotRail franchise, about which we will start discussions later this year. The other is through the public transport fund. We are seeking applications from local authorities by 7 August. Through those approaches, and through the shadow strategic rail authority's rail passenger partnership fund, we can in a variety of ways develop such projects as those mentioned by Robert Brown.

My answer to Robert Brown was that we were having precisely those discussions with Strathclyde Passenger Transport. Our job is to decide priorities across the whole of Scotland. In order to do that, we need to speak to SPT, the other transport authorities and local authorities throughout Scotland about what our strategic priorities should be when we discuss the ScotRail franchise. There are other ways in which we can pursue that, but I do not think that it would be appropriate for me to give carte blanche to every scheme that Ms White could raise with me. We will consider all the public transport fund applications and decide on the best one to take forward.

We have conducted a survey on the future for Scotland's airports. We will be developing the whole issue of airport links—by rail and other means. I do not want to respond in detail on any matter that might be the subject of a future planning issue.

Having secured new pension arrangements for their members, the trustees of the Scottish Transport Group pension schemes have responsibility for taking such steps as are necessary in order to wind up the pension schemes.

I am aware of the immense frustration among those who want the matter to be resolved. The Executive is attempting to expedite procedures and the trustees are working to wind up the funds this year. Complex tax and legal matters need to be completed. We hope to bring to the Parliament in the autumn an order that will achieve the wind-up of the STG. We are in discussion with the trustees and the Treasury to move matters forward.

The reassurance that I can give to Dennis Canavan is that I am well aware of the  concerns and frustration that exist. I refer him to the answer that I gave to Sylvia Jackson—that we hope to introduce an order in the autumn that will effect the wind-up of the STG pension schemes. That matter is for the Parliament to discuss and that is the way in which progress can be made in this matter.

The Scottish Executive is investing record amounts in Scotland's rural transport and will continue to ensure that Scotland's interests are being placed firmly on the agenda of the UK Government through direct contacts with the Treasury and the Scotland Office.

That, once again, was an attempt to deal with a complex political challenge through a soundbite. We are well aware of the number of options for giving people better access to cheaper fuel—for example, the Powershift programme and support for rural petrol stations. The Scottish Executive is acting. I would like to remind Mr Fergus Ewing that I do not think that it is in our interest in the Scottish Parliament to debate these complex issues in soundbites. It is in our long-term interest that the private discussions that I have with the chancellor and with people in the Scotland Office remain private as we negotiate the options for Scotland.

We are looking forward to the publication of the Office of Fair Trading report that was commissioned by Calum Macdonald, the Labour minister responsible for transport before devolution. This is a highly complex issue. I will want to examine the OFT's report and to continue discussions with Brian Wilson in the Scotland Office and with the Treasury. We need to see what we can do in the long term to tackle the issues that have been raised today.

I could not agree more with the member about the sheer hypocrisy of those who claim to have a different solution to this problem. I am aware of four different suggestions from the SNP benches alone as to how we should tackle it. Through the public transport fund, we are delivering support for rural petrol stations and the highest-ever support for our lifeline ferry and air services. We are investing in Stornoway air terminal and providing support for Orkney. We are delivering an integrated transport system for people in rural areas.

I am in regular contact with both the Scotland Office and the Treasury on matters such as this. That is one of the reasons why we are keen to promote the use of liquid petroleum gas in the Highlands and Islands—it is an environmentally friendly fuel that is much cheaper than the alternatives. We recognise that this issue is important and we are keen to act on it.

Thank you Presiding Officer. It is with a real sense of pride that I rise today to propose that the Parliament pass this bill, which is a landmark bill. Several times in recent years, people have observed that it is deeply ironic that Scotland should be one of the few countries in the world that does not have national parks. As Robin Harper mentioned, Scotland is the birthplace of John Muir, acknowledged as the founder of national parks in north America and, by extension, throughout the world. Scotland has some of the finest landscapes in the world. It is high time that we had national parks. The National Parks (Scotland) Bill sets in place a framework for national parks in Scotland. Some people feared that a blueprint would be imposed on all areas put forward for national park status. They made the point that what is right for Loch Lomond and the Trossachs is not necessarily what is wanted in the Cairngorms. We have listened to those points. The bill provides a framework, a set of common values and principles and a set of processes to ensure that the designation of an area as a national park can happen only after full consultation. Within that framework there is scope for differences between parks, for setting different priorities in national park plans, which reflect the needs and characteristics of the particular area and, crucially, for innovative thinking and ways of involving people. If there is one theme that has emerged consistently throughout the discussions and the consultation on the bill, it is that people have feared that they would not be allowed to be involved. We understand those worries, which is why we have made many changes to the bill to strengthen the consultation provisions. We have heard the points made that consultation must be approached properly—that it should involve people and seek their ideas, not  simply become a matter of rubber-stamping the only option put forward. We have taken those points to heart and agree with them. We will be working over the coming months, in partnership with many others, on the guidance to national park authorities. There is scope for innovation. We will be encouraging people to think of new ways of doing things. The preparation of the park plan is a particularly good example. It is essential that that is prepared in partnership. It will only be meaningful if everyone affected by it has ownership of it and feels that they have contributed to it. We have also provided in the bill a requirement on every national park authority to set up advisory groups, to ensure that there are mechanisms in place to allow the voices of the many people with an interest in national parks to be heard. The groups will be vital to the success of a national park. A further theme that has emerged is integration. National parks will have four aims. Those aims must operate together in a co-ordinated and integrated way. We do not regard them as polar opposites. One of the challenges for national park authorities is to integrate those key aims and to reach agreement in a co-ordinated way. We all agree that we must get the balance right. That is our job in setting the framework and the job of the national park authorities and their partners. We must not rely on the old-style system in which economic development was weighed up against nature conservation. We have lived with that approach for years. In the new national park areas the challenge will be integration. It underpins the objectives of national parks and comes from an aspiration to do things better and to make the most of the opportunities provided by our natural areas. The legislation must stand the test of time. It must ensure that the reasons for designating an area as a national park are not destroyed by virtue of the designation. Our high-quality environment is a vital asset for Scotland and for the communities in the national park areas. National parks offer us the chance to manage our resources better and in a much more sustainable way. If an example is needed, I have a prop—a bottle of mineral water. It is on sale in a major retail chain in Edinburgh. It is a national park bottle of mineral water from the Brecon Beacons National Park in Wales. It illustrates the argument that national parks can sell produce created in them that can be branded and is an example of the opportunities that a national park will create. Some people fear that national park status will stifle development, prevent progress and preserve  areas in aspic. Nothing could be further from the truth. The aims make quite clear the importance of communities and sustainable economic development. The example of produce from the Brecon Beacons National Park could be taken up in Scotland. We can learn from experience and best practice elsewhere. In France, when farmers sell their produce, it is branded as national park produce. Certainly tensions have been identified in the national parks in England. The challenge for the national park authorities will be to manage such tensions. We must lift our heads above the fears that have been expressed and identify the prizes and the opportunities and make the most of them. I am not aware of anywhere in the world—and almost everywhere bar Scotland has national parks—where once a national park designation is in place, people have demanded that it be taken away. This bill is about looking to the future; it is about managing, integrating and looking to the four aims and the conditions of the parks. It is about asking whether we can do better and aspiring to do better than we are doing at the moment. It is about knowing why we have designated the parks in the first place, then setting up the mechanisms that involve all those with an interest and a contribution to make to deliver on the aims in the bill. I have one formal task. For purposes of rule 9.11 of the standing orders, I am pleased to advise the Parliament that Her Majesty, having been informed of the purpose of the National Parks (Scotland) Bill, has consented to place her prerogative and interests, so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of the Parliament for the purposes of the bill. This is an important day, as we enter the final stage in the process of establishing the concept of national parks in Scotland. As the debate has illustrated, we must now look forward to the designation and electoral orders. That will involve more debate, but I believe that the debate so far has been time well spent. I urge Parliament to pass the bill. I look forward to the next stage of discussion. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the National Parks (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I am aware that amendment 33 was inspired by the stage 2 debate on national park plan reviews. Everybody accepted that it is important to review national park plans and that we must get the balance right between a review period that is too long and one that is too short. I appreciate Des McNulty's concern, which he expressed at stage 2, that not to specify in the bill how often reviews should take place might leave some uncertainty. Amendment 33 takes forward the discussion that we had at stage 2 about whether guidance or directions would be appropriate. I believe that his amendment provides a suitable balance. The maximum period for which a plan can operate without being reviewed is now five years, but the amendment allows flexibility for directions to be given to review a plan more frequently, if that is considered necessary. Therefore, I support amendment 33. I move on to Sylvia Jackson's amendment 34. As we discussed at stage 2, the auditing and monitoring of the activities of national parks is important. It is equally important that that information is publicly available. I assure Sylvia Jackson that her amendment is unnecessary because the bill already provides Scottish  ministers with sufficient powers to require audits of various kinds. For example, section 20(1) states: "The Scottish Ministers may make grants to a National Park authority for such purposes, of such amounts and on such terms as they think fit." That empowers Scottish ministers to attach conditions to the national park authorities' grant-in-aid settlements. Almost certainly, those conditions will include audits and monitoring. Section 24 ensures that national park authorities issue annual reports on their activities. I would expect those reports to include any audit findings and information about the monitoring of performance against targets. Those reports would have to be published and laid before Parliament. Furthermore, Scottish ministers can issue guidance or give directions to a national park authority under section 14. There are many ways in which we can demonstrate that Scottish ministers can ensure that audit arrangements are in place and that they are followed. I hope that that reassures Sylvia Jackson that the bill provides amply for audit and monitoring arrangements and that her amendment is not required.  Amendment 33 agreed to.  Amendment 34 not moved.

We have had as thorough a debate today as we had at stage 2. At that point, I said that the success of the national parks would depend on getting the balance right. I agree with Elaine Murray on that point. Murray Tosh said that he thought that we have got the bill about as right as we can get it. I would like to keep that comment for posterity. Alasdair Morgan said that it was important that we do not exaggerate fears. I would like to hang on to that sentiment, as I believe that amendments 32 and 18 typify the polar opposites of the debate and are not representative of the balance that we are trying to achieve. Amendment 32, in the name of Robin Harper, reflects a fear that the principle in section 8(6) is not strong enough and will not prevent unfettered development. The fear behind amendment 18, in the name of Fergus Ewing, is that the principle will always be invoked and will stifle all forms of development to the detriment of local people. Both fears were debated at stage 2, when the committee's opinion was that we had the balance right. I feel that we have. Robin Harper asked whether our national parks would be national parks as defined by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources. If we manage to maintain the balance that we have in the bill, the answer would be yes. However, if we tinker with the bill and attempt to remove the Sandford principle, the answer might be no. The key objective is to deliver a national park authority that is required to act to achieve all four of its aims: conservation of the natural and cultural heritage; the sustainable use of natural resources; enjoyment and recreation; and the sustainable economic and social development of communities. At stage 2 we added not only the word "sustainable", but the word "communities". It is important that we remember that we are talking about the economic and social development of communities. Following consultation on the draft bill, we added  the provision that those four aims are to be pursued collectively and in a co-ordinated way. That is important. The national park authority must not pursue one of those aims to the exclusion of the others. We have made it clear all along that we must have an integrated approach, not the old-style approach that automatically sees development as being contrary to conservation interests. The bill has been drafted to ensure that the national park authority looks for an integrated approach, tries to avoid conflict and reconciles competing interests. Only after failing to resolve a conflict would it be required to give greater weight to conservation. The Sandford principle is not the first port of call; it is what guides the park authority once it has exhausted the other avenues. Every opportunity must be taken for negotiation and mediation before the principle set out in section 8(6) is invoked. That is what will be new about the national park areas. In answer to Murray Tosh, I will say that I am prepared to use the statutory guidance to the national park authorities to make it clear that we expect the number of instances when the principle bites to be kept to a minimum and that they should try to reconcile different viewpoints. Zoning will help us to do that. It will ensure that, if appropriate, different approaches will be taken in different parts of the park area. The construction of the national park plan will be subject to wide consultation which will bring the community into the discussion. People will be able to air their views about where zoning should occur and what the nature of the zones should be. Careful planning and positive management, as provided in the national park plan, will be vital to the balance that we must deliver. Despite all the care, there will be times when conflicts are difficult to resolve. In such cases, it is right that the conservation of a park's special qualities should be given greater weight. The wording is significant: it is not "take precedence", as the matter concerns the judgment of the national park authority in dealing with difficult issues. I do not agree with amendments 18 and 32. The bill strikes the right balance at the moment. Amendment 31 is similar to an amendment that Sylvia Jackson lodged at stage 2. I gave a commitment then to think carefully about the points that she made. I support the aspirations behind the amendment. Of course we want good design in buildings and good stewardship. However, this is not the right place in the bill to address that, or the right way in which to achieve those aspirations. The amendment refers to two specific issues: the design of buildings and environmental stewardship or land management issues. Section  8 is more concerned with the collective and co-ordinated pursuit of the bill's aims, and the question of sustainability is already encapsulated in those aims, both in terms of natural resources and in the promotion of sustainable economic and social development. There are more appropriate vehicles for delivering what Sylvia Jackson's amendment seeks to ensure. Planning guidance, management schemes and guidance for national park authorities will allow us to achieve the appropriate balance and set the appropriate agenda for those issues. Good design is sought in all buildings, and is an aspiration that all members would share. However, that should be encouraged through planning and the associated guidance; it should not be in statute. The bill as drafted strikes the right balance; nevertheless, this has been a useful debate, as it has illustrated the difficulties and challenges that the national park authority will face. Statutory guidance will help the authority in that respect. I hope that the commitments that I have given will encourage Sylvia Jackson not to press her amendment when we come to vote on it.

I am happy to let the debate continue.

No, thank you. I am winding up. I remind people that the national park advisory bodies will provide another way in which to involve people who represent special interest groups or local interests and for whom there is no room on the national park board. That is important. There are many ways in which a range of people will be involved. We must involve them as far as possible in a consensual way. We must do things differently and meet the aims to which we have all signed up, which kicked off the bill. When I suggest to members that they should support all the amendments, it is because I want to get the process right. The process is complex. We have taken on board the arguments that were raised at stage 2. We must get it right in practice. This is not the end of the game. There will be further discussion. I hope that that reassurance will encourage members to vote for the raft of amendments lodged by Mike Rumbles. All of them are integral—we need all of them to make the complex process work properly.

I want to respond to some of the fears that have been raised in the chamber this afternoon. We will be going through a complex process, but the electoral order that will accompany the establishment of our national parks gives us the opportunity to debate in more  depth and with more time some of the issues that members have raised. For example, I am happy to give Alasdair Morgan and Murray Tosh an assurance that we intend to address directly the issue of disqualification, which they raised, through the electoral order. The process will be challenging because we will be doing something different with the decision that, given the support of the chamber, we will take this afternoon. The details will be challenging. We will ensure that we have widespread discussion. The affirmative electoral order will be voted on by Parliament, so all members will have the opportunity to be involved in the process. Murray Tosh's point about local representation and Sylvia Jackson's point about involving people from across the national park areas are fundamentally important. We will need to have a debate to decide how best the elections will be conducted.  I want to address the points that Murray Tosh and Sylvia Jackson raised. It is clear that the principle of involving local people and representatives of local interests will be retained in the nominations by local authorities and the Scottish ministers. Specifically, before the Scottish ministers consider appointing any member, they must consult every local authority and community council in the national park area. There is therefore an explicit commitment that the Scottish ministers will consult community councils on nominations, which is important. I remind members who have followed the bill from day one that it contains a provision that we will consult people who appear to be representative of the interests of those who live, work or carry out business in the national park. Consultation and the invitation to people to nominate themselves or others who they think would be strong and helpful members of the national park authority are part of the bill. It is important to put that on record. Community councils will, therefore, be part of the process of nominating people with expertise and interests that could help the national park authority. Des McNulty's point about representation from throughout the park area is critical. We will have to ensure that we get the form that the election process takes—the type of ballot, whether postal or other, and the amount of publicity that is circulated throughout the park area—right in the electoral order. It will be important to consult on that so that people feel that they are part of the process. I want to make a couple of points about issues that Fergus Ewing raised. There will not be room for everyone on the national park authority. We will  set a limit of 25 people, and they will need to be people with vision and broad experience who are tapped into a range of issues. The national parks will be challenging bodies to be part of, as they are being set up from first principles, but I do not subscribe to the negative comments made by Fergus Ewing. It is important that there is an appropriate place for people who can add weight and expertise to the national park authorities. I do not pretend that every debate in the Cairngorms has gone without difficulty or that every issue that has been resolved has been resolved with everybody's absolute agreement, but the point of national parks is to resolve difficult issues through consensus, where possible, in line with the aims of national parks as set out in the bill. The process must be inclusive.

I will address Ben Wallace's amendments first. I assure him that we have thought about the issues that are raised by his amendments, but we remain of the view that the amendments are not necessary. Further than that, we believe that the amendments would have serious disadvantages. I will pick up on all those points, but I want first to provide the reassurances that Ben Wallace needs. I hope that he will then be able to agree not to press his amendments.  The aim of Ben Wallace's amendments is to ensure that community councils will receive copies of the consultation documents that the bill provides for. There is no legal necessity for a requirement that a copy of the consultation document be sent to a community council, or any other consultee. Community councils, along with others, are specified in the bill as consultees. The legal position is quite clear. The essence of consultation is communication of a genuine invitation to seek advice and comments, giving a fair time to respond and giving genuine consideration to such comments. For consultation to be real, sufficient information about the proposal must be given to inform a considered response. The bill achieves that as it stands. I take the point, made by Alasdair Morgan, about cluttering up the bill with amendments that are not required. If further reassurance is required—as I suspect that it is—I should add that Executive amendment 3 provides for Scottish ministers to issue directions to a reporting body about the conduct of its consultation. I am happy to confirm that we will use that to remind any reporters of their duties in respect of sending consultation documents to statutory consultees. The reporter will be required to do that, not the local authority. That clarification might be helpful to Murray Tosh. I will focus briefly on what the drawbacks of Ben Wallace's amendments would be. The local authorities receive a copy of the proposal and the requirement under section 2(5)(a) because they are under a statutory duty to make them available for public inspection; community councils are not. Executive amendment 4 makes the link explicit and clear. A requirement on the Executive to send a copy of a proposal and a requirement to community councils would raise the question why that requirement was in the bill, given that it is not stated in respect of other consultees mentioned in the bill or in other statutes. Singling out community councils for special mention creates a legal implication that there is no corresponding requirement in relation to other consultees. The Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 requires that, when a planning authority has prepared a structure plan, it must consult any other planning authority likely to be affected by the plan before submitting it to Scottish ministers for approval. There is no requirement to send a copy of the plan to the consultees, but it would be inconceivable that that would not be done or that the consultees would stand for it not being done. I hope that I have reassured Ben Wallace that community councils are already guaranteed copies of the consultation documents provided for in the bill. That guarantee comes from the bill's provisions and from the directions that we will give  to the reporters through amendment 3. I suspect that the consequences of Ben Wallace's amendments are entirely unintended. However, they could have damaging knock-on effects for other parts of the bill and other legislation. I hope that he will agree not to press his amendments. Executive amendment 3 will ensure that consultations undertaken by the reporters on a national park proposal have the confidence of those who will participate in them. The amendment is the Executive's response to amendments that were lodged at stage 2 by Rhoda Grant and John Farquhar Munro, who proposed that the consultations should be fully participatory and undertaken on the basis of the planning-for-real exercises. Amendment 3 allows the Scottish ministers to issue directions to the reporters, with which they must comply, on how the consultations are to be carried out. We already have a compact agreement with the voluntary sector, which details the Executive's policy and guidance on consultations with that sector. The compact agreement provides the basis for the directions that will be given to the reporters and commits the Executive to consult the voluntary sector through a range of good-practice measures. Those measures include: planning consultations with the voluntary sector; taking account of the full range of different types of consultation process; taking soundings early in the process; and setting a minimum period of three months for all consultations, which is a practice that we have adopted throughout the bill. The agreement also makes commitments to consult widely, to give due consideration to all responses and to pay particular attention to those most affected by the proposals. The compact agreement is widely available and I assure all members that the directions that will be given to the reporters will have to adhere to the commitments made in that agreement. Having given those commitments and assurances, I hope that everyone who is affected by the consultations will have confidence in their integrity. I move amendment 3.

Amendments 4, 6, 14 and 19 are technical amendments to sections 2, 3, 5 and 11 respectively. We have lodged those amendments after considering the discussion at stage 2 on a group of amendments lodged by Ben Wallace. I hope that members find the Executive's amendments satisfactory. We have considered the points made when Ben Wallace's amendments  were discussed at stage 2 and, having done so, I recognise that the bill's provisions were probably not as clear as they were intended to be. I hope that our amendments will clarify matters. I will focus on section 2 as an example, in order to explain the point. The bill is drafted in such a way as to deal separately with three distinct strands of the process that is set out in section 2(5), in order to create clear and separate duties. Subsection (5)(a) and subsection (6) provide for the public inspection of consultation documents. Subsection (5)(c) requires the consultation to be publicised and subsection (5)(d) provides for the act of consultation. Subsection (6) requires the local authority to make copies of the national park proposal available for public inspection. That is a sensible way of ensuring that, despite all the other ways of publicising the consultation, everyone has access to the documents. The bill achieves that by referring back to subsection (5), which includes, among other provisions, a duty to send the consultation document to all relevant local authorities. However, the reference to subsection (5) must be more precise. I know that Ben Wallace has agreed not to press a couple of his amendments, but I hope that, with the assurances that I have given in those detailed comments, he will agree not to press any of them. We have considered in great detail the comments made by a number of members at stage 2 and I hope that the Executive's package of amendments will deliver what every member of the Rural Affairs Committee wanted. I move amendments 4, 6, 14 and 19.

In the National Parks (Scotland) Bill as initially introduced, the third aim of the national parks was "to promote understanding and enjoyment of the special qualities of the area by the public". We have always taken the view that recreation, which will be an important reason for many members of the public to visit national parks, was covered by the word "enjoyment". However, at stage 2, the Rural Affairs Committee strongly felt that that should be made explicit and that the term "recreation" should appear in the bill. As a result, an amendment from Fergus Ewing was accepted with the Executive's agreement. That gave rise to the current wording of the third aim, which is "to promote recreation in, and understanding and enjoyment of the special qualities of, the area by the public". Since stage 2, we have examined the wording that results from this amendment more closely. It has become clear that inserting the term "recreation" in such a way does not ensure a link between "recreation"—as against enjoyment—and the special qualities of the area. Amendment 1 guarantees that link while retaining the important term "recreation", and clarifies that the term is included in "enjoyment". National parks will promote enjoyment, including recreation, of the area's special qualities, which refer to the area's natural qualities or natural and cultural qualities. Those qualities are the purpose behind the national park designations. It is important to take a balanced approach to promoting the enjoyment of the special qualities for which national parks are being established. The importance, attractiveness and contribution of those special natural and cultural attributes to the promotion of enjoyment will be crucial in determining what forms of sport and recreation should be considered in national parks. Above all, it is important that the recreation permitted should be appropriate to, and not detract from, the national park's special qualities. That is why it is  absolutely critical to agree to this amendment. I move amendment 1.

No.  Amendment 1 agreed to.

Amendment 2 inserts at section 2(2) a new subsection, which adds to the list of matters to be considered by a reporter in considering a national park proposal. The new addition covers the financial implications of running a national park in terms of the likely annual costs and capital expenses of the national  park authority in exercising its functions. Rhoda Grant lodged a similar amendment at stage 2, which stimulated a good discussion in the Rural Affairs Committee. We promised her and the committee that we would reflect on the matter and bring forward an appropriate amendment. That is the purpose of this amendment. Finance is an important issue and we agree that the costs of a national park are elements in any decision on the designation of a national park. We have lodged this amendment to make the annual costs and capital expenses of the proposed national park a factor for consideration by a reporter. Those costs could include the amount of money needed for an estimated staffing level and an estimate of how much money would be required for potential capital projects—for example, how much it would cost for repairs to a section of the west Highland way. Of course, those could only be estimates, as we would be able to have a final budget only when the boundaries and powers of a national park had been identified. Resource estimates could not be set in stone, but it is important that they are made, so that they can inform subsequent debate. Like any other public body, national parks will be subject to the annual expenditure round when their budgets are agreed. All public spending has to be approved by the Parliament and we have made it clear that the core funding comes from Scottish ministers. That is provided for by the bill. Amendment 5 mirrors amendment 2 and is required to add consistency to the bill. It ensures that, if Scottish ministers decide to prepare a statement under section 3, they must give an estimate of the likely financial implications for the national park. I move amendment 2.

NPPG 16 sets a robust planning policy framework for opencast coal developments. Planning authorities have scope within the guidelines to consider projects on their merits. Complying with that and with other regulations should be sufficient to ensure public safety.

It is the job of authorities, in interpreting NPPG 16, to work out the local characteristics and to make their interpretation of safety, location and topography factors.

NPPG 16 on its own is not the full story. The regulations and the monitoring of sites by the Health and Safety Executive are a critical part of ensuring safety, both for communities and for the work force at opencast mines and similar sites.

The points that Cathy Jamieson raises are extremely relevant. I am aware of the tragic accident that occurred in her area. I know that Strathclyde police and the Health and Safety Executive are examining the matter. It is important that the subsequent report and information are acted upon. It is critical that the operators of the sites follow best practice and work with the local authorities, and that we have regular inspections by the HSE, to ensure that operations on all such sites are carried out to the right standards, and that best practice is applied across the country.

At present, the Scottish Executive has no plans to conduct such research. The Executive's transport research programme is reviewed regularly and includes topics such as tourist road accidents in rural Scotland and evaluation of Scottish home zones.

I agree that it is appropriate that local authorities should identify their priorities and survey their local circumstances. Last month, I announced that Stirling Council will receive £86,000 from the safer routes to school project. That will enable it to set its priorities, whether they relate to rural or urban schools. The key thing is that local authorities should identify the right schools and do so in the context of the guidance on best practice that we have given, which is intended to help them.

I am aware that we need to survey the causes of accidents. One of the research projects that has not yet begun, but which is programmed, is an evaluation of driver improvement schemes in West Lothian. We are keen to raise driver standards and to find opportunities to focus on that. If there are specific local matters of which Mr Stone has experience, I will be happy to address them if he writes to me.

Our rural transport and public transport funds are providing significant additional resources to improve transport in rural Scotland. We are also giving the highest ever level of subsidy to lifeline air and sea services.

I agree absolutely. That is why we are making funds available through the rural transport fund to make sure that local authorities can make the needed investment. For example, the fund provides for around 350 local bus services that would not otherwise be in existence. We will review the impact of that investment to see whether we can better target it to reach the parts of rural Scotland where affordable services are needed but are not commercially viable.

I agree absolutely that for many people in rural communities the car is their lifeline. That is why we are putting money into rural petrol stations to make sure that they stay open and why I announced in November that a number of trunk roads and routes in rural areas will get significant investment. Examples include the road to Mallaig and the Fochabers to Mosstodloch bypass. We are spending money on trunk roads and I shall be making a number of suggestions in the comprehensive spending review this summer about investment in transport. It will not be until the autumn that we will be able to reveal the results of those discussions.

This is like "Play it again, Sam"—last week a member of the SNP asked me the same question about rural fuel duty. I said then that the SNP's budget for Scotland at the elections to this Parliament included the full weight of the fuel duty escalator until the year 2034. In the budget this year, Gordon Brown took his foot off the fuel tax accelerator. There will be benefits to people throughout the Highlands and Islands in the investment that is now going into rural roads.

Scottish Executive officials meet the shadow strategic rail authority regularly and discuss a range of matters, including franchise replacement in Scotland. I will raise that issue when I meet the chief executive of  the authority later this month.

The ScotRail franchise runs for seven years and expires in March 2004. The shadow strategic rail authority has indicated that it is keen for the process of franchise renewal and replacement to be brought forward. It is our intention to start discussing with interested parties the future shape of the franchise. That process will begin in the autumn of this year. We will focus on issues such as network enhancement, journey times, capacity, punctuality and performance. As we move towards the end of the franchise, we will examine the performance of the current franchise holders with keen interest.

Today I am launching a consultation paper on modernisation and competition in the Scottish water industry. The paper's themes are: ensuring that the water authorities—while remaining in the public sector—are able to respond effectively to the challenges of competition; dealing with increasing competition in the sector; and meeting our objectives on social inclusion, public health and environmental protection. Competition is already a fact of life for our water authorities. They have to compete for business in a number of areas—although that is confined, so far, to services that are not delivered through their own networks. The Competition Act 1998 extends the possibility of third parties competing to provide services on those networks—whether through common carriage or other arrangements. Competition is, therefore, likely to become an increasing feature of the sector. There are potential benefits, and I welcome that. Where there is competition, customers have choice. Choice encourages innovation, improvements in service and keen prices, all of which mean value for money for customers. I want to see those benefits for water customers throughout Scotland. That does not mean that there will be unfettered competition without regard to the wider public interest. Our water and sewerage services are too important for that. They have a vital role to play in maintaining public health, protecting the environment and promoting social inclusion. That means that they must be safe, accessible and affordable. Any competition must contribute to that—not undermine it. The aim is for competitors to offer real choice through greater efficiency and improved services—not through the crude cherry-picking of the most attractive customers by playing the system and adding nothing to it. The challenge for our publicly owned authorities is to continue to improve the quality of the service that is available to current customers. Any shift to different providers would be entirely a matter of customer choice. Meeting our objectives means that we must put in place a proper statutory framework. At present, Scottish water and sewerage legislation makes no provision for third parties serving customers through access to, or use of, the public networks. That situation needs to be remedied to avoid wholly unregulated competition. The last thing we  want is for policy in this crucial area to be determined through the courts. It is imperative that the Scottish Parliament sets the limits. We must set the boundaries and the right framework. That is why the consultation paper proposes a new statutory framework for the Scottish water sector. The new framework will introduce a licensing regime that requires all operators to meet high standards of technical competence and financial strength. That regime will be an absolute requirement. It will make new entrants to the market liable to criminal prosecution if they supply unwholesome water—as applies to our water authorities at present. The framework will give water authorities clear responsibility for safeguarding continuous service on the public networks and it will clarify that authorities can permit access to the networks. It will also ensure that the authorities' charges for access to the networks are fair and fully reflect the costs to the authorities of maintaining the networks. To secure this network, the water industry commissioner needs to be given the duty of licensing operators. At the same time, we should enhance the powers of the Scottish Executive as the drinking water quality regulator. Everyone must recognise that operating water and sewerage systems is a complex technical task. Delivering drinking water that is wholesome and that also meets all our expectations for taste and appearance requires skill and constant vigilance. Meeting the ever higher standards of environmental protection requires massive investment in new treatment works. It is only right that those who want access to the networks must meet the exacting standards that are required of the water authorities day in and day out, or face the consequences. There is no place for cowboys, or for the "here today, gone tomorrow" sort of operator. Anyone wishing to operate services must be able to stay the course. Affordability of services is also a major issue for the authorities, particularly for vulnerable groups in society. In the longer term, the standards that are set by the water industry commissioner to increase efficiency will work to keep charges as low as possible. For the time being, the Executive is considering ways of improving on the protection that is already provided to many of the least-well-off consumers. Last week, we began a short exercise to canvass the opinions of experts in the field. We will draw on their advice when we frame our proposals, which will be the subject of consultation later in the year. Our proposals will require legislation by the Scottish Parliament. There will be an announcement on the timing of that legislation in due course, after the consultation exercise.  Our planned legislation will recognise the crucial role of the Scottish water authorities in delivering vital services. It will also acknowledge their continuing place in the public sector. The Executive remains committed to the authorities as publicly owned bodies. Nothing in our proposals alters the fact that the authorities are accountable to ministers and, through ministers, to Parliament. They are responsible for the public infrastructure of water and sewerage in Scotland. That fact is fundamental to our policy, but that is not to say that some changes might not be necessary. Competition poses a challenge for incumbent producers and suppliers, which is why it is good for the customer. The water authorities are no different—they must meet their customers' demands as efficiently as possible. This is undoubtedly a challenge for the authorities. I want them to rise to that challenge and, in doing so, to vindicate the public sector model by competing fairly and successfully with the private sector. While the Executive believes that the authorities are capable of that, if they are to succeed, the Executive, as owner on behalf of the public, will have to reassess some of its controls over them. Therefore, the consultation paper seeks to encourage debate about the ways in which the authorities will need to adapt as competition develops, because they will need to be able to develop innovative approaches. The consultation paper describes our decision to relax the guidelines that govern joint ventures. Such action is not dependent on legislation and it, therefore, can be implemented independently and quickly, which is important in enabling water authorities to retain their customers where competition exists for waste water services. A more flexible approach to commercial opportunities is an important element of the authorities' response to competition. However, the key for the water authorities is for them to concentrate on delivering the core services the public expects of them as efficiently as possible. If they do so, their position will be secure and their customers will be well served. The consultation paper sets out our proposals for ensuring that customers benefit fully from increasing competition in the Scottish water sector. It does so in the context of our commitment to develop a public sector water industry in Scotland that is empowered to deliver for its customers and to develop services that meet the need for clean, safe and affordable water. I want customer choice and a modern public sector industry, with no compromise on public health, environmental standards or social inclusion. Therefore, we need a framework that delivers those objectives. We must enable the authorities to modernise and we must equip them  to deliver for the future. Already, they are implementing a major investment programme that will deliver cleaner beaches and safer water and that will maintain our Victorian infrastructure. In the consultation paper, we are proposing competition that will work in all our interests. I look forward to receiving comments on our proposals.

Although Richard Lochhead's welcome for my statement was a bit grudging and he does not appear to have read some of the detail, I appreciate it. I want to make absolutely clear that there has been no delay in bringing this statement before Parliament. We made a commitment to make a statement to Parliament and I am honouring that commitment today. This is the right time—

I reassure the member that no details of my ministerial statement appeared in the newspapers. After this week's Cabinet meeting, there was a press briefing on the issues that were discussed—that happens every week. That is not the same as a briefing on the content of my statement. There has been no delay in making the statement. This is the right time for us to act. The  consultation period over the summer will enable consumers, those who work in the industry and those who have knowledge of it to engage in the discussion. The Competition Act 1998, which the SNP supported at Westminster, is a reality. Richard Lochhead asked three questions, but two of them were the same. There is already competition in the water industry—some major customers are putting their contracts out to tender and our water authorities need to be able to respond. I am proposing that the Scottish Executive's control be loosened to enable the water authorities to do that, so that they can keep those customers. The key issue is to set in place a new legislative framework that will avoid the cherry-picking to which Richard Lochhead refers. To do that, we need a regulatory framework. If we do not have one, the water industry will be wide open and the issue will be dealt with in the courts. That is why we need to address the matter. Richard Lochhead's suggestion that the Executive has not invested in the Scottish water industry is simply not true. I have made clear on a number of occasions that, through the external finance limits, each of the Scottish water authorities receives direct financial support from the Executive. That support was proportionately greater in the north of Scotland, where we knew there was a more significant investment challenge. I am happy to have the opportunity to lay to rest again the myth that Richard Lochhead propagates. The aim of the consultation paper is to boost our Scottish water industry and to ensure that we have the appropriate regulatory framework that will ensure that the industry is not undermined. I ask Richard Lochhead to read the detail of the paper and to engage with the questions that we are asking about how to deliver a secure, safe regulatory framework. I invite all colleagues in the chamber to do likewise.

I shall try to give relatively short and snappy answers. On cherry-picking, we will require average water charges to be in place and to be delivered through the mechanisms that we have identified in the paper, via a combination of the water industry commissioner and the water authorities identifying access charges. Having an average water charge means that in rural areas and throughout the wide swathes that are covered by water authorities, the cheapest customers cannot be picked off and dealt with. That is the mechanism that will address the issue. Secondly, on joint ventures, the issue is not about legislation, but about regulations. At the moment, the water authorities are in a tied straitjacket with regard to entering into joint ventures. I propose to loosen that straitjacket, which will put less of a burden on the authorities in terms of consultation and give them more freedom within the public sector framework. The paper identifies why we intend to do that.

I welcome the comments on the need for the widest possible consultation. The issue affects every one of us and our constituents. I have considered the overall structure of the water industry in great depth, particularly in the light of the challenge of investment in the industry, which I know is of concern to members.  At the moment, the top challenge for our water industry and water authorities is to make sure that the investment programmes that they have to deliver—which amount to £1.8 billion—are delivered as efficiently and effectively as possible. That point was picked up by both Opposition parties' spokespeople and we are all agreed on it. My view is that playing around with the overall structure of the three water authorities would be a diversion. However, in the medium to long term we need to think about that structure and I am keenly interested in the development of the mutualisation process that is being considered in England and Wales. Although I do not think that now is the time to address that issue—we need to get the framework in place to regulate competition and to defend interests in water safety and public health—it is a longer-term issue to reflect on. The water industry commissioner has already published for consultation a set of tougher standards for the water authorities to meet on the timing of the delivery of their services and the compensation that might be given to people if they experience a failure in service delivery. The requirements that it is proposed the water authorities should meet are tough and crunching. If members wish to support them or suggest alternative mechanisms, now is the time to give feedback to the commissioner. However, his overall approach of trying to improve efficiency and effectiveness in the industry is about value for money for customers. That is the biggest contribution that the water industry commissioner has made.

The critical challenge that is faced by the water authorities is not the result of the access issues that were opened up by the Competition Act 1998. The challenge is that, for a number of major contracts, there is already scope for customers to have water supplied from outwith Scotland's water industry. My proposals, on the regulatory side, for joint ventures are designed to give our water authorities  the opportunity to compete with the big water authorities that are being invited to tender for contracts by organisations such as BP Amoco. There are two issues to reiterate. First, there is existing competition, which is why I wish to offer the authorities, in a modernised, public sector framework, the challenge to compete, so that they do not automatically lose out when contracts are being awarded. Secondly, there is the longer-term issue of delivering a viable framework, set by the Parliament, that will deal with issues about fair competition and access charges, so that the investment that we are making through the three water authorities is not given away. If anyone wants access to our water industry, they will have to pay a fair price. The mechanism that I suggest we set up, through the regulatory framework, would let us deliver that. It would let us set the ground rules, rather than those rules being decided by the courts. We need the legislation—decided accountably and transparently by Parliament—in place, so that people can see what we are trying to deliver.

If we have a public sector water industry, we need to be able to raise investment. That is done on the public sector balance sheet. The point that I made to Richard Lochhead when he raised that matter in the chamber was that if investment is not raised through increases in charges or customers' payments, it comes back to the Scottish balance sheet. It then has to be paid for through increased taxes. If the Scottish National Party is seriously suggesting that £1.8 billion should be paid for by the public purse through raised taxes, it can do that, but it should be honest about it. The point of borrowing money is that we need to modernise the system if we are to have a Scottish public water authority. The paper opens the debate on how we do that. It is not a debate that we should duck—we need to engage in it. On Colin Campbell's first point about increased water charges, everybody in the chamber acknowledges the need for massive investment to meet European requirements, the need to deliver  safe water across Scotland and the need to ensure that what we do is carried out in the most efficient way possible. Those are the challenges and we all accept that. The member can haggle about how we deliver it, but if his alternative solution is funding through the public purse, that would mean more taxes. He should be honest about that.

That issue is not covered in today's paper, which is about modernising the water sector. Robin Harper's question is for another day.

Two points are crucial to that. The first is that we must identify a licence system so that every potential competitor is assessed on their capability to deliver a wholesome, safe, secure water service. That means that we must make requirements about their financial status. The last thing we want is some fly-by-night operator that does not have financial security. The point about liability is critical. To ensure that there is a level playing field, our current water authorities are liable if they provide unhealthy water services. Any new competitor would have to operate under the same regime. The second critical point is financial viability. Those who know about opencast mining will know that any company that is obliged to reinstate land after mining an area is required to submit a bond. Our consultation document asks for views on how to secure that, but there must be financial viability in the long term, not just in the short term. We must regulate the process and, in the customers' interests, we must require that the water industry commissioner is the person who hands out licences. That process should be subject to public scrutiny and access charges should be fair and should reflect the investment that the water authorities have made. We must deliver the whole package, and the document sets out the framework for that in detail.

The water industry commissioner has set up three consultative committees that will give him advice and feedback. I met members of those committees when the Parliament met in Glasgow a few weeks ago. The questions they asked persuaded me that they are completely engaged in the challenges of representing consumer interests and feeding that directly to the water industry commissioner. Wholesome water is not the same as water that is safe, because taste is important. David Mundell and other members have raised questions not only about safety, but about people's perceptions of the quality of their water. The system that we have set up with the water industry commissioner and his advisory committees will enable those points of view to be put directly into the framework that we are trying to develop.

I have included in the consultation paper a question that invites views on how to change the process and what opportunities can be plugged in. I have spoken to the water authorities about the broad content of the paper. During the past few months they have raised, in discussion, points about the need for greater flexibility. That is something that I am prepared to consider. However, we must modernise the public sector in a way that retains accountability. That is a critical issue on which I am determined to deliver.

The paper explores the complex relationships that are needed to manage the new regulatory framework. Euan Robson should study the details of how we propose to allocate the  different responsibilities. He is right to say that the water industry commissioner must act in the interests of the consumer. His role is central in licensing and in considering the way forward for the industry. He is in a crucial position to deliver for the consumer—that is why his role is important. The advisory groups that he has set up to give him feedback on consumer interests will allow us to manage that tension. Parliament is a major stakeholder in Scottish water and the public sector authorities, and we can influence the industry through the framework that we set as a Parliament.

We are bringing forward proposals for a regulatory framework. The Competition Act 1998 opened up the possibility of access to the water network. In England and Wales they have had a different history. There are already privatised water companies and there are licensing arrangements. In Scotland, we have no such framework and no protection for consumers. If the matter is dealt with through the courts, Parliament is unable to take action on the points that I raised about cherry-picking, setting of access charges and setting of high environmental and health standards, because we have no legislation that allows it to do so. We need the legislation, such as that which I am putting out for consultation, to avoid the problems that Gil Paterson has raised. We need a robust system. There must be a proper framework and that needs the democratic legitimacy of Parliament. The challenge for us all is to decide on the detail of the bill, as it will be when it comes before Parliament.

That is a matter for City of Edinburgh Council, which is responsible for that road.

What I can say to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton is that all the relevant local authorities in that area are working through the Forth Transport Infrastructure Partnership group of authorities to focus on congestion. We need the powers that have been identified in the Transport (Scotland) Bill, to enable us to take the matter forward in a speedy manner.

It is clearly for this Parliament to decide on the final content of that bill. The draft bill, as proposed, suggests that surplus income from the Forth road bridge could be used to assist transport improvements in the area. The local authorities that constitute the Forth Road Bridge Joint Board and are involved in discussions in Forth TRIP are focusing on how to progress the A8000. It is currently a matter for City of Edinburgh Council to progress the road, but discussions are on-going.

The costs of  preliminary work, land acquisition and detailed scheme preparation have been provided for in the motorway and trunk road programme, which I announced on 31 March.

It is our view that we should get the best value for money for our roads investment and that that should could come out of our resources. Our approach draws from the experience of the M74, as members will note from the response of Scottish Executive development department officials. We will pursue a scheme that gives us best value for money and enables us to go ahead with the M77 scheme as we have timetabled and as I have announced to Parliament.

The main statutory procedures for the M77 have been completed. The design is currently being audited, and any changes that would need to be incorporated into the scheme could be the subject of supplementary orders and compulsory purchase orders.

In December last year, the Executive issued guidance to all schools and local authorities in Scotland on how to run safer routes to school. On 25 May, I announced additional capital consents, totalling £5.2 million, which will enable local authorities to take forward a wide range of projects, building on the guidance.

All sorts of measures are urgently needed in the vicinity of our schools—safer routes to schools, pedestrian access, cycle routes and advice to schoolchildren on how to use the safety guidance that we have provided. I point out to Mr McNulty that in his area, the effects of the boost that I announced last week are £114,000 for East Dunbartonshire, and £98,000 for West Dunbartonshire. That is practical help for parents, children and teachers who want the improvements to be made in order to cut child accident rates and to tackle traffic congestion.

That is precisely the sort of issue on which we need a joined-up approach. As Minister for Transport and the Environment, I am concerned with the broader issues of safer routes to school. However, Alex Neil's specific question might more appropriately be asked of the Minister for Children and Education.

With the co-operation of the Scotland Office, the Executive continues to make the case for rural Scotland on fuel duty and other reserved matters.

Let us get behind the bluster of that question. It was the SNP that stood for election to this Parliament on a policy to make full use of the fuel duty escalator until 2003-04. It was Gordon Brown, as Chancellor of the Exchequer, who did not raise fuel tax this year, who has tackled the issue of vehicle excise duty on fuel and who has enabled £45 million less to be collected from hauliers, which will benefit hauliers in Scotland and in the rest of the UK.

We have been involved in discussions with the Treasury and the Scotland Office, in considering a range of options that would deliver benefits in rural parts of Scotland on the issue of fuel. I draw to Mr Tosh's attention the recent decision by one of the major oil companies  not to continue to discriminate in rural areas. We are seeking a series of initiatives in this matter, and continue to discuss with our colleagues in the UK Parliament precisely the matters that Mr Tosh has raised.

Recently, we have invited tenders for a study of the case for establishing a Highland and Islands transport authority. It is premature to speculate on the outcome of that study, but we will consider carefully how any such authority can best help to address the problems of high fuel costs in the area.

I would treat that question with a little more respect if the SNP's budget proposals  for the Scottish Parliament election campaign had indicated how the party would fill the gap created by not taking fuel tax into account. The Executive is working with the Scotland Office and the Treasury to examine ways of mediating in the problem of high fuel costs in the rural areas of Scotland. That is why we have identified money, which is being taken up, to ensure that rural fuel stations can be converted. The costs of such conversion could be passed on to and met by the Scottish Executive, which is why Brian Wilson in the Scotland Office has been able to work with fuel companies to consider ways of reducing costs. There is a range of ways in which we can tackle this issue, and we are keen to consider them. I know that the transport conveners of each authority in the Highlands and Islands want to work with us and that is precisely what we want to do.

I understand that Babcock Rosyth Defence Ltd has yet to bring forward detailed proposals regarding its pilot project to store on land the components of the reactor compartment from HMS Renown. We have been involved by the Ministry of Defence in the preliminary consultation on this proposal and have stressed the need to involve the local community. We note that the proposal would not result in any increase in radioactive material stored at Rosyth. Independent regulators will be involved as the project progresses.

It is important that we understand that this is a pilot project to deal with one submarine's nuclear waste. We are all aware that, in the long run, we as a society have to deal with that nuclear waste. It is important to get across the point that there will be strong local consultation. Any moves to discuss this further would require an environmental impact assessment, which would be consulted on at a local level. Representations have already been made to local councillors and to MSPs. It is important that people do not hype up this issue, that they treat it seriously and look at the details carefully and that none of us falls into the trap of exaggerating what is being proposed. It is important that we have the discussion in the open, and that we have it without going for headlines.

I am happy to confirm that. It is important that we understand that this project is at the feasibility stage. However, I understand that existing float storage capacity is finite, so there is a need for us to look at this issue. I hope that the consultation will fully involve local members and the council, so that local communities can see exactly what is being proposed and, before a second stage of the project can be pursued, that there is a commitment that the independent regulators have to be completely satisfied that a case has been made for progressing safely.

I appreciate that the issue of expertise is a critical one. In pursuing the discussions on this project, that expertise and confidence will be vital. In persuading the regulators and making the safety case to them, it is important that that expertise is used to the full.

I am delighted to wind up today's debate and to be positive at the end: members have been unanimous about the need for the Borders railway line. Several members have asked when the line will be completed. The critical issue is that the work has started; the clock is already ticking. We have  already had the feasibility study, which was commissioned by the Labour Government in 1997, and which was delivered and is now available in the Scottish Parliament information centre. I am sure that every member in the chamber has taken the time to look at its conclusions. We already potentially have the support through the public transport fund; Scottish Borders Council has already begun the process of working up its bid for the project. To suggest that nothing has happened, and that we are at the vision stage—and that we are not talking about realities—is not true: the work has started and the commitment has been made. The Scottish Executive has spent money already on getting the Scottish Borders rail link started. We must ensure that that work continues and that we give the support that Euan Robson asked for, encouraging the parties that are pursuing the project, such as Scottish Borders Council, Midlothian Council and Scottish Borders Enterprise, and telling them that we want to start the work on the line. However, it is not real politics to suggest that one can deliver overnight the sort of investment required to build the line by simply demanding it, nor is that how to build a railway line.

I will not give way, as I have only a short time. The first steps are being taken and money has been spent already. Important work is being done, which was recognised by all members in the chamber. I want to correct a number of the points made in the debate. Let me be absolutely clear—we have powers over services in Scotland, in relation to the ScotRail franchise. Nothing in the UK Transport Bill waters down those powers and we will use them to the full. Several nationalist comments were made about press speculation on John Prescott's transport investment proposals. We have already received money as a consequence of the budget, and we are spending that money in Scotland. The priority is for that money to go into rural transport and safety issues. The Nottingham link, to which Mr MacAskill referred, has funding already. When he examines packages of expenditure, he should be careful to ensure that he does not simply believe the press speculation. This summer, there will be a comprehensive spending review, which will give both the Scottish Executive and the UK Government the opportunity to decide our spending priorities. Rail and transport investment must be part of those priorities—that will be my job as Minister for  Transport and the Environment.

No. The SRA is already investing in Scotland, and the idea that it is not aware of our priorities is absolutely ridiculous. We have already received money for the Edinburgh crossrail scheme. That money is to be spent on the ground, to open up the scheme. The SRA has met Scottish Borders Council and the other parties involved in the project to open up the Borders railway line, and is due to meet them again on 12 June. The SRA is not a remote body—it is engaging with our priorities in Scotland, and we are clear that one of our key priorities is the Borders railway line. Several comments were made about the need to promote links across Scotland. I agree that we need an integrated approach and more investment in our rural infrastructure. The Executive is addressing those issues through our rural transport fund and our public transport fund. New railway stations are opening up across Scotland and more money is going into our railway network to provide extra capacity for services in Fife, for example, and to fund new freight facilities grants. Only this week, I announced another £1 million for those grants. Although we are making that investment, the Borders railway line is on a different level. All members accepted that point. The Borders railway line will be delivered not by a magic wand but by a package of funding. We have an opportunity to deliver that funding, and it is a great pity that members have talked down the fact that we are getting going on the line.

No. The work is happening already, and solid foundations are being built. I say to Mr MacAskill that before one can build a railway line, one must follow a series of procedures, such as planning procedures, and one must abide by important democratic principles. [Interruption.]

The point is that Scottish Borders Council has started doing that work— [Interruption.]

Can I be clearer? I am using the present tense, because this is not about the future. That is the important message that we must send to people in the Borders, not that the Borders railway line is on a wish list or that it will not be built for a long time. The Scottish Executive is  working on the project with the rail industry, Scottish Borders Council, Midlothian Council and Scottish Borders Enterprise. I am fully behind the enthusiasm that exists for the building of the railway line. We are working together, and it is a great pity that people talk down that fact. Rather, we must talk it up, while remaining realistic.

I have answered the point about time—it is now, as the work is on-going. That is the message from the debate which must be taken to people in the Borders, and no one in the chamber has disagreed with that message. It is good that there is unanimity on that point and that all members accept that there is a need for the economic investment in the Borders that the railway line will bring, which will enable people in the Borders to attract new investment. We are fully behind that opportunity, and I am happy to support the motion that was moved on behalf of the Rural Affairs Committee.

Will the member give way?

Who are you winding up?

I welcome the opportunity to speak about this issue today and would like to thank Alex Johnstone for moving the motion. I thank him also for the tone and content of his speech. I want to use my speech to outline the progress that has been made since we last discussed the issue in the chamber. In April 1999, when Gus Macdonald, then the Labour Government's Scottish industry minister, commissioned the feasibility study into the reopening of the Borders railway line, the aim was to explore the practicalities and viability of the options. I accept without reservation that improving the transport links between the Borders and the rest of the country is a prerequisite to the area's economic regeneration and for its social and environmental well-being. I am totally committed to securing a better-integrated and sustainable transport infrastructure for all rural communities. However, one of the challenges is to manage people's expectations honestly. All who are genuinely supportive of the aspirations of those who seek the reinstatement of the Borders railway line must take a detailed, informed and considered view of what can be realistically achieved. We must avoid making rash promises. The people of the Borders deserve no less. That is why I welcomed the commissioning of the groundbreaking feasibility study into reopening the line. Earlier this year, I marked the publication of the study by joining key stakeholders in the Borders—including some MSPs—to highlight the fact that the project was moving into a new and exciting phase. Having clearly demonstrated that reinstatement would be operationally viable to Tweedbank, the study was adopted by Scottish Borders Council and its partners as a sound basis for working up detailed project proposals. I am aware that a tender has been awarded to Turner and Townsend consultants for preparing the next stage of the work; I welcome that. I knew that the proposals would underpin a bid for public transport fund support and a couple of months ago I stated that I was looking forward to receiving these proposals. Since then, Scottish Borders Council has taken up the challenge enthusiastically. The  council has worked with Railtrack, ScotRail, Midlothian Council and City of Edinburgh Council, which are fully assisting the council to fulfil its desire to develop a robust economic, social and environmental case for reinstatement. That is an ambitious and sensible approach. Nobody has claimed that, together, the construction and operation of the line, even to Gorebridge, is commercially viable, taking account of capital as well as operating costs. However, most people are convinced that the wider economic, social and environmental benefits of reopening the link to the heart of the Borders outweigh the costs to the public purse of assisting its construction. I have much sympathy with that view, although I am aware that at some point a line will have to be drawn. I know that there is a debate about whether Tweedbank or further on to Newtown St Boswells would be the best place for an integrated public transport hub and for park-and-ride options to link into a line. That is one of the critical issues that will have to be considered in the work that Scottish Borders Council has begun. As the feasibility study ably demonstrated, we need to ensure that we get the assessment right. Viability is an important issue in considering the reinstatement of the line all the way from Edinburgh to Carlisle. After exhaustive analysis, it was shown that the very limited additional demand for passenger and freight services south of the heart of the Borders did not, at present, generate benefits that would justify significant levels of public funding. I say "at present" advisedly. The study was at pains to point out that no option for reinstatement should be ruled out entirely. It acknowledged that future demand trends might justify a serious reconsideration of extending the line beyond the heart of the Borders, on to Hawick and possibly to Carlisle. However, right now, that is not feasible. On that basis, the study insisted that no partial reinstatement of the line should preclude the possibility of future extension. I commend and support that sensible approach. It is worth reminding ourselves that, even at the height of the Victorian railway promotion, it took 17 years to join Edinburgh with Carlisle by the Waverley line. The incremental approach was appropriate then and most serious promoters of reinstatement are adopting a similar commonsense approach today. Indeed, having spoken to Scottish Borders Council, I know that it is playing the long game. It recognises that, at the moment, the sustainable case promotes reopening the line only to the central Borders. However, that does not rule out the potential for a southerly extension. The council's insistence on protecting the disused line for its entire length is important. That is a mature and realistic approach.  The feasibility study demonstrated how the direct and indirect benefits of reinstatement to Tweedbank could be used to justify public support. It also explored in considerable detail the potential for reopening a southerly link between the Kielder forest and Carlisle. The argument had been made that rail access to Kielder would open up the forest to the commercial movement of timber from the forest to customers outwith the area. The feasibility study considered the whole issue of costs, in particular the extremely cheap cost of imported timber, which is undercutting many UK producers' prices. Again, the report did not discount the possibility that market conditions could change, but with the southerly extension from Tweedbank, the study concluded that a link to Kielder from the west coast main line could not be discounted entirely. I believe that Scottish Borders Council is on the right lines in seeking the development of a project that sets a medium-term goal of developing the passenger rail link between the heart of the Borders and Edinburgh, without ruling out longer-term reinstatement options. The motion urges the Scottish Executive to consult others to facilitate the reinstatement of the Borders railway. That is an important proposal that deserves our serious consideration.

No, but I will take an intervention from Mr MacAskill in a minute. I have outlined in some detail my reasons for not raising expectations about the Scottish Executive's preparedness to support, at this time, the re-establishment of the line between Edinburgh and Carlisle. There will be bids, through the public transport fund, from the Borders and many other councils, for schemes that I will have to consider fairly, on their merits, alongside other legitimate claims on public resources. It would be inappropriate for me, in the chamber today, to make any pronouncements about the outcome of those bids. To do so could also justify indignation throughout the rest of the country from potential competing bidders, and would undermine any commitment to equity and transparency. That has not prevented us from working fully with Scottish Borders Council in its preparation for the public transport bid. We would give the same assistance to anyone who was considering applying for support under the scheme. It certainly does not stop us discussing with Scottish Borders Council the potential sources of funding that the council can explore.

That is precisely the issue that I have just addressed. There is not only the option of the public transport fund; there are other options that the Scottish Executive can explore in consultation with Scottish Borders Council. However, we must ensure that we get the process right. We have the feasibility study, which goes into great depth about the options. The next stage is to consider how the whole issue should be progressed. Looking for finance is one of the key issues; I have just said that we are more than happy to discuss that issue with the promoters of the Borders railway and to explore it with the shadow strategic rail authority. As a result of the McLeish settlement, new responsibilities on rail will come to the Scottish ministers; a number of those are outlined in the Transport Bill that is before the UK Parliament. The most significant of those will be dealing with directions and guidance to the SRA for the franchise for providing passenger rail services that start and finish in Scotland.

No. I am answering the member's question. That will be underwritten by the transfer of full financial responsibility for the cost of the Scottish franchise. We will also have an input to the SRA on its GB strategy for the railways and on advice on cross-border franchises. Together, those functions make for a significant ability to influence how Scotland's railways will develop in future. We are also having discussions with the authority about options that will come through a number of funding opportunities that it is developing. I am committed to using our influence fully. I am committed to developing a set of robust and achievable strategic priorities for Scotland's railways. That is why I will consider all sensible arguments that are raised today for developing our existing network and will take into account practical and cost-effective proposals for how we deliver that. The proposals that are being developed by Scottish Borders Council are firmly within the category of realistic, practical and cost-effective.  We have kept the SRA fully informed about developments regarding the Borders railway. The SRA is conducting a detailed consideration of the feasibility study and has met at least once in the past few months all the main players who are promoting the railway. Members will know that the SRA itself operates a funding scheme for developing passenger rail services and I am sure that that has not escaped the attention of Scottish Borders Council. There has been progress since we last met to discuss the reintroduction of a Borders rail link, and I welcome this debate, which allows us to discuss the issue further. The motion asks me and Scottish ministers to continue the work that we are already doing. It is vital that we make maximum use of an excellent feasibility study and that there is further work between the key partners—Scottish Borders Council, Midlothian Council, Scottish Borders Enterprise and the rail industry. That approach is underpinned by the feasibility study and will be built on by the south-east of Scotland transport partnership, which will be given new weight by our new transport bill. As we start our new century, I hope that every member in this chamber will work together to bring to fruition the wish expressed by so many people in the Borders to bring back the railway to the heart of the Borders. [Applause.]

The Executive attaches high priority to CalMac's vital services off the west coast of Scotland. I am delighted to be able to confirm that the strike that was proposed for this weekend has been called off. That follows the additional talks held this morning between CalMac and the National Union of Marine, Aviation and Shipping Transport Officers. The Executive welcomes the news, which safeguards the services on one of the busiest weekends of the year. [Applause.]

I am happy to stick to the subject, Sir David. I am well aware that communities in the Highlands and Islands have been unsettled even at the prospect of a strike. That is why I am so delighted that we have averted the strike that was proposed for the weekend. I want to reiterate the fact that there will be no disruption to those services at the weekend. I hope that those people who were reviewing their travel plans—whether they were travelling to or from the islands—will now be able to make their arrangements with confidence.

It is appropriate that members focus on the key issues. Negotiations were carried out this week between CalMac and NUMAST, the trade union. Those discussions were lengthy; they were reconvened this morning and it is to the credit of both sides that it was possible to find a resolution. The Executive is happy that that has happened. What the chamber should now do is to follow the lead that Duncan Hamilton gave in welcoming the conclusion of those talks and look forward to people being able to make successful visits on and off the islands in future.

That has nothing to do with the talks that have just been successfully concluded. I would be happy, however, to add my comments to those of Mr Sheridan, to make people aware of just how challenging it is to provide some of the services throughout the year. It may not look that way in the summer, but the work is done not only by NUMAST members, who are now going out to ballot, but by members of all the trade unions who work for CalMac. All their services are greatly valued by us all. [Applause.]

My spending proposals for the next two years include the construction of two road improvement schemes, at Crossroads and Gateside, and the replacement of Afton bridge at an overall cost of £2.3 million.

There is a route accident reduction plan for the A76 and the schemes that I announced are a key part of that. Clearly, there are other schemes that can be pursued as part of the A76 improvement and they will be programmed for the future. We have invested £3 million in the route already and the extra money that was allocated this year will bring further improvements.

The Afton bridge is at New Cumnock, and that is a welcome improvement. There are four improvement schemes that have not been programmed yet, which will have to be considered in a future review of investment in our trunk roads. The schemes are clearly important, and come on the back of work that has already been done. However, those outstanding schemes will have to be considered in our forthcoming review of investment in route action plan schemes.

We are committed to reducing traffic growth whenever and wherever appropriate as part of our vision of a sustainable, effective and integrated transport system that addresses the needs of everybody in our society. The bill will provide tools to progress that strategy.

I agree that the bill must set a framework for the improvement of public transport services. One of the key elements of the bill, to which I would draw Robert Brown's attention, is its provision for regional transport partnerships. Those will be able to build on the excellent work that Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive has done and will be able to focus on issues such as commuting and some of the major reasons for congestion in our major cities. Partnerships will also be able to identify forums on which local authorities can work with transport operators and key business groups to identify the best ways in which to develop improvements to the public transport network.

I want to make it absolutely clear that it is not the Executive's intention to force people not to use their cars. We want to give people choice—all members in the chamber can sign up to that. We are putting new money into public transport. Our £90 million public transport fund for the next three years will provide for facilities such as those which Linda Fabiani requests. Park-and-ride facilities enable people to use their cars for part of the journey and to use high-quality bus and rail facilities for the rest of the journey. We are also committed to providing opportunities that give parents an alternative to taking their children to school by making options such as walking, cycling or using public transport safer. That is why this morning I announced £5.2 million of new investment for local authorities.

We are examining, in our multi-modal studies of the M8 and M80, what the key investments should be for the future in terms of providing for modal shift where opportunities exist for that. I expect that those studies will examine closely all such schemes as the one that Mrs Mulligan mentioned.

My spending proposals for the next two years include the construction of new sections of dual carriageway on the A1 between Haddington and Dunbar and at Houndwood. On the A720, work is presently under way to strengthen the road between Dreghorn and the Water of Leith bridge, and to add hard shoulders.

I am happy to agree with Lord James that we need to tackle safety issues and that we need to ensure that we tackle the issue of improving the A1. That is precisely what our schemes are intended to do. I am aware that a public exhibition is currently being held on this matter and that John Home Robertson was there yesterday. There was great public interest in the expressway scheme on the A1. The work that is currently in progress on the A720 will bring relief from some of the main problems.

I add my thanks to the committees, which have contributed a great deal to the debate. I thank the Transport and the Environment Committee, the Subordinate Legislation Committee and, in particular, the Rural Affairs Committee for its considered review of the bill and for the number of recommendations that it made. Nicol Stephen kicked off by thanking the wide range of people who were involved in the consultation on the bill, many of whom gave evidence to two committees. I reiterate that thanks and thank also those who have campaigned for national parks in Scotland for a long time, many of whom are in the gallery today. I want to pick up on many of the points raised this afternoon. First, let me clarify that we are discussing the general principles of the National Parks (Scotland) Bill. I heard the comments made by Murray Tosh in his impassioned speech. Many of the detailed issues that members have raised today are correct and will be debated at stage 2. I will touch on some of those points in my summing up.

I will not take an intervention from Mr Tosh. He made his points extremely eloquently, and I will address them in my speech. Tavish Scott began by emphasising the  agreement that there is around the chamber, but there was a focus on the areas of disagreement, so those listening to the debate will not have focused on the extent to which there is a huge amount of consensus on the bill. It is important to say that at the outset. Several points were made about national parks. I detected reluctance on the part of some members who asked about the extent to which we need national parks. There are already pressures on the areas that have been identified. We discussed that when Sylvia Jackson raised the issue of national parks nearly a year ago. The key purpose of national parks is to ensure integrated management. The aims set out in the bill enable us to focus on the key priorities that national parks should address. Lewis Macdonald spoke eloquently on that issue. Many members spoke about the need for balance. Janis Hughes and Keith Raffan, in particular, focused on the need to get the balance right. We need to get the balance right, not just in the bill, but in the national park plan, in the boards that are put together to run the national parks and in the consultation exercises. The bill is not a one-off statement of principles; we need to imbue all the work of the national parks with those principles. One issue that has been raised by every single member in the debate is the involvement of communities. That issue came up extremely strongly in the consultation exercise. We have already amended the bill to reflect the importance of local communities, which several members recognised. There are particular issues in relation to the preparation of a national park plan where it will be critical to involve communities in the process. Some important questions about that have been raised today. We have said that we need to involve communities in the process of drawing up the policies and management strategies that the national parks will implement. We have suggested "planning for real" techniques as a practical way to involve local communities. As I said in committee, we see zoning as an important way of reflecting diversity; there is a need for sensitive management plans across each national park area. The guidance that we will prepare as Scottish ministers will give focus to those matters, to address effectively issues such as Gaelic, and to ensure that zoning is picked up in every national park area. We have discussed that in committee; when we debate the bill at stage 2, it will be important to get that right. To return to the fundamental point that almost every member who spoke today has raised, at stage 2 we need to look in more detail at ways of strengthening the involvement of local  communities in the national park boards, and I make a commitment to do that. In today's debate, I counted four variations, I think, on how we could do that. The principle is clear; working out the detail, as several members have said, is critical. I reiterate my commitment that we will come back to the matter at stage 2 and debate it in detail.

I will give way briefly.

It is my view that the guidance is the appropriate place to request national park authorities to examine zoning in the context of the national park plan and to identify how they think it will be appropriately applied to each national park plan. The issue of marine national parks was raised by several members. That demonstrates the worth and power of our pre-legislative process. When Scottish Natural Heritage carried out the consultation on national parks, before this Parliament was established, that issue was not raised in the same way as it was when we looked at national parks in the Parliament. It is very important that we get section 29 right. Kenny MacAskill said that if it was totally worthless, we should get rid of it. Our challenge is to make sure that the bill addresses the concerns of the World Wide Fund for Nature and the Scottish fishing industry. I read the debate that took place in the Rural Affairs Committee with great interest. We need to do further work on that area. In particular, I make a commitment to tighten up the insertions to section 29—a point raised by Tavish Scott—through amendments at stage 2. I accept that point but emphasise that the purpose of pre-legislative consultation is to enable issues that have not been raised through initial consultation or incorporated in the draft bill to be addressed. The principle of the bill is important and should be adopted; we will discuss the detail at stage 2. Sylvia Jackson and Jackie Baillie made impassioned speeches on byelaws. I again make a commitment that the points raised will be addressed at stage 2, when we will discuss the exact nature of the byelaws and appropriate powers. Several comments were made about the process of setting up new parks; we will focus on the comments by the Subordinate Legislation  Committee. In the Transport and the Environment Committee, Linda Fabiani referred to the time for consultation; I gave a commitment to insert in the bill extra time for consultation to ensure that people have a proper opportunity to look at the designation orders, so that they are given full consideration and the process is transparent.

I said six weeks, in response to a question from Linda Fabiani at the committee. This is an issue for which 12 weeks might be more appropriate, given the nature of some community organisations, which might meet quarterly rather than monthly. I know that this is a critical issue, and that those groups would meet to keep to any deadline, but we need to return to the matter at stage 2. The process of setting up national parks is critical. It is vital, as Andy Kerr said, that we reassure people about fairness and transparency. I will speak briefly about finance, which was raised by several members. The points that were made have been addressed in discussions in the Rural Affairs Committee and the Transport and the Environment Committee. On several occasions, I have made it clear that national parks will receive their core funding directly from the Scottish Executive—the bill will provide for that. National parks can, of course, seek additional funds from other sources, such as the national lottery, for particular projects. They will also be able to raise and retain revenue through various marketing activities. We look to international experience of how that can be done.

I have to wind up. In discussions on the budget in the Transport and the Environment Committee, we have been clear about the extent to which resources are available. Discussions are already taking place in the potential national park areas. We have focused on the areas on which we disagree. That is entirely appropriate, because it is critical that we get right the detail in the National Parks (Scotland) Bill. We have waited a long time for national parks. The communities in the national park areas need to know that their comments and contributions are fully reflected in the final bill. Today we have focused on the principles and we have had a very good debate. It is important that at stage 2 we address all the detailed points that have been made by the committees. I think that there will be an extremely constructive debate at  stage 2. We might not achieve complete consensus, but the process of scrutinising the bill and the subsequent subordinate legislation will allow us to ensure that we get the principles right for the whole of Scotland and the detail right for individual national parks. This is a huge step forward for us. We are joining the nations around the world that have national parks. The debate and the amendments that we will make to the legislation emphasise the fact that local people need to feel part of the process. At stage 2, we will debate the detail of how we do that. This has been an excellent debate. We have moved a significant step closer to establishing national parks in Scotland. I commend the bill to Parliament.

I have done so repeatedly in  committee.

We have made an absolute commitment that the best people for the job will be appointed. We will use the Nolan principles. I will come back to this point in my speech, because it is an issue that every member has raised.

The operator of Wick airport, Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd, is continuing to give the highest priority to making preparations for the resurfacing of the airport's main runway.

I am well aware of the background to this issue. Over the past couple of years, HIAL has had to cope with unexpected financial as well as regulatory pressures, which has put pressure on the organisation. I am currently considering HIAL's funding arrangements and intend to make an announcement shortly.

I am extremely sorry to have to disappoint Dr Ewing, but that is not the case. As I stated to Mr Jamie Stone, there were unexpected financial as well as regulatory pressures, such as the removal of oil-related traffic from Sumburgh to Scrabster and the withdrawal by KLM UK of its services from Inverness to Stansted and Amsterdam. HIAL must also deal with regulatory issues, including the level of fire cover at its airports and environmental works relating to the use of de-icer fluid. As I told Mr Stone, I am currently considering the funding arrangements for HIAL and I expect to make an announcement shortly.

The Scottish Executive will be able to issue advice to the strategic rail authority on the strategic priorities for the east coast main line franchise. It will be for the train operating companies and Railtrack to provide the necessary infrastructure to meet the terms of that franchise.

I know from Mr MacAskill's series of questions on electrification that he is extremely interested in the issue. I repeat to him the point that I have made on previous occasions: the critical issue for the east coast main line franchise is the quality of service that can be provided by the rail companies. Passengers are not interested in how the train is powered; they are interested in the regularity and comfort of the trains. They are interested in our ensuring that the franchise that we get is better than the one that we have at the moment. That will be my priority.

I am happy to confirm the points that Mr Macdonald made. The key issue is that  constructive dialogue is taking place within the rail industry and with the communities that are served on that route. The challenge before us is to maximise both the quality of service and the line speeds. I think that the measures in place will give us that.

The Scottish Executive will take the study's findings into account when targeting road safety campaigns and developing social inclusion strategies for disadvantaged areas. That will help us to make progress towards meeting our target of a 50 per cent reduction in the number of child road deaths and serious injuries by 2010.

Initiatives on speeding are important in reducing inappropriate speeds in areas in which children are playing or walking to school. We need to do more on safer routes to school and on road safety campaigns that are targeted at children. One of the key points to emerge from the study was that the risk of death to child pedestrians was strongly class related: children in the lowest socio-economic group are four times more likely to be killed than their counterparts in the highest socio-economic group. We need general campaigns, but we must also target them in the right areas.

I listened with interest to the many excellent contributions throughout the debate. The debate has been marked by the consistently high quality of those contributions. I suspect that that is because members have read the Transport and the Environment Committee's recommendations and the Executive's interim response. I suspect that it is also because they have received a large number of letters over the first year of the Scottish Parliament. I am aware of the extent to which the issue has attracted significant public interest. Many members have written to me directly, as Minister for Transport and the Environment, so I know that there is strong interest in the subject. I wish to take this opportunity to do three things: to give some insight into the thinking behind the Executive's response; to elaborate on some of those points; and to focus on where we go next—what the next steps are. We will make a full response in due course. However, as I am sure everyone is aware, the related report from Sir William Stewart's independent expert group on mobile phones is extremely relevant to the issues that we are discussing. I want to ensure that, before we come to our final conclusions, we not only consider carefully the Transport and the Environment Committee's report, but consider in detail the Stewart report. I do not propose to discuss each and every recommendation of both those reports—I do not have time. However, I wish to focus on the key issues that many members mentioned this morning. A number of recommendations in the report of the Transport and the Environment Committee  relate to extending planning controls over telecommunications installations and equipment. I acknowledge at the outset that there was limited support for the Executive's prior approval proposals from those who gave evidence to the committee. Andy Kerr made that point in his opening remarks. However, there was strong support for the introduction of full planning control from most of those who gave evidence to the committee. I understand the strong views of local communities and parents on the need for more advance warning of developments, more effective regulation and more accountability. Against that background, the Executive intends to move towards the committee's recommendations on that central issue, particularly in relation to planning controls over ground-based masts. I wish to make it clear that it is not our intention severely to impede the industry from continuing to provide the people of Scotland and the Scottish economy with the undoubted benefits that mobile telecommunications offer in terms of business growth, e-commerce and economic efficiency. I have detected strong support across the chamber for an approach that supports the Scottish economy in an increasingly competitive global market. Having said that, I stress that we will expect the industry to be more sensitive than it has sometimes appeared to be in the past. I will return to that point later, but there are obvious issues about mast sharing and providing information to local communities. Nick Johnston, Euan Robson, Elaine Smith and Bruce Crawford all spoke eloquently about those issues. Not just the central belt and other large population centres will benefit from this fast-developing technology. It is particularly important for rural Scotland. Telecommunications infrastructure can help overcome many of the disadvantages associated with distance and remoteness. It can provide valuable opportunities for development in rural Scotland, which is an important priority for the Executive. I note the Transport and the Environment Committee's support for the extension of mobile coverage across Scotland. That point was addressed by Tavish Scott. I wish to make it clear that, as we move towards the committee's recommendations, not every item of telecommunications equipment will be made subject to a specific application for planning permission. There is some equipment for which permitted development status might remain appropriate. However, before I announce any details on what will or will not require full planning control, or what will or will not be permitted development, I wish to ensure that we take the appropriate steps.  I wish to clarify a point made by David Mundell and Sylvia Jackson. If we extend planning control, it will cover road verges. We want to liaise with the industry so that we are clear about its future development proposals; in fact, it will be in its interests to be more forthcoming about such proposals now that the recent licensing auction has been concluded. We need to know the nature and scale of the roll-out of new investment in telecommunications. Factors such as the number of sites, which areas are involved, whether there is more scope for mast sharing and future improvements in technology and design will be critical in shaping the future regulatory regime. Furthermore, we also want to liaise with planning authorities on what they can do to prepare development plans and alterations to those plans, to provide a sound basis for the development of the industry while addressing environmental, amenity and other concerns. That will also enable input from communities.

As Elaine Smith and David Mundell both stressed, the critical issue is the detail behind our proposals. I also expect councils to have procedures in place to ensure that planning applications for telecommunications development are dealt with efficiently and consistently. That point was made by many members. On the important concern raised by Linda Fabiani and Murray Tosh, the standard rate for planning applications will apply as we increase planning controls, which will enable full cost recovery for local authorities. Failure by councils to provide an enabling planning framework and a positive approach to decision making on planning applications could not only deprive people and businesses in their own area of the technology but create gaps in network coverage that would deprive others as well. As every member who has spoken this morning has acknowledged, there are no easy solutions. Planning involves making difficult choices: we should not simply assume that all will be well if we introduce full planning control. Although the Executive will liaise closely with the industry and planning authorities, I will expect the industry and planning authorities to work together constructively on solutions that balance the economic benefits of a modern telecommunications infrastructure with addressing environmental sensitivities and the concerns of local communities, which have been so strongly raised in the debate.

No. I want to move swiftly on to the issue of guidance, which many members raised. As there is a clear need for central guidance and advice, I fully endorse the committee's recommendations in that respect; we will urgently start work on the preparation of national planning policy guidance and a planning advice note. In preparing planning guidance, we are committed to a more open and inclusive approach. As a result, we will involve the industry and planning authorities in preparing such guidance, which will, of course, be subject to a full public consultation exercise. Our aim is to circulate the draft NPPG later in the summer and in final form by the end of this year. As is our current practice, the NPPG will be kept under review; however, I will not commit the Executive to the Transport and the Environment Committee's recommendation of an annual exercise, because I would prefer to allow some flexibility. That said, I recognise that guidance and advice must remain relevant to the needs of a fast-moving industry. Some recommendations relate to the need for developers and planning authorities to liaise with each other and to co-operate more than at present. I could not agree more, and will encourage such an approach at every opportunity. Our guidance and advice will certainly emphasise that. I now refer to the report's recommendations on health matters. The protection of public health will be at the heart of any action taken by the Executive. My colleague Susan Deacon, the Minister for Health and Community Care, and I clearly have a shared interest in working together to protect the health of the Scottish people. Coincidentally, as we debate this subject, the Stewart report is being launched. I welcome the report as a helpful framework within which the Executive and the UK Government can develop matters, and it makes a number of recommendations that are relevant, respectively, to health, planning, education and industry. MSPs will wish to be aware of its main recommendations. First—and this is worth stressing—the independent expert group has concluded that the balance of evidence to date does not suggest that emissions from mobile phones and base stations put the health of the UK population at risk. However, the group also notes that there is some preliminary scientific evidence which suggests that exposure to radio-frequency radiation might cause subtle effects on biological functions. That does not necessarily mean that health is affected, but  the Stewart group concludes that it is not possible to say that exposure to radio-frequency radiation—even at levels below national guidelines—is totally without potentially adverse effects. Against that background, the group recommends that a precautionary approach to the use of mobile phone technologies should be adopted until more detailed and scientifically robust information becomes available. The report recommends further that—although there is no evidence that there is a general risk to the health of people who live near base stations—exclusion zones within which exposure guidelines may be exceeded, but which are defined by a physical barrier, should be established around antennae. The Stewart report also recommends that base stations should be brought within the normal planning process. Much of that chimes with the Transport and the Environment Committee's report. Another recommendation proposes that the UK should adopt the guidelines that were prepared by the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection instead of the currently accepted—but less demanding—guidelines that are recommended by the National Radiological Protection Board. Other recommendations in the Stewart report include proposals for publicity about the health aspects of mobile phones. It recommends measures that could be taken that would secure greater protection of children and measures to tackle the indiscriminate use of mobile phones in hospitals and other sites where radio-frequency radiation might interfere with sensitive equipment. The report also recommends further research in specified areas. The protection of public health, and in particular children's health, must underlie our every action in the matter. The Executive has no difficulty, therefore, in accepting the Stewart group's recommendation that we should move towards a more precautionary approach. How such an approach can be implemented will, of course, be the subject of consultation, which I would like to see started soon. In response to Helen Eadie's question I can say, however, that the Executive is happy to accept the Stewart report's suggestion that, as part of any precautionary approach, the ICNIRP guidelines should become the accepted standard in Scotland. Those guidelines have been incorporated in a European Council recommendation and agreed in principle by all countries in the European Union, including the UK. The Stewart group records its understanding that all mobile phones that are currently marketed in the UK comply with that EU recommendation The report notes also that exposures from base stations are much lower than  those from mobile phones. The Executive will need to study the Stewart report—which is a weighty document—in some depth. It would be wrong to respond to its detailed recommendations without reflecting on them and working on them with other ministers. We must consult widely before giving a more detailed response. I repeat that the protection of health will be our prime consideration. I recognise, however, that the relationship between planning and heath is complex. That was addressed in the Transport and the Environment Committee's report and it requires that a number of practical issues and significant policy issues be addressed. A key task for the NPPG will be, therefore, to clarify that relationship. Many members acknowledged that complex issues are involved and that it is important that we get this right. I intend to move forward as quickly as possible, but the introduction of a new regulatory framework along with complementary guidance and advice is a major task. That task involves working in partnership with the industry and local councils and requires a period of consultation. The dialogue that Des McNulty called for must start. The points that Ian Jenkins made about changing circumstances must be acknowledged. That is why I intend to call a summit early this summer to engage with local authorities and the mobile phone companies, to enable us to make progress swiftly and to have the dialogue that is urgently required. I know that there is concern that the industry will try to accelerate its programme of mast development, but a telephone survey of Scottish planning authorities—whose co-operation earlier this week I greatly appreciated—suggests that that is not the case. Scottish ministers have powers to issue an article 4 direction. The effect of such action would be that operators would have to apply for planning permission for new development that was specified in the direction. It would not—indeed, could not—halt telecommunications development pending the introduction of a new planning regime. We would have to consult on such proposals. They would at best confuse and at worst cut across the consultation that we intend to undertake on draft legislation, guidance and advice. I want to move ahead purposefully and swiftly. I thank Andy Kerr and his committee for the report.

I am concluding. I also want to thank everyone who contributed to this morning's debate. Members have raised many  points, which, as Minister for Transport and the Environment, I will consider in developing proposals. We have a window of opportunity to take forward a number of new initiatives to allay the real and widespread concerns that people have about these issues. We will therefore move forward urgently on the range of fronts that I have identified this morning, to ensure that Scotland has in place a regulatory framework for telecommunications development that supports our economic competitiveness, addresses environmental concerns and provides greater reassurance to the public on the potential impact on health.

I would like to thank David Davidson for raising this issue and all members for the quality of their speeches and for raising so many transport issues in relation to north-east Scotland. I welcome the positive way in which members responded to my announcement in March of our plans to invest £444 million on motorways and trunk roads over the next two years. That represents an increase of 22 per cent on the previous two years and is testimony to our commitment to improve and maintain Scotland's motorways and trunk roads. There are 49 schemes, costing in excess of £500,000, including the five major schemes announced in November following the strategic roads review. I would like to pick up on the points made by Ben Wallace, Brian Adam and Richard Lochhead about the benefits for the north-east that have come from that investment. It is important to focus not only on the stretch of road directly north of Aberdeen, but on the whole area. Several major schemes have been included in the programme that will bring direct benefits to people in and around the Aberdeen area. There are schemes on the A96 at Coachford and Newtongarry. There is the Bridge of Dee to Ellon road scheme to improve safety in urban Aberdeen. There is also a range of schemes to the south of Aberdeen—from Aberdeen to Dundee and from Dundee to Perth. I know that that does not appear to be local investment, but in terms of the access issues that Brian Adam and Richard Lochhead raised, it is important to think about the A90 as a national stretch of road. Nora Radcliffe raised the point about the A90 between Balmedie and Tipperty. We have made road improvements that will benefit the area. I know that there are particular stretches that members would like to add.

I am sorry—I am about to answer Brian Adam's question. Much of the investment lacks the glamour of the Rolls-Royce new-build schemes, but it is worth £7.5 billion and is as important to Aberdeen and north-east Scotland as it is to the rest of Scotland. Our improvements focus on safety-related issues and bringing the network up to standard following years of under-investment. The investment will cut  congestion and delays and will benefit motorists, businesses and public transport passengers alike. We have been criticised for not pressing ahead with every scheme that people would like to be implemented. As Minister for Transport and the Environment, I am conscious of the need for transport investment across Scotland, but we must face the realities of the development of transport policy. Brian Adam acknowledged that we must make choices and set priorities. That is a difficult issue. When we consider the issue of expenditure on new roads, we must face up to the consequences of less investment elsewhere, for example, in education or health. We must face up to those issues honestly. That is why the Executive has been developing a more transparent method of allocating resources. We want local people to understand that the five appraisal criteria—integration, accessibility, safety, economy and environmental impact—of the strategic roads review are being implemented. That is why the Fochabers to Mosstodloch route came through. We have implemented several routes in Scotland. However, any new road investment must meet the appraisal framework. We need to go further. Members made several comments about the need for an integrated approach. Elaine Thomson talked in particular about the impact of new investment in Aberdeen, which is trying to tackle the issue of congestion that David Davidson raised in his opening remarks. We need to make the links between different transport improvements by using a common framework. We will take into consideration Alex Salmond's point that not every constituency has access to the national rail network. Those are the issues that we must consider when we assess future priorities. That is the context in which any upgrading of the A90 must be considered. I am glad that members welcome the proposed realignment scheme at Hatton bends, which is just the sort of vital but unglamorous improvement that has been ignored for too long. I can confirm today that, subject to satisfactory completion of the necessary statutory procedures, the work, worth £650,000, will commence in 2001-02. Nora Radcliffe raised the issue of the Balmedie to Tipperty route, which was considered in the strategic roads review. As members know, the scheme was held in abeyance and will, in due course, be considered alongside other emerging priorities for inclusion in any future trunk road scheme. That means that there will not be short-term improvements on that stretch of the road, but we keep safety on all stretches of road under review and have commissioned research—

No. I must continue. We are studying accidents to consider the priorities for small scheme improvements, which can be taken forward in the short term. Therefore, there is some prospect of work being carried out. The second issue raised by Mr Davidson in his opening remarks was the Aberdeen western peripheral. As members have correctly identified, we have been there before in one of our very first debates in Parliament. Then and during a subsequent visit to Aberdeen, I made the Executive's position clear. The western peripheral is not a trunk road, nor is there any realistic prospect of the Executive trunking it—that would be an empty gesture. The cost of £85 million is, quite simply, unaffordable in the light of the other severe pressures on the trunk road programme that we have talked about.

No, I will not. However, back in June, I urged Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council to look again at the scheme in the context of their emerging local transport strategies, which is precisely what they have done. I urged them also to reconsider the plan in the light of the alternative funding mechanisms that might be open to them. The local congestion powers that we will bring forward in the transport bill, for example, might be one answer. Alternatively, the western peripheral could be promoted using the existing powers in the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991. It is to the councils' credit that they have begun to re-examine the case in the wider context with NESDEP. That is an excellent example of real partnership working and I would like to take this opportunity to signal my support for their efforts thus far. The work is now nearing completion and publication. I look forward to hearing the detail over the summer. The next stage must be to consider the impact on local communities and the arguments being raised there. There are many ways in which the Government can assist in that process. My officials recently met the councils. I am keen for them to do so again and for them to participate in NESDEP. Officials are already working with Edinburgh and Glasgow on their key transport priorities. In my statement to Parliament on 10 February, I signalled my support for authorities that are committed to developing a charging scheme, by offering, on a case-by-case basis, matching financial support towards their research and development costs. I know that a lot of work is being done. We are moving to the next stage of consideration at the local level. From what they have said today, I  know that members are keeping in touch with local authorities and enterprise companies, ensuring that they are well briefed. There is no piggy bank at Victoria Quay waiting to be raided. I wish life was that simple. That message must be clear to members. To say otherwise would be dishonest. We are committed to maintaining and improving our strategic roads  network. The priorities that we have set for the network this year go a long way towards doing that. However, there will always be hard choices and a need to prioritise. We need to engage seriously in that process.  Meeting closed at 17:44.

Studies of traffic, air quality, noise and local road safety have been undertaken before and after construction. The results are to be published in the summer and similar studies will apply to the proposed motorway extension between Fenwick and Malletsheugh.

Johann Lamont is right that it is extremely important to consider the impact of new road schemes and their aftermath, particularly on the communities that are directly affected. The study that will be published this summer will be important in quantifying some of those issues and in enabling the local community to see what the impact of the road has been. I hope that that process will be transparent. I would be happy to explore, if it is appropriate, the possibility of officials from the development department engaging in dialogue with representatives of the community that Johann Lamont serves.

I am happy to give the commitment that we are continuing to progress with the M77, as requested by Phil Gallie and many members of the Parliament. The scheme was prioritised on the grounds of safety, economic development issues, integration, access and environmental quality. In reference to Mr Gallie's first question on whether I agreed with the benefits of Michael Forsyth opening the M77, the whole purpose of the studies that are being carried out is to allow us to consider the issues of air quality, environment and noise. The publication of those studies in the summer will allow us to consider the situation before and after the scheme; that will answer Mr Gallie's question.

The transfer of traffic between routes from Eire and Northern Ireland will be influenced by a number of commercial factors beyond improvements to the A75.

I would say to both of them that we have invested heavily in that route over the past few years. A number of major improvements have been carried out; the Glen was the most recent one. In the announcement that I made on trunk road and motorway maintenance work a couple of weeks ago—£444 million over the next two years—I made it clear that the next two schemes, Cairn Top to Barlae and Chapelton to Bush o' Bield, will be constructed over the next three years. The estimated costs of those schemes are £4.5 million. There has been a huge amount of investment in that route. I know that the council would like us to make more investment; that point is raised every time that I meet the council. I would be keen to tell it that we are moving ahead with the route action plan work and making investments in the current programme. Beyond that, we will consider the next set of route action plan improvements that are required in the next round of decisions on the maintenance of our trunk road and motorway network.

The main priority that I have  established is working with Dumfries and Galloway Council to ensure that it knows what is happening with the route action plan. When I recently published the route action plan, I ensured that the council and local members who expressed an interest received a copy, so that they could see what progress had been made and where we intended to take the plan further.

With your permission Presiding Officer, I would like to make a statement on the Executive's proposals in relation to Caledonian MacBrayne's lifeline ferry services in the Highlands and Islands. The Executive attaches high priority to safeguarding the lifeline ferry services off the west coast of Scotland, upon which those fragile communities rely. Our commitment to the maintenance of these vital services has been demonstrated by making available for 1999-2000 the highest ever deficit grant, of £14.8 million. That helps to keep fares as low as possible. The European Commission has a duty under article 88.1 of the EC treaty to keep aids in member states under review. Following the introduction of Community guidelines on state aids to maritime transport, the Commission wrote to the Executive last year seeking information as to compatibility with Community law of the current arrangements for Caledonian MacBrayne ferry services. It might be helpful if I explain briefly what the relevant rules about state aids are. Article 87.1 of the EC treaty provides that, in general, state aids are deemed to be incompatible with the common market if they distort, or threaten to distort, competition by favouring certain undertakings and in so far as they affect trade between member states. Such aids require to be notified to the Commission, which has a limited discretion to find that they are compatible. To comply with the state aid rules and the 1992 regulations on maritime transport or cabotage—Council regulation 3577/92—we need to put the services out to competitive tender. The Community issued guidelines on state aid to maritime transport in 1997. Part 9 of those guidelines provides that, in certain circumstances,  aid in respect of operating losses incurred as a direct result of fulfilling certain public service obligations are not considered to be state aid provided that certain conditions are met. Those conditions include: that public tenders are made, that there is adequate publicity and that the contract is awarded on a non-discriminatory basis; that the contract does not involve over-compensation or cross-subsidy, so that the system is not used to support inefficient management and operating costs; and that the duration of such contracts is to be limited to a reasonable period, in general not more than five years. A public service obligation is defined as an obligation imposed upon carriers to ensure the provision of a service that would otherwise not be economic. Article 4 of Council regulation 3577/92 on maritime transport or cabotage allows a member state, in certain circumstances, to impose a public service obligation as a condition for the provision of cabotage services on shipping companies participating in regular services to, from or between islands. However, it is obliged to do so on a non-discriminatory basis in respect of all Community ship owners. That would be achieved by competitive tendering. We believe that most Caledonian MacBrayne services are in the nature of public service obligations. Therefore, to be able to continue to provide the services and to comply with the 1992 regulations and the 1997 guidelines, the routes must be put out to tender.  That will bring CalMac services into line with the Executive's practice in respect of the northern isles, where tenders are currently being sought for ferry services to Orkney and Shetland. In determining the best way forward for routes operated by CalMac, the issues are complex. They include decisions about how the routes might be tendered, about the ownership of vessels and about service specifications. Today, I am publishing a consultation paper that sets out the options for tendering. The Executive is seeking views on options and I want to encourage all those with an interest in these vital services to play a part. A number of key issues arise, such as how the routes should be grouped in the tendering exercise. Tendering the CalMac network as a whole could be regarded as a barrier to competition. It seems likely that a minimum of two or three groups of routes would be necessary to meet requirements for adequate competition. I will seek views on what groupings would be regarded as sensible packages of routes by local communities. Furthermore, local authority ferry services might be affected by these rules. We will consult local authorities on that issue. There are particular issues in relation to mainland-to-mainland routes, which include  Tarbert-Portavadie, Gourock-Dunoon, and the local authority services Gourock-Kilcreggan and the Corran ferry. Although it has been suggested that the cabotage regulations and the state aid guidelines might rule out assistance to such mainland-to-mainland routes, we believe special considerations apply to similar air routes. I intend to make a robust case to the Commission for Scotland's remote mainland ferry services to be brought within the tendering exercise. In respect of the Gourock-Dunoon route, there is the added issue of a private sector operator close by. However, the CalMac service provides an important component of an integrated transport system for users who do not have access to a car. I therefore intend to make representations to the Commission for a passenger-only service which, I believe, is complementary to the service provided by Western Ferries at present. The Executive undertook to publish Deloitte Touche reports commissioned by the previous Government on options for the Gourock-Dunoon route, and I propose to do so even though some of the argumentation in them has now been overtaken. There might be significant advantages in keeping the substantial CalMac fleet together to give economies of scale, to secure future investment in ferries and to provide the flexibility of fleet relief vessels. As a result, I will seek views on the proposal to establish a separate vessel-owning company, which could be accountable to the Scottish Executive in that regard. The Executive values highly CalMac's contribution as a publicly owned operator of lifeline ferry services. We will therefore allow CalMac to bid to continue operating the routes and I will seek the company's views on how best to structure itself to meet the challenge of competitive tendering. Of course, any bids from CalMac would be on a transparent basis, consistent with the principles of fair competition. For the longer term, we will carefully consider introducing new legislation which would ensure compatibility with EC law. That will provide a significant opportunity to shape a new framework for Scotland's ferry services and I will seek views on the content of that legislation and the role that a possible Highlands and Islands transport authority might play. It is planned that the first tenders will be placed by spring 2001, which implies that tenders—including detailed service specifications—would require to be invited later this year. Much work has to be done and views on the initial proposals that I am publishing today will require to be submitted by 30 June. However, I want to assure members of the Executive's absolute commitment to maintaining  these vital lifeline ferry services to Scotland's islands and rural communities. I am happy to give the assurance now, that in drawing up service specifications for tendering we will make clear that fares and levels of service will be protected. This challenge is huge; however, I seek the co-operation and assistance of the local communities, CalMac and its work force, local authorities and other interests to work with the Executive to deliver a tendering framework that supports and underpins the economic and social well-being of Highlands and Islands communities and builds on the success of CalMac's present services. We have the opportunity to set the framework for the future delivery of high quality integrated ferry services, and the Executive, CalMac itself and the communities involved must respond positively to the challenge.

I welcome Mr MacAskill's support for the Executive's work in persuading the Commission that we must ensure that the tendering process keeps the logic and integrity of CalMac's routes. Mr MacAskill made specific reference to the operation in Spain and France of state ferry services. There is no compulsion in the European rules and guidelines to privatise the services; we are asked to tender them. That is what Spain and the other countries in Europe have been required to do. I make clear our commitment to retaining CalMac in the public sector, but we need to tender the services. We need to engage with the European rules and regulations to safeguard our services. I have launched the consultation paper so that members and the communities they represent can be involved in the process. The process is not straightforward; it is very complex. We must  persuade the Commission of our case: that our lifeline services are vital to our Highland and rural communities. I will do that when I make the case to the Commission. We must work with the Commission on tendering and the bundling of routes. I have made it clear that I absolutely do not want to fragment the routes and services and enable cherry-picking. However, that means that we must put a robust case for the integrity of the services. I have made it clear that we believe that it could be seen as anti-competitive to have one bundle of routes. Spain has given some practical examples of tendering services. It looks as though we will have to consider carefully the possibility of two or three bundles of routes. That is another purpose of the consultation, which must be transparent. We must bring the communities with us; we must also go in line with European obligations and rules. The issue is complex, but I am absolutely committed to maintaining the services and their integrity.

I thank Mr Tosh for his helpful and positive contribution. I am happy to clarify that point. It could be that the network could be perceived as being anti-competitive if we attempt to tender it in one block—it could be perceived as  such, but it is not automatic that it would be perceived in that way. Mr Tosh is right to pick up on the distinction. It is important that we do not make assumptions in starting out on this exercise. I do not want to underestimate the challenge in persuading the Commission that we should keep the integrity of the routes. That is why I have made it absolutely clear in the consultation paper, which I will issue to members this morning, that we need to consult on the process. My preference is to look at the integrity of the network. We must look closely at the possibility of two or three bundles of routes. In a sense, we would almost be going back to the pre-CalMac days. I am anxious to bring the communities fully into the discussion. It would not be helpful to go down the route of tendering every single route separately. That would fragment the network, as members have observed. However, I do not underestimate the complexity of the matter. To meet European rules, we cannot just say that we are meeting the rules; we must meet them in practice. We have to be able to convince the Commission that we have carefully considered the impact and the competitive nature of offering the routes out to tender. I will explore this matter extremely carefully and I welcome the support from both spokespeople who have asked questions so far. This will require a concerted effort, not just in this Parliament but among MEPs, in making representations in Europe.

I will try to work through George Lyon's large number of questions as swiftly as possible. I thank George for his support for trying to persuade the Commission of our strong interest in trying to continue the ferry services. By opting for public service obligations, we need to be able to demonstrate to Europe that we are fully considering the rules and regulations. We have to make strong representations about the absolute necessity of our mainland-to-mainland services. A careful reading of the rules shows that they are not covered by the regulations. We must make the case that, in some of the areas concerned, the alternative to a relatively swift ferry crossing is a round trip of about 50 miles, using small, often single-track, roads. Taking into account economic competitiveness and the economic and social nature of the communities served, the retention of the services is vital. We will have to work hard with the relevant local authorities to make that strong case to Europe and I welcome George Lyon's support on the issue. We also need to work hard with CalMac, in supporting it in its examination of its structure and in ensuring that it is able to compete and go through the tendering process. We have the experience of the northern isles ferry service in which CalMac, in the guise of Northlink, is part of the tendering process. CalMac therefore has some expertise in tendering. We need to examine carefully the company's structure. I want to get across strongly the message that this is a complex issue. We need to lobby Europe in the strongest possible terms and make our case about the lifeline nature of the ferry services for the communities they serve. We must link into Europe's strong support for integrated transport and its strong commitment to social inclusion and strong contacts between rural areas, particularly remote ones, and to mainland areas. On George Lyon's point about the Gourock-Dunoon route, I am happy to announce today the publication of the Deloitte and Touche report, about which several members have regularly asked me questions. I am happy to announce also  that I intend to visit Gourock and Dunoon and to see the ferry service there on Monday 1 May. I do not want any more delay with this issue. It is very important that I am involved in discussions with the local communities and with the local council on how we proceed. We will have to argue our case on the Gourock-Dunoon route strongly. For the sake of integrated transport and ease of access, we need to keep that route open for tourists, commuters and local people. I will make a strong case for that in Europe, but I stress that the outcome is not automatic. I welcome the support that Mr Lyon has given.

The onus is on us to make that case. The guidelines and rules apply to every European country and we have to make representations to the European Community about how we intend to bring our services into line. We have had fruitful discussions with other European countries and take their experiences seriously. The issue is difficult and complex, but we can learn from the experiences of Spain and Denmark. I have spoken with the Danish transport minister and discussed issues such as the way Denmark has structured its tendering process, the length of the tendering process and the legislation that it has in place. The Spanish example weighs heavily on my mind. When Spain put its services out to tender, it advertised in the Official Journal of the European Communities on 23 December, requesting tenders by 31 December of the same year. Europe was not impressed by that. We need to acknowledge what has happened elsewhere while making the best possible case for our own special circumstances.

We do not want our ferry services to be broken up. I have set out the options in our consultation paper explicitly and I have been clear about the difficulty of persuading the European Commission to let us tender all our routes in one bundle. We must consider carefully the option of having two or three bundles of routes. I do not think that that would lead to the break-up of the network and I stress that I believe that we need to protect the integrity of the services. I encourage members to read the document. It is clear that tendering each route separately would not give us the benefits of an economy of scale, would not be good for competition and would make no sense in terms of ensuring the integrity of the service. I am resolutely against the cherry-picking of those services. I will be happy to answer further questions in the light of what is said in the document. We must make it clear that we have to maintain the integrity of services while meeting the European Commission's regulations. We must consider the experiences of Spain and Denmark. With regard to the point about paragraph 15, I am making a clear commitment on fares and service specifications. Our experience of the northern isles ferry service tendering process is that, in putting out a contract for tender, we would make clear the specifications for the route, the quality of service required and the fares. The point that I shall make strongly to the Commission is that by opting for a small number of route bundles, we can maximise value for money and keep the subsidies at a reasonable level. We must do that to persuade the European Commission of the appropriateness of our proposals. The consultation exercise will ensure that the trade unions, CalMac and the local authorities and communities are fully involved in a transparent process and that we will move forward together. That is the lead that I am giving today, with the publication of our consultation document.

The point about anxiety and the circulation of information is absolutely critical. That is why it is important that I do not simply introduce a set of proposals, but that those proposals, the options that we have in front of us and the process  that we must go through are transparent. I want the communities to be reassured of the levels of fares and the subsidies. A couple of years ago, the Scottish Office undertook research into the lifeline nature of the services and the sensitivities of our island communities, in particular, to CalMac fares. We know well the fragile economic nature of those communities. In Alasdair Morrison's region, the western isles, the levels of unemployment—particularly of long-term unemployment—mean that communities rely on the services. The fares that are charged are critical, which is why I was happy to reassure Duncan Hamilton that, in tendering the services, fares and the current levels of service are factors on which we can give a commitment today. I know that there will be anxiety. The best way in which to dispel it is to be open and honest, to explain to people the complex nature of the proposals and to reassure them that we are working with other European countries and doing our utmost to bring our services and subsidies into line with European rules and regulations and to convince the European Community that there are specific circumstances and experiences in Scotland that must be taken on board. However, the onus is on us, not on the European Community, to undertake that work, which is why I hope to enlist the support of all members in the process.

That is an extremely pertinent point. Spain had a 22-year contract with Transmet, its ferry service operator, but the Commission made it clear that it would not accept contracts of that length. However, anyone who knows anything about ferries and boats knows that the cost of a boat cannot be repaid within five years. If we are to meet the safety of life at sea—or SOLAS—regulations and tackle some of the most challenging sea conditions—particularly up the west coast of Scotland—we must ensure that we have the right kind of vessels. We have had that discussion in relation to the northern isles ferry service and we know just how difficult it can be to achieve. The consultation paper makes clear that there are ways in which we can address cost issues and  link the cost of subsidy into the tendering process. I do not underestimate the difficulty of that and I accept that the five-year limit that the Commission has set does not make our task easy. That is an issue that Denmark and Spain have tried to take up with the Commission. There are other, similar, issues. We must make the best case we can to the Commission. I have set out our views on the length of tender in the consultation document.

I am well aware of that point. In a sense, the consultation process that we start today includes not only CalMac and the local authorities, but relates to the work force and the communities of which the work force is a vital part. I do not wish to separate out those two issues. The jobs provided by Cal Mac are critical, skilled jobs in our most remote communities. I know how important they are. The morale of the work force is also important, which is why I am happy to talk to the work force, to CalMac and to the local authorities to ensure that they understand the process we are about to enter. I am also happy to reassure them that we are making the most robust and best possible case to Europe to ensure that we can continue our subsidies and the operation of these lifeline ferry services.

On 30 March we appointed the MVA Consultancy Group Ltd, experienced international consultants, to undertake the preliminary stage of the studies for the A8 and A80. We expect their report by the end of July.

Michael McMahon has correctly pointed out that we need to ensure that when major investment decisions are made, linkages are also made and that our approach to transport should be integrated. We must examine the joint opportunities that can come from development. That is the point of our multi-modal studies.

The purpose of the review is to produce a scoping study from which we can take forward the main multi-modal work that will examine those corridors. That is a huge and complex piece of work. The purpose of the strategic roads review, which I announced in November, is to allow us to move ahead on five key roads and to ensure that we get our decisions right in the long run. We must examine all the options in road and rail and the use of those networks to ensure that future investment is properly justified and maximises opportunities in central Scotland.

The Scottish Executive is concerned about any instances of environmental pollution in Scotland. A comprehensive programme of routine monitoring of environmental radioactivity in Scotland is carried out by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. It can detect radioactive discharges from Sellafield. The monitoring results show that doses to the most exposed members of the public in Scotland are well below the internationally recommended dose limit of 1 mSv. Full details of the monitoring and assessment of radioactive pollution around the Scottish coast are published annually in the "Radioactivity in Food and the Environment" report. A copy of the current  report is in the Scottish Parliament information centre.

That is why we are committed to effective monitoring of the environment to give clear information about radioactivity. SEPA concentrates on looking at the marine and coastal environment, as Alasdair Morgan suggests, to determine the impact of liquid radioactive discharges from Sellafield on the Scottish environment. Following a recent review, SEPA has expanded that activity beyond Dumfries and Galloway to the entire west coast of Scotland, so that we have more accurate information on the levels in the environment. That is very important.

I refer Mr Paterson to my answer a few minutes ago to Michael McMahon.

The initial scoping study will be completed by this summer. In the autumn, we will appoint consultants to carry out the main study, which we anticipate will take around 18 months to complete.

We can in a variety of ways tackle the problems that Elaine Smith mentions. We can do so through our road safety targets, which seek to reduce the number of accidents on our roads, and by ensuring that when we carry out routine maintenance work, as in the £440 million investment programme announced last week, we examine what safety improvements can be made. On congestion, traffic corridors will allow us to maximise the opportunities for public transport and to manage our public roads infrastructure more effectively. A combined approach is needed to tackle the problems that have been described.

None. This is a local planning matter.

I am happy to answer that question. It is important that we get the balance right. I am well aware of the issues regarding 7 and 8 Alfred Terrace. Pauline McNeill has already raised them with me and I have answered her questions. The representations that were made by the local community were considered by Scottish Executive officials in coming to a recommendation on whether the matter should be called in for decision at national level. We have to take a view on whether such cases raise national planning issues. On this occasion, the representations that were made were considered carefully.

These matters need to be considered carefully. The best place to do that is in the local plan discussions that each local council conducts when weighing ideas about how the area should progress against the views of people in that area. I encourage members to take an interest in planning issues in their areas and to consider them in the course of the democratic  process that has been decided by local councils, in the light of their development plans.

I would like to thank Lord James Douglas-Hamilton for giving us the opportunity to discuss this issue. I am mindful of the comments that several members have made about the level of objections to this project and am grateful to have the opportunity to reply to many of the points that have been made in the chamber. I know from personal experience and from the many written questions that members present for this debate have asked me that there is strong public interest in this matter. I am aware of the level and nature of objections. I believe that it would be helpful if I set out briefly some of the background to this issue and, by doing so, answered the questions that have been raised tonight. The project that was the subject of this application envisages the construction of a stretch of dual carriageway from New Milton to the Straiton junction on the Edinburgh bypass. The new road would follow a separate route from the existing single carriageway. An integral part of the council's proposals is the implementation of a package of public transportation measures on the existing A701. That relates to the point that Mr MacAskill raised. The measures would ensure that the A701 is developed as a dedicated route for pedestrians, cyclists, local traffic and buses. The project also incorporates the construction of 4.9 km of side roads and junctions. Further traffic management improvements are planned by the council for the stretch of the A701 from Milton Bridge to Penicuik. They involve traffic calming measures. It is important to bring to the chamber's attention the fact that the plans for the road go back some time. The council applied to the previous transport challenge fund for this project. It was notified on 18 February 1997 by the then Secretary of State for Scotland, Michael Forsyth, that £2.5 million was being made available to assist with the  development, under the private finance initiative scheme. Mr Forsyth's letter to the council said that he and his ministerial colleagues had considered the submissions from the local authorities carefully and that: "We recognised the importance placed by the Council on improving the A701 and I am therefore pleased to advise you that your application has been successful in the competition." As I think Mr Forsyth's letter makes clear, there had been a collective decision by the then Government. The ministerial colleagues included Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, as he himself said. The project has been on the go for a long time. No additional funds have been allocated to the council since that award. In May 1998, the council followed up the application with an outline business case to the then Scottish Office.

I was making a point about the financial background. I will come on to the planning issues shortly. I wanted to bring to the Parliament's attention the fact that the project has been going on for some time and had already been given financial support before the planning matters that have been mentioned arose. My concerns are about the planning issues rather than the financial issues, but I wanted to address the points that members have raised. Planning permission is a central issue. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton peppered his opening remarks with such phrases as "I understand that" and "It has been put to me that". We must acknowledge that there have been a lot of comments, all of which I have had to address in making the decision to pass the issue back to the local authorities to enable them to move ahead with the project. Local authorities may not submit planning applications to themselves for developments that they propose to carry out. That is why they must go to the Scottish Executive. They must follow the procedures set out in the Town and Country Planning (Development by Planning Authorities) (Scotland) Regulations 1981. Under those procedures, authorities must first advertise their proposals in the form of a notice of intention to develop. If objections to their proposals are lodged, they may not proceed to develop without first notifying the Scottish ministers. That procedure gives ministers the opportunity to decide whether they wish to call the proposals in for their own determination or clear them back to the council, thereby granting deemed planning  permission, which is what happened in this case. Scottish ministers will normally presume against calling in a submitted notice of intention to develop where the proposed development is in line with the adopted or approved local plan for the area. That is in line with guidance set out in Scottish Office development department circular 4 of 1997. It is a matter of law that the determination of any planning application must be made in accordance with the development plan, unless material considerations indicate otherwise. Midlothian Council, having advertised its proposals for improvements to the A701 and having received objections, duly submitted its notice of intention to develop to the Scottish ministers. It was accompanied by a statement from the council that made it clear that the council is committed to pursuing other initiatives as part of a package of measures to improve transportation within and outwith Midlothian. That addresses the points that Mr MacAskill made about developing a multi-modal approach across that corridor. Whether or not to intervene in the determination of the council's proposals was a matter that required extremely careful consideration in the light of the weight of the objections that had been received. Scottish ministers had to take account of the national planning policy guidance and the current development plan for the area. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton raised a point that I think requires a direct response. I stress that the development plan consists of the Lothian structure plan, which was approved by the then Secretary of State for Scotland in July 1997, the Bonnyrigg and Loanhead local plan, which was adopted in 1992, and the villages and rural areas local plan, which was adopted in 1995. It is a function of those plans to resolve the competing—and often conflicting—demands for land and to consider whether the loss of green belt, for example, is outweighed by other benefits. That can make for difficult choices, as all members acknowledge and as is reflected in all the objections that we have received. There was no objection to the proposals from Scottish Natural Heritage, but it identified a number of issues that it felt should be taken on board. When writing back to Midlothian Council, Scottish ministers noted that Scottish Natural Heritage, although not putting in an objection, had made certain points that it wanted the council to deal with. Those points, especially those relating to Straiton bing, were made directly to the council. Robin Harper's points about the green belt were very relevant. The opening up of land in the Straiton-Penicuik corridor is covered by the new local plan that is currently available for people to comment on. Because of concerns that have been  raised, and in the light of the current development plan, I have already called in both the proposed biotechnology park at Gowkley Moss and a single house in the corridor area. I can assure Robin Harper that, in line with Scottish Executive policy, I will be vigilant in protecting the green belt from unjustified and inappropriate development. Several members mentioned national planning policies. As members may be aware, national planning policy guideline 17 on planning and transport promotes development in a way that minimises the need to travel. It also encourages more environmentally friendly ways of moving around. The guideline recognises the important strategic role that roads can play in carrying long-distance traffic and improving accessibility, which can be important for the local economy. However, it also indicates that proposals for major new roads should be included in wider development plan strategies. Such proposals should, as far as is practicable, be integrated with existing settlements, and should be capable of being accessed by public transport and by local cycle and footpath networks. Although the Lothian structure plan predates NPPG 17, its policies are still consistent with the guideline. The structure plan sets out a clear commitment to improvement of the A701 road transport corridor. During the processing of the plan, only one objection was received on that issue. The current local plans, and the proposed replacements, also contain policies to support that improvement and to safeguard land for the road's construction. I want to emphasise strongly that development plans have to be drawn up following a process of extensive public consultation. They provide the basis for efficient, effective and consistent decision making. In reaching decisions on whether to call in planning applications, ministers attach considerable weight to whether a proposal is in line with the development plan. In considering the proposals that are before us today, it was clear to Scottish ministers that the proposed improvement of the A701 was in accord with the statutory development plans and the Executive's own guidance. Accordingly, ministers decided—as would normally be the case where proposals are deemed to be consistent with established development plan policy—that intervention was not warranted. The Executive is committed to seeing councils and others deliver projects and proposals that are consistent with the statutory development plan for an area. The sensitive nature of the A701 proposal was, however, fully recognised. My department's letter of 1 February, which intimated our decision not to intervene, noted that the council was committed to pursuing a package of transportation measures.  Those measures include proposals to enhance the potential for public transport, walking and cycling along the existing A701. They also include proposals on the long-term work on the provision of a park and ride facility at Burdiehouse; a rapid transit route providing a link between Midlothian and Edinburgh; and a scheme of traffic management measures for Penicuik. All those proposals were set out in the existing Lothian structure plan. The council will therefore be proceeding in line with established statutory planning policy. The decision letter said that Scottish ministers hope that the council will pursue those initiatives with a view to delivering a comprehensive and sustainable package of transport improvements as soon as possible.

No, I am just about to wind up. I have been asked by, I think, all members whether I will consider the case for holding a public inquiry into the proposed development. That choice was available to me when I decided whether to call in the development. As ministers decided not to call in the notice of intention to develop, we have no further locus in that issue. It is for Midlothian Council, which now has deemed planning permission for its proposals, to decide whether to proceed with the development. It is also for the council to decide whether to carry out any further assessment of its proposals and whether a public inquiry would be appropriate.  Members have raised a number of issues that were not in front of us when we dealt with the initial application. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and Robin Harper both mentioned an issue that was mentioned in Parliament two weeks ago—the subsidence close to Straiton, on the route of the proposed new dual carriageway, that has opened a crater that is some 50 ft deep and 50 ft wide. Midlothian Council will have to take that into account. It is a matter for the council, not for me as a minister. I hope that members have found the debate useful. There is much local interest in this issue and I hope that I have been able both to shed some light on it and to answer members' questions. Furthermore, I hope that my answers to the many written parliamentary questions on this matter have been helpful. It is now up to Midlothian Council to decide how to proceed on this planning application.  Meeting closed at 18:15.

Direct spending by the Scottish Executive to combat the effects of coastal erosion comprises both grant payments to councils for their coastal protection capital works schemes and also grant in aid towards councils' revenue expenditure on coastal protection. In the period 1996-97 to 1999-2000, four councils made grant claims to the Executive for coastal protection capital works schemes. Those claims resulted in payments by the Executive of £393,000 in 1999-2000, £34,000 in 1998-99, £59,000 in 1997-98 and £103,000 in 1996-97. Total expenditure by councils on coastal protection during that time amounted to around £1 million annually.

The process is that the Scottish Executive provides assistance on the basis of applications from councils. There are at present no schemes before Scottish ministers for approval. I know that a number of schemes are being prepared by councils, where they have identified projects that they may wish to promote. It is for councils to decide on their priorities in line with the needs of their areas.

Provision has been made in the UK Transport Bill to enable the Scottish ministers to issue directions and guidance to the strategic rail authority in relation to rail services that start and end in Scotland. Those directions and that guidance will be concerned with matters such as service levels and fares policies. It will be up to the train operating companies and Railtrack to provide the necessary infrastructure.

I am not prepared to accept Mr MacAskill's simplistic analysis of how we need to improve the railway network in Scotland. The east coast main line, for example, does not end in Edinburgh, and new proposals that are being made by both Virgin and Great North Eastern Railway refer to tilting trains. Electrification is not the only way in which to improve services in Scotland. Tilting trains and the network improvements that are currently being carried out will also do that.

We aim to ensure that when the franchise process takes place we retain at least the level of service that we have at the moment. In discussions with the strategic rail authority, my intention will be not just to maintain the existing service, but to expand and improve on it. That is not just about extending the east coast main line, but about integrating it with the ScotRail services that also run on the line.

The answer that I gave Mr MacAskill was technically correct in relation to the UK Transport Bill. I do not think that it is significant that the word instruction does not appear in the bill. We are delivering the McLeish settlement, both through the work that we are doing in Scotland and through the Transport Bill that is being considered at Westminster.

Public participation is a cornerstone of the planning system and there are already significant opportunities for the public to be involved. We will address the issue of how the planning system can contribute to the achievement of sustainable development in the revision of national planning policy guideline 1.

On the member's first question, I will spend time looking at yesterday's report from the Transport and the Environment Committee on telecommunications masts. The Executive has been considering that matter, particularly in relation to our own proposals for prior approval. I will read the report, I will consider its implications and, further to that, I will take action as it is deemed appropriate. On the second matter that the member raised, the decision by the Scottish ministers on that route was taken in line with the development plan that had been approved.

Having decided not to call in that planning issue, the matter is now for Midlothian Council to pursue as it sees fit. It will have to consider the matters to which the member refers.

I am happy to agree with the points that Sylvia Jackson has made. It is important that we increase our understanding of sustainable development. I hope that the work that Sylvia is doing with the European Committee in considering the sixth environmental action programme will help us to broaden and deepen that knowledge.

I met the chief executive of Railtrack on 13 March. We discussed a wide range of matters, including the east coast main line.

On all those issues, I assure Mr McAllion that we are working with a variety of rail interests, including Railtrack, to try to get more investment into our railways. We want to improve journey times and the level of service. In fact, on the route that Mr McAllion refers to, recent improvements such as the £15 million Eurostar—sorry, I mean Turbostar—rail units that ScotRail has placed on that line and the improvements that are coming around through enhancements to the track, will take about 10 minutes off the journey between Edinburgh and Aberdeen. That is the start, but we must go further. A wide range of enhancements, many of which are mentioned in the Railtrack network management strategy, will be the key things that we need to think about and prioritise if we want to improve the quality of the services that people in Scotland get from the rail network. I want to emphasise the point that the network is growing. The figures that appear in the next 10-year plan, which are in front of us today, suggest something in the region of a 30 per cent increase in passenger numbers. I strongly support that.

The work that we are doing through our freight facilities grant is intended to give the opportunity for fast, good rail networks that will allow people to export their goods to Europe. The work that we are doing, which involves £6.1 million each year over the next three years, will enable us to do precisely that.

I am grateful to Bill Aitken for initiating this debate, if only so that I can put on record that, as I was born in Glasgow, I am most interested in its economic and environmental future—I did not want to interrupt his opening remarks to correct him. I know from the oral questions that I answered last month, from the many written questions that have been lodged and from the petition that the Parliament has received, that members have a strong interest in this matter. It is important that we have the opportunity to debate this issue, but we should recognise that this is a matter for Glasgow City Council and West Dunbartonshire Council rather than for us. However, this debate could be helpful. Members have made many points, to which I would like to respond. I will outline the provisions of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 that apply to bus corridors; set out the process that needs to be carried out by councils; and inform members of action that has been taken—I am aware that many members are aware of some of those actions. Members made some wider points effectively. It is important that bus corridors should be considered in the context of a wider policy on transport. The work that has been done by both councils on their local transport strategies allows us to consider this debate in that wider context. For example, park-and-ride schemes, which Patricia Ferguson mentioned, are important and must be developed by councils. The future of retailing and the pressure on shops must be underpinned by a strong planning regime—the guidelines and local plans that are in place in both councils. Under the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984, local authorities have a general duty to ensure the free-flowing movement of traffic in their area, which they can do by introducing traffic regulation orders for a variety of purposes. It is for each traffic authority to decide on the best way in which to proceed to meet that statutory obligation. Bus lanes are one way of doing that. To promote a traffic regulation order, local authorities have to follow the procedures laid down in the Local Authority Traffic Orders (Procedure) (Scotland) Regulations 1999. They are designed to ensure that local authorities cannot just impose traffic orders. They provide for consultation,  publication of proposals, a statutory period for objections to be received and, if objections are not withdrawn, a hearing procedure. Depending on the nature of a traffic order and whether objections are sustained, the matter may eventually come before the Scottish ministers for determination. I need to be careful about what I say on any particular scheme, as I may become involved in determining whether it should go ahead. It would be inappropriate for me to say anything about proposals that could prejudice my future involvement. I am sure that members appreciate my position. However, I hope that it will be helpful if I speak on those issues. The background to bus quality partnerships in this instance is the successful joint bid by Glasgow City Council and West Dunbartonshire to the first round of the public transport fund for the development of bus priority measures along the Baillieston to Faifley corridor. The public transport fund is aimed at assisting local authorities to add key value-for-money developments to their public transport network. The joint bid was considered very carefully by ministers in March last year and a total of £6 million of additional capital consent was made available to the councils to assist with that project. The detail of the project is entirely a matter for the two councils. They received a further award of £6.6 million from the second public transport fund competition, to assist them with the development of another two quality partnerships in the city. Bus lanes cannot be introduced regardless of public opinion, which is where the key issue of consultation comes in. The comments of many members present about the consultation in which they have already been involved are extremely important. I stress that this is pre-consultation that is taking place in advance of the statutory procedures. The councils should be commended on the extent to which they have been prepared to engage with individual members of the public and the business community. Significantly, a number of workshops have been held. Those are not about signing on the dotted line, but about enabling members of the community—of the business and shop communities in particular—to express their views on the detail of the proposals. Patricia Ferguson's point about the Maryhill corridor raises detailed issues of operation that are, quite rightly, part of the consultation process. Pauline McNeill, Robert Brown and Sandra White also made some detailed comments. Robert Brown's point about the ownership of schemes was particularly crucial, while Mike Watson made an important point about co-operation. I am sure that the councils will read the Official Report of tonight's debate and will take on board the points that members have made.  When dealing with an issue of this sort, which has aroused huge public interest, councils need to go beyond the statutory consultation process. Important work has been done so far, and the consultation process will give people an opportunity to contribute on the principle and the detail of the proposals. This is an excellent example of local democracy working as it should. Neither council is starting with preconceived ideas, and both are listening to the concerns of those who believe that they may be affected by bus lanes. As the member for Edinburgh Central, I am aware that it is critical to get the detail right. That is why we need informed discussion, particularly at local level. I urge the MSPs who have spoken in and been present at tonight's debate, and local residents and businesspeople, to raise their concerns directly with the councils.  I know that members have not been able to make all the points that they would have liked, but their views are important and should be taken into account when schemes are being considered. The councils are listening, and people inside and outside this chamber must not miss the opportunity to make themselves heard. Until the councils promote a traffic order for bus corridors and have been through all the statutory procedures, I will not be able to comment directly on the proposals. I hope that members have found the debate useful and I look forward to the two authorities taking on board the points that have been made tonight and in the workshops.  Meeting closed at 17:53.

Discussions with HM Treasury have focused on procedural matters relating to the wind-up of the Scottish Transport Group.

On each occasion, Mr Canavan should have had a letter from my office saying that the matter was being dealt with. A number of members have asked me the same question. Until the issue is resolved, I cannot give him a letter setting out the formal resolution. The matter is on my desk and we are attempting to deal with it. It has been a long, complex and extremely frustrating process for all the members who have local people who have written to them about the issue. In the region of 8,000 pensioners and 4,000 deferred pensioners are involved in the two schemes. I am extremely concerned to ensure that we can resolve the situation, and we are dealing with the matter with the utmost urgency.

An announcement was made on 21 March 2000 that the Scottish Executive's contracts for the provision of air services between Glasgow, Campbeltown and Tiree and from Glasgow to Barra have been awarded to Loganair for three years from April 2000 until March 2003. The Glasgow-Islay air service is operated on a commercial basis and does not form part of these contracts.

Two pieces of news will give great comfort to George Lyon's constituents in Tiree. There will be an additional Twin Otter aircraft on the Barra, Campbeltown and Tiree service, which will lead to much greater reliability and effectiveness. Also, the Barra flight will no longer be linked to the Tiree flight, which will mean that passengers to Tiree will no longer be held up by the vagaries of the tidal system at Barra.

On this occasion, we consulted the relevant local authorities: Argyll and Bute Council and the Western Isles Council. We also consulted the relevant enterprise companies: Argyll and the Islands Enterprise and Western Isles Enterprise. In the consultation, we were looking for ways in which the service could be improved. Our consultation process is a model one and I hope that we can consider the responses when we discuss the possibility of a Highlands and Islands transport authority.

The Executive attaches a high priority to maintaining lifeline ferry services. We are satisfied that Caledonian MacBrayne Ltd has made good progress against efficiency and performance targets set by the Executive each year.

The answer I can give is that we are currently discussing the issue with the European Commission. As I said to Parliament previously and reiterate, we have no intention of privatising Caledonian MacBrayne.

I am happy to explain how we identify efficiency across CalMac services. Given that we are allocating the highest ever subsidy to it of £14.8 million, it is vital that we receive an efficient service. In 1998-99 the target for financial efficiency was achieved and the efficiency target was exceeded. The performance target was not met; it was 98 per cent of sailings on time and the rate was 97.4 per cent of sailings on time. On staff costs the target was met.

No; we have not attempted to buy that ferry back. The £20 million investment in new ferries this year has been our priority.

The Scottish Executive was consulted on the draft regulations that were proposed by the Health and Safety Executive and the accompanying guidance document relating to the decommissioning of nuclear installations.

I am disappointed but not surprised by the tone of that question. The critical point is that, through the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, we oversee the protection of the environment. We are fully consulted on, and involved with, any of the decommissioning works that are being carried out at Dounreay. One of the first things that I did on becoming a minister was to ensure that I could meet the management at Dounreay and receive regular reports on progress towards the achievement of the recommendations  of the HSE/SEPA audit report. We are being more transparent and are ensuring that we stick to the highest standards of environmental protection. The Executive has a strong interest in ensuring that the decommissioning of Dounreay proceeds to those standards.

We are kept informed by HSE through SEPA. Through SEPA, we have the opportunity to ensure that each HSE report is subject to the transparency to which I referred. That is our mechanism for accountability in the implementation of the HSE/SEPA audit report. It is significant that that is a joint report. Reports are made regularly to a local liaison committee. There are now more reports about progress at Dounreay than there have ever been. Some of us have campaigned for years for such transparency. The Executive is ensuring that we have it.

There is evidence that much more emphasis is being placed on transparency and accountability. One example of that is the fortnightly information for stakeholders that the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority produces. People who wish to raise concerns can see what progress is being made in practice. The HSE/SEPA audit report made a number of recommendations. There is a rigorous process to go through before it is accepted that recommendations have been implemented, and only six recommendations have been fully closed off. That is a recognition of the higher standards that apply and the more transparent process that is under way. Follow-up action has been completed on 40 recommendations, but the regulator's approval of that action has still to be gained. The process is now more rigorous and transparent. That is critical for people's confidence in decommissioning at Dounreay. It is important that that confidence be sustained and the management there is aware that transparency must be maintained.

I fully recognise that an effective road network is an integral part of Scotland's economic development, particularly in rural areas. Although trunk roads are the responsibility of Scottish ministers, it is councils that have a statutory duty under section 1 of the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984, as local roads authorities, to manage and maintain all local roads in their areas.

It is important for local authorities to identify their priorities for spending on local roads. A survey is being carried out by the Society of Chief Officers of Transport of Scotland, which is examining that issue throughout all local authorities in Scotland. It is conducting a consultation exercise on the condition of local roads. I hope that that will provide information that can be taken up usefully by local authorities in identifying their own priorities.

Following all our discussions on local authorities and finance, it is well accepted that there are certain formulae that identify the amount of money that goes to local authorities. The Scottish Parliament's priority—and mine as  Minister for Transport and the Environment—is to work out how we maintain the structure of our key trunk roads and motorways. That must be my priority. The priority for local authorities is to set their own priorities.

I would not accept that prescription. There has been a local authority settlement this year. The key task for everybody is to work out how to spend those resources wisely; that goes for roads and transport, as well as all the other local authority services for which local authorities are democratically accountable.

I am sure that that will be of great interest to the transportation officers as they look into the infrastructure of the local roads network. Safety is a key issue. Our national safety strategy for roads, which was announced last week, must apply throughout Scotland in tackling child accident rates and reducing the number of people who are killed on our roads.

Scottish Natural Heritage, the Scottish Executive's nature conservation adviser, is in regular communication with the local community, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and the Ministry of Defence about the use of the range through the Cape Wrath management group. It is SNH's view that the use of the bombing range is compatible with the nature conservation interest in the area. As the public body responsible for protection of the wider environment, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency carries out a monitoring programme of seawater quality in Scottish territorial waters. I have been assured that SEPA is not aware of any pollution problems arising from use of the bombing range.

I had hoped that my first answer would reassure Dorothy-Grace Elder that consultation has taken place on the issue. There is monitoring of bird life—especially kittywakes—with a study every three years. We are able to monitor closely the local impact. The site is closed at certain times of the year, to make sure that there is no conflict with local environmental needs and tourist activity. Dorothy-Grace Elder is correct to say that napalm and depleted uranium test missiles were used in Puerto Rico. They are not used at Cape Wrath. Work there is carefully carried out with the Cape Wrath management group. As I said a moment ago, SNH and the RSPB are involved in that group. The work has been carried out transparently and with consultation. I am happy to reassure Dorothy-Grace Elder on that.

My answer made it absolutely clear that SNH, as our nature conservation adviser, has been involved in consultation all along on the issue and has   been in regular contact with the MOD. Clear chains of accountability have been put in place.

I congratulate Euan Robson on securing today's debate and offering us all the opportunity to take part. It is important that we focus on the national concessionary free travel scheme for blind people that we have already launched, and on Euan Robson's emphasis on the need for GNER and Virgin Trains to extend free travel to blind people who use the railway station at Berwick-upon-Tweed. I have listened with great interest to the points that have been raised both by Mr Robson and by other members. I would like to do three things in the time that is available: first, set out our policy on concessionary fares generally; secondly, give a bit of history on the voluntary scheme for blind people and how it was delivered; and thirdly, look at where we go from here. We believe that transport policy is fundamentally about meeting people's needs and establishing an integrated transport system that is accessible to the maximum number of people. A key theme must be that of encouraging an inclusive society, and several members have addressed that in their speeches. We intend to achieve that through a partnership approach and by a range of measures to promote a more accessible public transport system. This week, I announced that we will be setting up a national group to discuss issues relating to improving access for people with disabilities. I want to look at the wider solutions that we need to tackle. The group will enable a Scottish focus on action. I welcome the support of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and Mike Russell in taking forward this issue. We need to look at timetabling and information, as Sylvia Jackson said. We need to look at how we improve access for people across Scotland, whether it is to new rolling stock or to stations. I remind members that through the public transport  fund, we have already begun to provide support for Strathclyde Passenger Transport, East Lothian and Falkirk, and we intend to take that further. There is a lot more that we need to do. There are also issues regarding attitudes, and the assistance that can be given to people by public transport staff. That is important. We need to look at the training implications for public transport companies. A lot of work needs to be taken forward, and I see our group playing an important role in that. Many of the barriers that exclude blind people from society, and from the opportunities that the rest of us take for granted, come down to accessibility and public transport. That is why one of our top priorities was introducing a national free concessionary travel scheme for blind people. It is the first of its kind in Britain, and it was brought about as a result of a voluntary partnership between the Executive, Scottish local authorities, Strathclyde Passenger Transport and the rail, bus and ferry companies. In the light of this debate, I want to explore what voluntary means. A great deal of effort went on behind the scenes to establish the scheme. Thanks must go to those who agreed to join the scheme and for their work so far. The scheme is an acknowledgement by the public transport operators of the social importance of transport access for blind people, which I am keen to promote and extend further. The scheme was established on the basis that there were no significant cost implications for local authorities or for the transport operators as a whole. If the scheme had sought to include free travel for the companions of blind people as well as for blind people, for example, I suspect that the response might have been different, and it would have been even more difficult to reach the agreement that we have reached. Some local authority schemes currently offer concessions to the companions of blind people, and those will continue, in addition to the voluntary scheme that we have established. With regard to Virgin, GNER and the national scheme, I want to give members a sense of the work that the Scottish Executive has done at ministerial and official level to reach today's stage. Initially, officials wrote to those companies' managing directors, and were informed on two occasions by those firms that they did not think that their participation in the present scheme was essential to its operation, and therefore they were not prepared to join any such scheme. Officials continued to press for their participation, and the then Minister for Local Government and Transport, Calum MacDonald, wrote to Richard Branson, the chair of Virgin Management Ltd, and to David Benson, the chair  of Sea Containers Ltd, which owns GNER, asking them to participate in the national scheme. That correspondence resulted in both companies agreeing to provide free concessionary travel to blind people for any journey that begins and ends in Scotland. Executive officials then raised with GNER and Virgin Trains the issue of blind passengers wishing to travel from Berwick to Carlisle, and the high desirability of extending that concession to, as Euan Robson said, the relatively small number of blind people who might wish to use those stations. GNER reiterated its position that it could not agree to blind people who lived in Scotland and used Berwick station being provided with free travel, when a similar concession was not available to blind people living in Berwick. Virgin Trains gave a similar reiteration of its views. The national scheme was brought about through a voluntary agreement, which meant that there could not be an element of compulsion. Rather than delay the introduction of the scheme, with no certainty of securing a change in the position of either GNER or Virgin Trains, the only sensible decision was to define the scope of the all-Scotland scheme in terms of the two criteria that those two companies could agree to. I hope that I have been helpful to members in giving them a sense of how long it has taken us to get to this stage. The companies have not yet been moved by the representations from members or the Scottish Executive. A management group has been set up by COSLA, with assistance from the Confederation of Passenger Transport, to oversee the implementation of the scheme and review its progress. In the light of the discussion that we have had today, I hope that we can take forward the views that have been expressed by members in this chamber. I will pick up on a point in the letter from GNER from which Euan Robson quoted, and will perhaps reassure the two train companies involved. The letter talks about GNER's caution, as it is concerned that I wish to extend the voluntary scheme to the scheme that the Executive is bringing through Parliament in the transport bill, which would extend concessionary travel to pensioners and people with disabilities. I see the voluntary scheme as being just that—a voluntary scheme. The national scheme that we want to take forward would be another scheme, which would come through the work already done by local authorities throughout Scotland. I give the two companies the reassurance that I am not seeking to impose that the voluntary agreement that we have should be automatically transposed to the new national scheme that we are developing. I hope that that might be helpful for those two companies.  I hope that our national scheme will bring a big extension in opportunities for people. I also hope that the management group that we have established will bear in mind cross-border rail travel for blind people who have those passes. I hope that it will pick up the issue of Berwick and Carlisle. ScotRail enables travel for people in Scotland to Carlisle, so a precedent has been established. In the light of the issues that have been raised today, I will consider further what it might be helpful for me to do in respect of writing to both companies again to encourage them, once more, to join in this scheme. I commend members for the points that they have made. I hope that we can make progress on this issue and come back in the future to consider an expansion of the voluntary scheme. I thank the companies thus far. It has taken us a lot to get to this stage and it is important, when we commend a scheme such as this, to acknowledge the hard work that has been done. I hope that we can make further progress. I thank Euan Robson for raising this matter and enabling it to be discussed in Parliament today.

indicated disagreement.

I am pleased to announce the launch today of the Scottish Executive's consultation on a climate change programme. Copies of the consultation paper are available in the document supply centre. Last month, in moving our motion on sustainable development, I stated that environmental policies are at the heart of everything that the Executive stands for. In launching this consultation on the Scottish climate change programme, we are demonstrating that commitment and moving the debate forward. The policies that we are proposing reflect sustainable development in action, and address concerns about the way in which we use natural resources, protect the environment, maintain and enhance economic growth and deliver social justice. It is fitting that I should be making this statement today. I endorse Tony Blair's comments about the importance of the partnership that the United Kingdom government and the Scottish Executive have built. Our relationship with the European Union and the wider world is also important, and is the driver behind our work on climate change. John Prescott is today launching a consultation on a comprehensive and ambitious UK climate change programme. The development of that programme has benefited from our partnership approach. We are delighted to be part of the UK programme, as well as to be launching our own programme with distinct proposals for Scotland. Before moving on to the detail of our programme, I will talk about the recent events in southern Africa. No one can have been unmoved by the images from Mozambique following the devastating floods. The worst flooding in living memory has caused hundreds, perhaps thousands, of deaths in Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Botswana and South Africa. A million homes have been destroyed and Mozambique's infrastructure has been devastated. It is predicted that it could take 20 years, or more, to recover from the damage that has been done. This tragedy emphasises the human cost of extreme climatic events. Developing countries should not have to bear the consequences of the  developed world's pollution. Few people in Scotland will associate flooding in Africa, or even flooding in Scotland, with emissions from their cars, factories or power stations, but we are all contributing to the climate change problem. We must all therefore play a part in its solution. We cannot be certain that the African flooding was a direct result of climate change, but it is one more example of a growing number of extreme weather events, which scientists have predicted will occur more frequently if we do not act. We must act now and we must act decisively. The threat of climate change was recognised some time ago. In response, voluntary agreements to stabilise emissions were made at Rio in 1992, but those have not been met. Most countries have had priorities other than keeping pledges on climate change. When Governments met in Kyoto in 1997, we moved from talking to action. We must, therefore, ratify the legally binding agreement that establishes the initial reduction targets for all industrialised countries. I would like to emphasise "initial". Although Kyoto was an historic achievement, it was only a first step. There can be no doubt that we must do more in the future; but for now ratification is crucial. I am therefore delighted to inform Parliament that John Prescott has today called on our EU partners to ratify the Kyoto protocol at the 6 th Conference of the Parties, which will take place in The Hague in November. However, we should not see action only as an obligation. Our policy measures also offer opportunities: the opportunities to provide warmer, more comfortable homes; to develop new technologies; to create jobs; to provide a modern, integrated public transport system; and to make our industries and our homes more energy efficient. What we do in Scotland to combat climate change is important. People know that already. In a survey undertaken by System Three for the Executive, 80 per cent of those surveyed thought that climate change was a serious issue. Along with air pollution, they rated it as the most serious issue for the environment in Scotland. Seventy five per cent of those surveyed thought that they should do more personally to protect the environment; but over half were unsure what changes they could make in their lifestyles to do so. This is, therefore, more about providing people with choices and more information than about having to convince them to change their attitudes. That must be good news. There is also the issue of environmental protection and natural heritage. Biodiversity is affected by climate change and, in Scotland, the initial effects will not be positive, but the  recommendations from the Scottish Biodiversity Group will be important in setting out action that we can take. Our aim should be to protect our environment by tackling issues at home, which will in turn make a contribution globally. At the end of last year, I published the results of a scoping study into the Scottish implications of climate change. It was a wide-ranging study, which identified some key issues for us. With our draft Scottish climate change programme, we are today taking forward a number of those issues. The Scottish Executive is committed to working in partnership. I am keen that we engage the widest possible audience in the debate on the programme that we propose today. Our scoping study identified that information and discussion were crucial to success in meeting emission reduction targets. Our consultation paper sets out a programme for meeting our commitment under the Kyoto protocol. It will also move us towards our domestic goal of reducing CO 2 emissions by 20 per cent by 2010. That domestic goal is far more difficult than the target we agreed at Kyoto, but we are determined to drive forward emissions reductions and to make an ambitious and significant contribution. In the time available today, I cannot cover all the measures in our draft programme. However, I can say that we have sought to address all the main points raised in the previous climate change consultation. I will therefore concentrate on two of the main sectors in which greenhouse gas emissions are significant for us in Scotland. The first is transport. Greenhouse gas emissions from transport are significant. In our programme for government, the Executive set out a plan of action for the implementation of integrated and sustainable transport policies across Scotland. We need to improve the fuel efficiency of vehicles using our roads. The European Commission's deal with the car industry will make a major contribution to meeting emissions reductions targets. Calculations by the European car industry show that fuel efficiency of 20 per cent can be achieved. In short, if consumers paid £350 more for their cars, they would save £1,000 on their fuel bills. That is a win-win situation. But there is much more that we can do in Scotland. Tackling traffic congestion will help to improve fuel efficiency. It is estimated that fuel consumption on urban roads is at least 10 per cent higher than on rural roads and as much as 25 per cent higher in the centres of our largest cities, just because of congestion. Encouraging and promoting modal shift from the private car to public transport or to other forms of transport such as  cycling and walking will also reduce emissions. Our integrated transport strategy is therefore central to addressing climate change. Energy is another crucial sector in which we must reduce emissions. Ensuring secure, diverse and sustainable supplies of energy at competitive prices is, quite rightly, a key policy objective of government. This policy recognises the important environmental impact of energy production and its use. However, there is no question of our abandoning fossil fuels overnight. We need to factor in economic, resource management and social considerations, as well as environmental ones, when developing our response. That said, our climate change targets clearly require us to take action in the energy sector. We can expect more stringent international targets for the commitment period after 2012. Meeting those may well require fundamental changes in the way in which we produce and use energy. We have a programme for government commitment to develop renewable energy. Through this consultation exercise, I am seeking views on a Scottish contribution to the objective of delivering 10 per cent of GB electricity from renewables by 2010. If we meet that target, we will reduce our CO 2 emissions by around 2 per cent, a significant contribution for a single sector. In Scotland, with our extensive hydro schemes, and through the Scottish renewables obligation, we expect to be generating 12 per cent to 13 per cent of our electricity from renewables by 2003. If we increase this by a further 5 per cent—the same increase that is needed in the rest of the UK to meet a 10 per cent obligation—Scottish renewables would meet around 18 per cent of generation by 2010. Clearly, this is an area in which we in Scotland can make a difference—another win-win for Scotland. More renewables means more jobs as well as cleaner electricity. I do not underestimate the environmental impact of renewable energy schemes. Although Scotland has some of the best sites in Europe for wind power, we also have areas of natural scenic beauty and sites that are set aside for wildlife protection. The quality of those sites and wind turbines do not always sit easily together. The Executive was conscious of that tension, and our programme for government includes a review of planning guidance on renewable energy. New guidance will be introduced in the summer, which will provide for the planning system to take on a more enabling role in the development of renewable energy. I am sure that renewables developers will welcome that important initiative. We also need to address attitudes towards wind farms. I want to consider people's actual experiences with wind farms, so that we can  address their concerns in our new guidance. In Rio the nations of the world said that we must act. In Berlin we said that we must act. In Kyoto we did act, and we reached agreement. In Buenos Aires we ensured that the momentum was continued and we agreed timetables for action. Climate change will affect us all. We must face up to the real challenges before us. The challenge is to make the choices that make a difference. The political challenge is to ensure that the Kyoto protocol is ratified. That is what world leaders must do in The Hague later this year. It is why we must have a climate change programme—a programme that offers well thought out proposals for a robust response to the threat of climate change. That is why I am delighted to launch our consultation on a Scottish programme today.

We are in discussions with the Treasury and with the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions and the Department of Trade and Industry on precisely that matter. It is important to acknowledge that more resources will be coming through to enable us to develop our climate change programme. The climate change levy is a key issue, where we hope to get resources that will enable us to target how we can improve our response to climate change. One of the key questions in our climate change consultation concerns how best we should use those resources. Renewables is a key area in which we can take the debate forward. John Prescott announced today a new round of energy efficiency performance standards, not just for the electricity companies but, significantly, for the gas companies. That will deliver more resources to enable us to tackle reducing the fuel bills of people who are on low incomes, in particular pensioners in low-income households. Major changes are taking place today, not just in Scotland but across the UK. It is important that we  work together, as Kenny MacAskill suggested, to deliver real improvements for Scotland.

I thank Annabel Goldie for her support for the broad principles of what we are addressing today on climate change. She is absolutely right: we must ensure that Scottish industry remains competitive. The point of having an integrated UK strategy is to enable us to do that. The discussions on the climate change levy affect industries throughout the UK. That is why we must have a common response. Annabel Goldie mentioned commercial waste and industries' performance. I have been involved in extensive discussions on these issues with Henry McLeish, and our officials have had many discussions to ensure that industry is firmly on board. The significance of John Prescott's announcement is that it is important that the UK does not just lead on its own. We want to ensure that other EU countries sign up to their obligations, so that the EU can be seen to lead the way. International action must be taken, so that we meet our environmental obligations and so that our industries have a fair level playing field with industries not only in Europe, but in the rest of the world.

Tavish Scott is absolutely right. We must ensure that we can tackle our transport emissions effectively. A key way of doing that is through our investment to enable local authorities to improve the range and quality of available public transport to let people make that modal shift. Local authorities also have a major role through their local transport strategies, through which we can address at a local level the key issues of providing people with safer routes to school and alternatives to taking their cars into the city centres. The congestion measures that we are introducing in our legislation will be a key part of those strategies. Traffic growth is an important issue for us to tackle, and I thank Tavish Scott for his full support on that matter. Tavish Scott's points on LPG are also important. In the Executive, we now have bi-fuelled vehicles that allow us not only to use low-lead petrol, but to have the opportunity of using LPG. There are important economic mechanisms to encourage firms, whether they have large or small fleets, to shift the type of fuel that they use in their vehicles. I would also like to identify the opportunities presented by low-sulphur fuel. A range of technologies is available. I am keen for the Executive to work with the oil industry on that. Tavish Scott is right to point out the economic benefits to people in rural areas if that fuel were more readily accessible. Unleaded fuel provides us with a good example. It took some time for unleaded fuel to spread through rural areas, but it has happened. I am keen to ensure that other forms of more environmentally friendly fuel are also made available and at a lower cost.

I am well aware of the Marine Laboratory research to which the member refers. We know that climate change is happening. The Executive must set out a strategy to ensure that we contribute to the global effort to cut carbon emissions. We must also begin to think about adapting our current patterns of land use and economic development to the climate change that is already happening. We know that we are  experiencing more severe climate events such as flooding, many of which are linked to climate change. We must identify a programme to which businesses, local authorities and individuals can sign up so that they can see that they are making a practical difference. That will allow us to add up the reductions in emissions that we have made, so that we go beyond the tough targets that were set in Kyoto and we make a real contribution to the UK situation.

One of the major issues that we must address is that of flooding. Several local authorities have applied to the Executive for help and I am pleased to say that we have identified resources to ensure that they can begin to address some of the flooding problems. Work has also been done through the scoping study on climate change, which considers adaptation measures that can be taken by local authorities and businesses. The Home Energy Conservation Act 1995 has come into force and local authorities are now preparing plans to improve energy efficiency. There are many practical ways in which we can respond and adapt. I suggest that we improve our building regulations in Scotland to meet tougher standards of energy efficiency. That will go a long way towards tackling climate change and will also help to tackle fuel poverty. In developing adaptation strategies, we must identify what makes sense in terms of our economic performance and our social justice objectives. We need a more joined-up approach. I hope that the questions that we have asked at the end of the consultation paper will enable businesses, local authorities and individuals to focus on the way in which they can contribute and how the Executive should respond to the challenge.

There are two areas for which Scotland has higher emissions than the rest of the UK. The first is land use. The land in Scotland has more carbon locked into it and we know that that is a problem, as it gives us a proportionally higher  level of emissions. The second area is that of energy emissions. We know that, because of our fuel production, we did not have the dash for gas that England experienced, and so have a proportionally higher level of emissions. If we take those two areas out of the calculation, Scotland has per capita emissions that are similar to those of the rest of the UK. We need to know what the different sectors are doing about emissions. Businesses have improved their record, which is partly because major companies have become more energy efficient, and partly because of economic restructuring. Our key task should be to identify where we can win in areas such as renewables and energy efficiency, and to identify where it makes economic sense for us to move. We have to meet the overall UK targets. I am confident that we meet the 12.5 per cent target for emissions; the 20 per cent target is more rigorous. That is why I do not consider it appropriate for Scotland to have separate emissions targets for each sector. We need to monitor emissions, and to ensure that we make gains where there are major opportunities to do so.

As Cathy Jamieson suggests, when good work is done, it is important that it is commended and supported. We need to offer support for energy efficiency to small and medium enterprises. They do not have the level of research and development facilities that some of our big firms and companies have. I have discussed with Henry McLeish ways in which we can ensure that energy efficiency information is communicated effectively, especially to the small business sector, which needs to modernise and be more environmentally and energy efficient and which would derive major benefit from doing so. Local information is critical. Local authorities can play a major role in providing information, in bringing together local businesses and in setting local objectives that can be met. In April, I will be meeting the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and individual local authorities to talk about how we can address climate change. We will have to discuss energy efficiency, local transport strategy and waste management. We have a common agenda, and I  look forward to working in partnership with the local authorities.

A key issue that we have discussed in Parliament during debates on waste strategy is methane that arises from landfill sites, but I am happy to take Mr Robson's point on board.

I agree with Maureen Macmillan on the importance of research and development into new forms of renewables. Technology moves ahead all the time. We have to ensure that we do not miss the boat. Wave energy is an untapped opportunity for Scotland, and one that has been missed in the past. There are now major collaborations between academia and business to consider the economic opportunities. Last year, I was pleased to visit a research project involving the University of Glasgow and the University of Strathclyde. They are getting to grips with what the major companies can do and with how we can manage our energy requirements. There are many opportunities there. A major research programme is being carried out by the Department of Trade and Industry. We have an input to that. It is important that Scotland has a part to play in the programme and that the research that is carried out is disseminated across the United Kingdom.

Dr Jackson is absolutely correct that changing attitudes needs to be at the heart of what we are trying to achieve. There is clearly a role for schools or higher education to provide more information and to put the issue higher up the agenda.

I have found it. I think that the question was about encouraging local authorities to do what is practical and appropriate in their areas. Authorities with major areas of low-lying land that meet the sea must address issues of long-term planning, identify adaptation measures and choose how to tackle potential rises in sea level. As I said, it is critical for local authorities to identify what is appropriate in such areas to ensure that adaptation strategies link in with local circumstances. Affected local authorities should begin to consider this issue, because a "business as usual" attitude is not enough. We must think further into the future and begin to examine how we adapt to change.

The timetable for construction will depend on public reaction to the draft orders relating to those proposals and on the availability of funds. I expect to publish draft orders for the new crossing in the summer of 2001. If the current investigations prove that it is feasible to construct the eastern bypass in advance of the new bridge, draft orders for that road will be published towards the end of this year.

It might help Mr Raffan to know that I met the chair and secretary of Kincardine Community Council to discuss precisely that matter. I am well aware of congestion problems in the village, and we are trying to make progress on the matter as quickly as possible, which is why I have asked officials to examine the issue of the eastern bypass. If we could do something about that, it would begin to tackle some of those congestion problems.

Yes, I also congratulate the council on its work on that matter. We are closely examining Fife Council's work and particularly the pelican crossing in Kincardine, which is the responsibility of the Scottish Executive. It is important to take a partnership approach to tackle the problems in the village.

The Scottish Executive publishes national planning policy guidelines, planning advice notes and circulars. Those are available free of charge on request and most are now on the planning home page on the Scottish Executive website. The Executive also operates a planning helpline. In addition, most local authorities make available booklets and leaflets.

On the second point, I am happy to say that I am considering the production of an easy read, which would make it possible for people to understand how planning operates at the Scottish and local levels and empower local communities in relation to the development of their area. On the first point—the operation of local authorities—we are in regular contact with local authorities to discuss best practice at local level. We are always open to ideas on how local authorities can improve their performance. There are innovative ideas; some local authorities are thinking about putting their development plans on the internet. I am keen to ensure that each local authority does what is possible with the resources that they have, to ensure that people understand how the planning system operates.

At the moment, the right of appeal lies with the developer. I am keen to ensure that local communities are much better informed at an earlier stage in the planning process, whether about the local plan or about the structure plan. Those documents sometimes seem remote to communities, but they are the basis on which local authorities take decisions, so it is important that people are involved in a meaningful way much earlier in the process. That is where I  want us to focus our energies.

Scottish Natural Heritage is an adviser to the Scottish Executive on nature conservation. Its advice should be acted upon in such a way that people can see that their many points of view have been taken on board when a planning decision is taken—and it is often difficult to come to a decision—and when a report is published.

The Scottish Executive and the UK Government recently announced targets for road accident casualty reductions in the period to 2010. They include a 50 per cent reduction in the number of child fatal and serious casualties. The targets, together with a strategy for achieving them, were published on 1 March.

I would be happy to do that. The purpose of the safer routes to school guidance was to enable local authorities, schools and the police to work with parents to identify safer routes to school. We want the guidance to reach the widest possible audience; I will investigate the case that Dr Jackson raised.

I have made it clear to local authorities that they, as the local transport authorities, are in the best position to identify the areas that need that change in speed limit. We have identified schools and areas around residential developments where child accident reduction measures could be put in place. This is an issue on which local authorities can take the lead and that is why, last year, we gave them the power to do so.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the fact that no one in this debate has seriously questioned the need for investment in drinking water quality and environmental improvement. The Scottish Executive has faced up to how we deliver that investment and the fact that it must be paid for. However, the evidence from this debate is that some members want to have their cake and eat it. The fact is that the SNP does not understand finance. The Scottish Executive has helped—we provided £20 million in external financing limits in the previous spending round.

No thanks. Mr Lochhead will have his chance in a minute.  Increasing NOSWA's EFL by 50 per cent over the next two years is a practical way of providing support. The borrowing is, in itself, not an easy option as it must be repaid. The SNP's approach would create excessive debt burdens for the future. On debt write-off, Scottish water authorities were better treated when they were set up in 1995 than English water companies were on privatisation. The comparison that Mr Lochhead gave on debt write-off was completely inaccurate because it did not include the receipts from privatisation. That meant that the net benefit for England and Wales was £1.3 billion. For Scotland it was £0.7 billion, which is, proportionately, five times more favourable. PFI has been mentioned. It is not the cause of higher charges. It is simply one of a number of means of financing the necessary investment, at least cost to the customer and in a way that allows us to know when the work will be completed. It will enable us to meet our obligations under European directives on time and guarantee the investment in higher-quality water that we need. In this debate, as in many others, the SNP has suggested that we simply throw money at the problem. In his concluding speech, I would like Mr Lochhead to explain how he would finance the spending commitments that he seems to be making. Those include £1 billion for debt write-off, along with a further commitment of almost £1 billion—if the SNP really intends that additional investment costs over the next five years should be met by taxpayers rather than by water customers. If water customers are not to pay for that investment and the Government is, we are the people who will have to identify where the money should come from. I welcome Murray Tosh's support for a broader discussion on the way forward for our public water industry in Scotland. I want to talk briefly about competition, which was mentioned by several speakers. It is important that I set out where we want to go on that. We need to ensure that our water authorities can mature and meet the increasing competition challenge. It is not the case that 1 April will be a magic date on which the Competition Act 1998 comes into force—there is already competition in the water industry, and our three water authorities in Scotland are trying to gear up for that. What matters is that they are becoming more competitive and that our water industry commissioner is suggesting ways in which they can do that. We will no doubt hear accusations that some form of competition is a form of privatisation. Nothing could be further from the truth. The water  authorities will remain firmly in the public sector, and I am confident that they will take the opportunity to show that the public sector can compete fairly and effectively to deliver a high-quality, value-for-money service. We need a public debate on that; our consultation paper next month will provide us with that opportunity. Although water prices in Scotland are rising, they are still lower than those of the comparable water authorities that were privatised in England and Wales. We need to be responsible, flexible and imaginative in ensuring that our water authorities respond to the needs of all their customers. However, that will not diminish our right, through ministers in Parliament, to hold the industry to account in the public interest. It is absolutely fundamental that competition should operate in a way that does not threaten public health or the security of the public water and sewerage networks. That will be a fundamental condition, on which there can be no compromise. In our consultation with the industry, we will continue to ensure that public control remains firmly on the agenda. That does not mean that we have any ideological problems with partnerships with the private sector. However, when they happen it must be with the leadership of the public sector. The challenge is to create a modern public water industry in Scotland. Our Executive is developing Scottish solutions to Scottish problems. Tavish Scott and Nora Radcliffe made key points. We need co-operation, we need to have savings in the water industry, we need benchmarking with the best parts of the water industry throughout the UK and we need to ensure that we have efficiency of service. Every consumer, whether domestic or business, will want a higher level of service for the extra money that they will pay because of price rises. We need to ensure that we deliver that. Our Executive will deliver investment where it is needed. We will deliver an efficient, high-quality, safe and environmentally responsible water industry that is also competitive. The Executive is committed to addressing the problems of the most vulnerable in our society. We are already doing our bit for pensioners, with our £100 winter fuel allowance, with our free television licences for the over-75s, with the minimum income guarantee for all pensioners and with low inflation at a UK level. That is the way in which to protect pensioners and meet their needs. We need Scottish solutions to Scottish problems. Our water industry will remain public and efficient and it will deliver high environmental standards. We need the investment; that is what this Executive is delivering. I commend our amendment to the Parliament.

The parliamentary record will show that I made a clear commitment to a review  of vulnerable households in my statement to Parliament in January. That fact was not wheedled out of me by a question.

Our amendment to the motion is an accurate reflection of what we have been doing and addresses the problems that we have in the water industry in Scotland. We have had two discussions in Parliament on the water industry. In the summer, I announced the appointment of the water industry commissioner and what we planned to do in light of the Water Industry Act 1999. I also announced in January the results of the strategic review of water charges for the period April 2000 to March 2002. We have discussed the issue in Parliament. We have had ministerial statements. I will address the specific parliamentary question that Mr Lochhead suggested had not been responded to and will get back to him as soon as possible. Mr Lochhead and his colleagues have asked a huge number of questions on the water industry. I have answered those questions and given as much information as possible. The framework that I set out in January was based on our commissioner's advice that the authorities have to increase their revenue to meet substantial and urgent investment needs. The commissioner argued that we needed a significant acceleration of investment to renew and improve our infrastructure. I am conscious of the need for investment, but also that people—both domestic and business users—have to pay the bill. I therefore moderated the water industry commissioner's proposals, reflecting our determination still to provide the water authorities with sufficient ability to invest.

Not just now. Our aging Victorian infrastructure has suffered from decades of under-investment. The cumulative underspend is estimated at about £2.5 billion. It is not possible to ignore the consequences of that. We cannot allow our mains and sewerage systems to continue to decay, threatening more burst pipes and disruption to supply. We cannot ignore European legislation, which rightly demands higher standards in the interests of public health. The urban waste water treatment directive will require proper sewage treatment for all our towns and cities, and the drinking water directive sets tough, new, safer standards. We cannot turn our backs on the need for such investment, for higher-quality water and for improved service quality. We need to do more to clean up our beaches.

As I told Mr Salmond in a letter earlier this year, I can confirm that a bond issue would not have been a more appropriate way in which to proceed, because it would still have been counted as borrowing. It would not have been cheaper than the money that we, as central Government, are able to lend. I am quite clear about that. We cannot turn our backs on the need for investment. We have heard nothing from the Scottish National party about practical suggestions that would let us invest.

No, thank you. The overall revenue increases for the Scottish water authorities in each of the next two years—15 per cent and 12 per cent for the East of Scotland Water Authority; 35 per cent and 12 per cent for the North of Scotland Water Authority; and 15 per cent and 12 per cent for the West of Scotland Water Authority—were designed to allow us to ensure that we can begin to tackle the backlog of investment. The increases total £1.8 billion over the next three years. In the west, for example, £140 million will be spent on constructing more than 30 new waste water facilities for coastal towns and communities. In the east of Scotland, each region will benefit from major investment programmes.

No thank you, Dennis. Around £87 million will be spent on waste water treatment in Fife and £72 million will be spent on the water treatment that is required in the Forth valley.

No, thank you. In the north, £12 million will be spent to provide Inverness with its first water treatment works, which means that the town will have properly treated water for the first time ever. A good example of investment in rural areas is the fact that almost £1 million has been spent in west Gordon and Midmar on a new water supply—meeting modern-day standards—for a community of around 80 people. That works out at investment  of around £12,000 per head. Investment will happen throughout the country. The strategic decisions have now been translated into charge schemes for the coming financial year. I understand that the schemes have been agreed and made public today.

I do not underestimate the need to make investment. I come back to the point that we need to meet higher standards. There are tougher European directives to meet and we must clean up our beaches. The water authorities' average increases in domestic charges over the next year will be just under £40 a year, or around 75p a week. When I spoke to Parliament in January, I acknowledged that large increases would not be welcome to customers. I accept that. We need to examine the impact of charges on low-income households. I said then, as I say today, that I will carry out a review. It would not have been possible to carry out a review before today's announcement in time to affect the charges for this year.

No, thank you. It is important to know that the current arrangements link to council tax bands, so there is a link to the less well-off, with substantial assistance for people on lower incomes.

That is one of the things that needs to be reviewed so that we can ensure that we can tackle the issue. It is important to state that the average charge increase for band A householders will be only two thirds of the band D increase, which means an average of 60p a week for band A householders. One of the key things in Scotland is that people cannot be cut off.

No. I have already taken interventions. The significant charge increases make it even more important for the water authorities to give their customers value for money. How they respond to that challenge is crucial for the long-term health of the industry. That is why I endorsed the water industry commissioner's two proposals, first, on clear benchmarking to allow us to compare Scottish authorities with the best in the United Kingdom; and secondly, to ensure that higher customer standards are available throughout Scotland.

No, thank you. Our standards will focus on issues that are genuinely important to customers, such as better response times and reducing the number of disruptions to service. We can match the best in Europe. Our authorities will have to provide better quality services; as I announced in January, we will initiate a consultation on that in April. We demand the highest standards of customer service and efficiency from our public water industry and we are determined that that is what customers will get. Mr Lochhead alleged that the charge increases will be unfair to rural areas, particularly in the north, and that we have not done anything to tackle that issue. That is not true. The legislation requires "no undue discrimination" between customers. We know that it costs more to provide healthy drinking water and acceptable waste treatment facilities in sparsely populated areas. It is unacceptable that 65 per cent of sewage in the north pours untreated into rivers and the sea. Does the SNP really think that that can continue, or is it adding another public spending commitment to its growing list?

No, I am running out of time. The Scottish Executive has taken a responsible approach, ensuring a firm footing for the water industry rather than pretending that there is an easy way out. We have increased opportunities for external finance—an increase of 50 per cent over the next two years for NOSWA and an extra £20 million in external financing for the water authorities in this year's budget. To go further would push debt to an intolerable level. The main point is that investment is needed and it must be paid for. We are making sure that, with a regulatory regime, the investment will give value for money. We are taking the hard decisions that will put the industry on a firm basis, as a properly  funded, successful and, above all, public water industry with high-quality services for customers. That is what people want and need—we cannot compromise on drinking water quality or environmental protection. We must invest, and this is the way forward. I move amendment S1M-639.1, to leave out from "believes" to end and insert:  "recognises that the Scottish public water authorities need to make very significant investments to deliver the high quality, safe and reliable water and sewerage service that the Scottish public and Scottish business need; recognises also that Scotland must meet the standards to protect health and the environment laid down in European and national legislation; welcomes the additional external finance made available by the Scottish Executive for the water authorities in the recent spending round; notes that the current system already provides a degree of protection for the most vulnerable through the link to council tax banding; welcomes the review of these arrangements that has been announced; welcomes the Water Industry Commissioner's initiatives to increase efficiency, customer service and accountability in the water industry; and therefore endorses the strategic framework for the industry set out by the Scottish Executive in January."

I have a point of information for the member. In January, there was a ministerial statement on water; members had the opportunity to ask questions on that. It is not true that the matter has not been on the agenda.

During my forthcoming meeting with the chief executive of Railtrack I will discuss a wide range of matters.

It is important that we improve the travelling times for rail journeys between Aberdeen and Edinburgh and Aberdeen and Glasgow. I draw to the attention of members the fact that new rolling stock from ScotRail and the new east coast main line franchise will improve journey speeds. Furthermore, investment in infrastructure, particularly in Fife, will bring down the journey time between Edinburgh and Aberdeen.

The member raised the issue of instructions, which are not within my power. It is not a question of my instructing Railtrack; I represent the Scottish Executive and I encourage Railtrack. I discuss with Railtrack the key priorities  of the Executive. The Forth rail bridge is a key part of the Scottish infrastructure, and, of course, we will encourage Railtrack to do everything in its power to ensure that the infrastructure is maintained to the highest standards.

I am grateful to Nora Radcliffe for giving me the opportunity to highlight trans-European network funding. However, I must draw to the attention of the Parliament the fact that such funding provides an opportunity for only 10 per cent of the investment on any particular route. Although it is an important opportunity, it should not be overstated, and such matters must compete with other European Commission priorities. In the context of railway investment in Scotland, I am happy to consider the opportunities that might arise from trans-European network status.

We aim to establish the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park by summer 2001. The draft bill provides for the Scottish Executive to meet all core funding. Resources have been allocated in 2000-01 and 2001-02 towards the cost of establishing national park authorities and to meet expenditure by the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park. Those resources are additional and will not displace other environmental programmes. Funding for 2002-03 and 2003-04 will be considered in the 2000 spending review.

The main point behind Robert Brown's question is why we think that it is a national responsibility, and why we are picking up the core costs for the new national parks. It might be helpful to point out that we are increasing our support from 80 per cent of the funding in the previous financial year to 85 per cent of the funding this year in recognition of the significance of national parks and to alleviate the need to make sure that sufficient resources are in place when the new national park is established next year.

Investment in the national park will meet the needs of national park designation.  The whole point of designating a national park is to bring together the efforts of existing organisations and to add value to them. The purpose of the national park plan is to set out key strategic objectives to develop what is being delivered at the moment, to integrate and to provide a much higher quality of protection and development in the area.

Under United Kingdom renewable energy policy, waste-to-energy technologies, including incineration of municipal waste, have always been accepted as a form of renewable energy generation. They were therefore included within the Scottish renewables obligation. Municipal waste incineration processes are licensed for pollution control purposes and are subject to regulation by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency.

Robin Harper is correct to identify the problem of accumulating, which relates to the amount of waste that we generate as a society. We need a variety of ways to deal with that, and I am keen to encourage local authorities to work with SEPA, through the national waste strategy, to identify appropriate ways to deal with waste. To illustrate the SRO, six schemes have been commissioned so far that come under the category that we are talking about. Five of them are for landfill gas schemes. They take the methane that comes out of landfill and reuse it, preventing that gas from being released into the atmosphere. Our approach requires to address more than one waste problem. I am keen to encourage a strategic approach.

Jamie Stone is right: there may be a need for some incineration in the future. The £40 million waste-to-energy plant at Dundee is an example. It is being supported through the SRO. The critical thing is to get the approach right. By bringing local authorities together where appropriate, we can get a response which will tackle the issues regionally and not leave each local authority to deal with a problem in isolation from the opportunities that exist to tackle this issue effectively.

I cannot comment specifically on an issue which is likely to be raised prior to planning. I stress that it is important for local people to get involved in the planning process and to make their views heard. I do not want to comment on the particular case of the application that Alex Fergusson raises.

The Scottish Executive has worked with the Scotland Office and project sponsors to develop a package of support which goes as far as possible within legal constraints. That package may be available to other operators.

I am grateful to George Lyon for reminding me of the concern that I know exists in the local community. We are keen to establish the opportunity for a public service order on this route. I understand that the Scotland Office and the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions are actively considering that possibility. Great interest has been shown by the sponsors of this route and much energy is being invested in trying to resolve this issue.

It would be open to CalMac to consider the route if it wanted to. It is not a lifeline service, so it would not be covered by the sponsorship of the Scottish Executive. However, out of a range of options for route operators, CalMac is clearly one that could be considered.

The Executive is aware of the concerns of local traders in Shettleston Road about the impact of Glasgow City Council's proposals for the Faifley to Baillieston quality bus corridor. However, that is a matter for the city council as the local roads authority, and any concerns or comments should be directed to it.

It might be helpful if I outline to Sandra White the process that is appropriate in this circumstance. The local authority is carrying out important consultation on the routes, and I strongly urge all traders and anyone else who is interested in the issue to get involved in that consultation. From experience in my constituency, I know that the detail of any proposals will always be important to local people. I understand that Glasgow City Council has organised meetings and workshops for March, which will include discussions about proposals for the Shettleston Road route. I hope that everyone will get involved in the process and will make their views known at the right stage.

As I said to Sandra White, the important issue is that consultation involving Glasgow City Council, local residents, community groups and traders is taking place. Furthermore, a formal consultation process is taking place on traffic orders, and there is a specified way in which the matter will proceed. The council should listen to local views and take them on board in light of its overall transport strategy for tackling congestion and improving the economy and the environment in those areas.

The Executive is aware of the concerns of some residents of Moffat about the quality of their new drinking water supply. There is no evidence that the new supply fails to meet the standards set in the Water Supply (Water Quality) (Scotland) Regulations 1990, but if failures occur, the Executive has the power under the Water (Scotland) Act 1980 to require West of Scotland Water to take remedial action.

It is important that West of Scotland Water abides by the guidelines and procedures to identify standards of water quality. I understand that a meeting was held on 14 February with local residents and that, subsequent to that meeting, West of Scotland Water will conduct a detailed investigation into the complaints that it has received from some residents in Moffat. A report on that investigation will be provided to the community council at its meeting on 28 March. I hope that that will allow the debate to go forward, that the concerns of local residents can be addressed effectively and that the residents can then get proper feedback from the water authority.

I met the chair and chief executive of the Shadow Strategic Rail Authority in November, and my officials meet regularly with counterparts in the authority. Those meetings cover a range of matters, including the process of franchise replacement as it affects rail passenger services in Scotland.

Scottish ministers will have the sole responsibility for ensuring that franchise replacement in Scotland meets our needs. That is why the bill gives us the powers to issue directions and guidance. Clause 183 is very important and will be carried out in full. That will ensure that we are able to direct the services that we need in Scotland when we reach the franchise replacement process.

John McAllion has made some good points about the importance of improving our rail infrastructure. The Scottish Parliament must talk to the authorities that run the services on our railways and to those who provide the tracks on which those services run. Next month, I will meet the chief executive of Railtrack to talk about our strategic priorities in Scotland and to discuss how we seen our vision meeting that of Railtrack.

I am aware of the points that the member has raised. It is a commercial matter between Parcel Force and the train operators. However, I understand that in this case, the problems are due to temporary engineering works, which are delaying the mail. We want to ensure that we have a rail service that is as efficient as possible. I am grateful to the member for raising the matter.

That is exactly why we need to work within a GB rail framework. We must ensure that we address our service priority in Scotland and that we fit in with the overall UK rail framework. That is why we have regular meetings with the Shadow Strategic Rail Authority.

No specific distance is set by the Scottish Executive. The reasonable or safe distance from residential properties will vary for each blasting operation. Further information on this matter is contained in the annexe to planning advice note 50, which I am issuing today.

The quarries regulations of 1999, which came into force on 1 January 2000, specify the way in which blasting must be carried out in each circumstance. They specify the competent operators and they identify the Health and Safety Executive as being the agency that must oversee such operations. Part III of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 places a mandatory duty on the local authorities to investigate any complaints of nuisance and to take  action where necessary. That includes nuisance from rock and vibration. The safeguards are in place. If there is a specific issue that Mr Quinan would like to raise with me in writing, I will be happy to address it.

We welcome initiatives to promote greater understanding of transport choices. In Scotland we plan to establish a travel awareness campaign to complement and reinforce local initiatives. We hope to make an announcement in the spring.

The best way to tackle traffic reduction is to give people choices in transport. There must be safer routes to schools, traffic-calmed areas, better quality bus services and an integrated approach to train and bus services. The transport bill will bring us those things and my top priority is to get that bill through Parliament.

We need solutions that are appropriate to different areas. It is not appropriate for me to implement a one-size-fits-all transport policy. Each local authority has its own perspective and its own local transport strategy. I draw members' attention to Aberdeen City Council, which is going to promote promotional fares on buses and hold travel awareness conferences. There are many local initiatives that  we should welcome. The critical issue is that they are local, but we must support them at national level with the appropriate resources and the right legislation.

Transport is at the heart of the Executive's vision for Scotland. We are committed to delivering a sustainable, effective and integrated transport system. Today sees another major step forward in the realisation of our ambitions, with the publication of our proposals for the integrated transport bill. Since taking office, I have travelled the country seeing our transport problems and opportunities at first hand. I have met the Confederation of British Industry, the Automobile Association, the Royal Automobile Club, Transform Scotland, the Scottish Council Development and Industry, the chambers of commerce, the Freight Transport Association and the Road Haulage Association. I have spoken with local authorities and public transport operators across Scotland, listening and debating. All have strong views, forcibly argued, but there is agreement on many of the essentials, such as the need for partnership rather than confrontation; the need for increased investment in Scotland's transport infrastructure; the need to make hard choices; and the need to explain to the public what we are doing and why. I have reflected carefully on those views in finalising our legislative proposals. I believe that our proposals will be supported by all those committed to delivering a step change in Scotland's transport. We have a vision for the future of Scotland's transport. We have an ambitious agenda, which cannot be delivered overnight. However, we are not starting from scratch. In the short time that this Parliament has been in existence, we have achieved a great deal. We are investing in Scotland's key inter-urban links. Five major trunk road schemes are to proceed to construction over the next three years, drawing upon the additional £35 million for trunk roads announced in October. We are implementing the devolution settlement on rail, including new powers for the ScotRail franchise. Rail investment is on the increase and has  resulted in the new Glasgow-to-Edinburgh service that runs every 15 minutes, new railway stations in Fife and new diesel rolling stock right across the network. We have announced five freight facilities grants totalling £7.25 million, which will save well over 6 million lorry miles a year. We are improving public transport at local level, supporting 32 schemes and awarding £55 million in the first two rounds of the public transport fund. We are promoting seamless travel for the public transport passenger with a national transport timetable that should be in place by the end of this year. We are meeting the distinctive needs of Scotland's rural communities. The £14 million rural transport fund has so far supported 350 new and extended public transport services, 73 community transport projects and 10 refurbished petrol stations. Furthermore, support for Caledonian MacBrayne and Highlands and Islands Airports is at record levels. We are also committed to increasing investment by channelling any future above-inflation increases in fuel duty into extra spending on transport. the integrated transport bill will build on that record of achievement and create the strategic framework by which central Government, local authorities, the private sector and others can plan and invest. The bill will promote better integration at regional level. Local authorities have begun to work together in voluntary partnerships to deliver better co-ordinated and integrated transport services. I wish to build on the progress achieved by existing partnerships, while avoiding the disruption and costs involved in establishing the regional transport authorities that are advocated by some. I propose to take enabling powers to require selected local authorities and, where relevant, Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive, to develop strategies for tackling specific cross-boundary issues. I envisage that the first use of those new powers will be to require the public authorities in and around Glasgow and Edinburgh to prepare strategies for managing commuting flows in and out of those two cities. The bill will also address the specific problems of ensuring accessibility across the Forth estuary, an issue of vital importance to communities on both sides of the estuary. Traffic levels on the Forth road bridge are increasingly unsustainable and daily flows are forecast to increase by 33 per cent by 2006. A second bridge is not a viable option because of cost, environmental impact and the implications for congestion elsewhere in the network. I therefore propose to set up a new joint board, building on the existing partnership between local authorities and the Executive. The  new body will take over the responsibilities of the existing joint board. It will also have wider strategic and funding powers to promote public transport, road works and traffic management measures relating to the Forth crossings. There is growing support in the Highlands and Islands for the establishment of a transport authority. A transport authority could develop a vision for transport for the region and take responsibility for Caledonian MacBrayne and Highlands and Islands Airports. I am sympathetic to such aspirations, but I am aware that the issues are complex. I am, therefore, commissioning a thorough examination of the issues with the Executive, relevant local authorities and Highlands and Islands Enterprise. My aim is to reach a decision by the end of this year. Any decision to proceed would require primary legislation. I now refer to my proposals for high-quality bus services. The Executive's vision is of a bus market that is growing rather than contracting. However, if people are to be encouraged to use local bus services, bus operators and local authorities will need to provide frequent, comfortable and reliable services, which operate at times when people want to travel, and to the places where they want to travel. The bill will provide the tools for achieving that aim. We will give bus quality partnerships statutory backing to provide local authorities and bus operators with the confidence to work jointly to deliver improved services, through bus priority schemes and investment in new high-quality buses. We will give transport authorities increased powers to support additional services on existing routes, thus providing the means to deliver better, more frequent services. Our preference is to move forward by means of partnership, to harness the talents of all parties and to build on the hard-won successes of recent years. If that fails to deliver the necessary improvements in service, we will have the power to allow local authorities to regulate bus services through quality contracts. Those will allow local authorities to make binding provision in respect of routes, quality of buses, fares and frequency levels. The Executive regards such contracts as a last resort, and would expect to approve them only when all other approaches to service provision had failed. Nevertheless, I serve notice that we will not hesitate to use them if circumstances require. In addition, we will give local authorities new powers to provide better bus information to the public and to require through-ticketing, so that passengers need buy only one ticket per journey irrespective of the number of buses or bus operators that they use. We will also tighten the regulation of bus services and introduce more flexible penalties to tackle some of the worst  remaining problems of deregulation. The bill will give local authorities powers to tackle the growing congestion and environmental problems in our urban areas. Traffic is projected to increase by 50 per cent over the next 30 years. To do nothing would be to abdicate responsibility. Traffic jams cost time and money—costs that Scottish business can ill afford. Traffic jams also pollute the air that we all breathe. We will therefore give local authorities the powers to introduce local congestion charging for driving in an urban centre and a workplace parking levy on employee parking at business premises. Let there be no confusion. As I stated to Parliament in November, we will not legislate to raise tolls on the motorway and trunk road network. The Executive believes that charging has a role to play in reducing Scotland's traffic, but it is not a panacea for our congestion ills. It will be up to local authorities, acting singly or in partnership with neighbouring authorities, to decide whether to use those powers. All schemes will have to address a pressing congestion or air quality problem; all must fit into an authority's overall vision for transport, as set out in its local transport strategy; and all will have to win the support of local people and the approval of Scottish ministers. That is why we will require each local authority that wants to introduce a charging scheme to enter into a contract with the motorist—a public document against which the local authority can be held to account. I make the following five pledges to the Scottish motorist: 100 per cent of the net revenue from charging will be ring-fenced for local transport; all the net revenue from charging will be genuinely additional expenditure on transport; motorists and businesses will be able to see where their money is going, through transparent accounting arrangements; there will be fair treatment for those paying and for those benefiting; and public transport improvements will be made before charging, with further improvements to follow. It will not be easy to introduce a charging scheme, and local authorities that have the vision and determination to tackle congestion problems in their urban centres deserve our support. There are many ways in which the Government can help. Today I signal my support for authorities that are committed to developing a charging scheme, by offering, on a case-by-case basis, matching financial support towards their research and development costs. Over time, the revenue from charging will fund a step change in public transport, providing services that are comparable to the best in Europe. Let us keep that vision in mind as we discuss the bill over the coming months. Finally, I wish to refer to an issue that will be  supported by everyone in the chamber and in Scotland. Our programme for government commits us to encouraging the improvement and integration of concessionary fares schemes on public transport for pensioners and those with special needs. In December, I was pleased to announce free travel for blind people throughout Scotland on rail, bus, ferry and underground services, which is the first and only such scheme anywhere in Britain. MSPs of all parties know that funding is tight. We cannot always move as quickly as we would all wish to. In government, there will always be difficult choices but, in making those choices, we are determined to pursue social justice for Scotland's pensioners and people with disabilities. I am therefore delighted to be able to inform the Scottish Parliament of the first step towards delivering on our commitment. Today, I am commissioning a research project to examine all the options for improved concessionary travel for pensioners and people with disabilities. When the results of that research are available, we will set a national level of concession for pensioners and disabled people throughout Scotland. The Executive's aim is to increase progressively that minimum level of concession as and when resources become available. A national concessionary fare will improve the quality of life of pensioners and people with disabilities throughout Scotland. Today's step is a positive indication of the Executive's priorities—translating social justice into action on the ground. The Executive's ambition is to deliver a transport system that stands comparison with the best in Europe and that will meet Scotland's needs for the 21 st century. While much remains to be done, a good start has been made. The legislative proposals that I am publishing today mark another major step forward in delivering that vision. I commend them to Parliament.

Let me make the position clear. The people and organisations I consulted in producing the bill go way beyond the list that I mentioned at the start of my statement. However, that list contains the critical organisations that will be involved in delivering our partnership. Of course I have met people from other transport industries, which will play a major part in our overall transport strategy. Today is about legislating on the key issues that I outlined. The Westminster Parliament is producing transport legislation on rail, through the devolution settlement—the McLeish settlement—but today I am focusing on our proposals. The Forth road bridge measures will enable us to tackle congestion and to ensure that the resources go where they are needed. I must make it clear that a lot of work has been done by the Forth transport infrastructure partnership, which includes all interested local authorities and the Forth Road Bridge Joint Board. I want to ensure that we can spread resources effectively. I invite members to check what I am saying about investment in local transport and in public transport to deal with the local congestion priorities as seen by the authorities in those areas. I made it absolutely clear in November that the A8000 is not a trunk road, but it is a major priority for people who live in the Forth estuary area. We will deliver a contract with the motorist, on which people will receive annual reports, so that they can see where money is going and what it will be spent on. That is a good deal for motorists in Scotland.

It is a stronger commitment. We are not setting a limit on the ring fencing of new transport revenues for the schemes. I have made it absolutely clear that each local authority will have to consult on the principles of a charging scheme through its local transport strategy. It will have to involve the business community and the wider community in those discussions. It will then have to submit its proposals to me before it can proceed with the development of a scheme.  People will have to be able to see that these are value-for-money schemes, that the revenues will be used effectively and that they will be ring-fenced for public transport and local transport improvements. This is a stronger commitment than the one that we made in the consultation paper, "Tackling Congestion". I am not setting a limit because it will be up to local authorities to make the case and justify their proposals to each local community. I am not setting a limit on the amount of investment that can go into schemes.

I agree absolutely. The provisions that we will make in the legislation will require each local authority to consult before it develops a scheme, to identify the new public transport provision that would be introduced under the scheme, to consult on the details of the scheme, and to make an annual report of how revenue is being raised and spent. We will need value for money. In advance of that, we have the £90 million public transport fund and the £14 million rural transport fund. Investment is going in now. The new rail stations in Fife and the proposals for crossrail in Edinburgh and a new rail station in East Lothian show that public transport improvements are being delivered now. We will see more of them. It would take at least another two years before a paper scheme could be introduced. We could not have an electronic charging scheme until at least 2005. Now is the time to make the public transport improvements—the step change—that everybody in the chamber wants.

Dr Jackson is absolutely right to say that there is no room for complacency on child safety. We must ensure that we meet our targets. I see the safer routes to school scheme and "Tackling Congestion" as integrally linked. Members will recall that last year we launched our publication on safer routes to school in Stirling. I hope that local authorities, the police and parents will be able to work together to deliver on safer routes to school, which must be part of our overall priorities. Traffic calming is a key area where local authorities can act now.

As we made absolutely clear in November, we have allocated an extra £35 million to our substantial roads programme. This is not about us asking the local authorities to do work for us, but about working in partnership. We are paying up front, putting in resources through the public transport fund, the rural transport fund and a variety of other mechanisms. The ScotRail franchise will yield more than £208 million, and we are providing our highest-ever support for Caledonian MacBrayne and HIAL. We have put in the investment. What we need are the complementary measures that will pull everything together—that will let local authorities work with us and with the transport operators. That is the exciting vision in our transport legislation.

Aberdeen Council and Aberdeenshire Council are two of the authorities that are leading the way. They are working together effectively, and their work on bus quality  partnerships is bringing about a real change for drivers and public transport operators in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire. Tackling congestion must be a priority for the Executive. Just-in-time deliveries mean that our lorries cannot afford to get stuck on our roads. We must ensure that we provide high-quality, convenient and hassle-free alternatives for people to get to work. The bill will provide major opportunities for the Scottish Executive, businesses, local authorities and transport authorities to do that in partnership. We must all work together to tackle congestion.

I will address that issue in the new guidance for local authorities that are preparing the next round of local transport strategies. Each local authority has submitted a local transport strategy to us. We have taken on board what they have said and will issue revised guidance to take account of the requirements of the Road Traffic Reduction (National Targets) Act 1998.

Helen Eadie may be interested to learn that we fund a full-time staff member to work on community transport in Scotland. Community transport is vital for many of our rural areas, where we need to provide a much more localised and focused type of transport. It is a key part of our overall integrated transport strategy.

I guarantee that the bill does not give me powers in relation to tolling on trunk roads and motorways—it is clear about that. We have consulted for the past eight months and there has been extensive discussion in Scotland on that issue. Today's announcement is the point that we have reached. Sandra White talks about U-turns. The U-turns that the SNP has made on transport in the past few months are legendary. For example, the SNP  included the fuel tax escalator in its budget for independence. She should look to other people for road tolls.

I expect that we will have the results of that research by the time the legislation is enacted this year.

Absolutely not—I will not be recommending an appropriate level of congestion charging to local authorities. That is for local authorities to resolve, in consultation with local and business communities. They must work out what local transport priorities are and what is right for them. It would be inappropriate for me to tell them what to do.

Does Mr Lochhead think that there was a problem with Westminster because it is in London, or because of the political priorities of the Government at the time?

Will Richard Lochhead give way?

It is my intention to communicate the thrust of what we are discussing in the ministerial group on sustainable Scotland. I am looking at how we might do that through the Executive's website.

Environmental and sustainable policies are at the heart of everything that our Executive stands for. In moving this motion, I want to keep sustainable development at the top of the agenda and to demonstrate the way in which we are making sustainable development a reality. It is right for this Parliament to declare its support not only for what the Scottish Executive is doing, but for making sustainable development an integral part of the democratic process in Scotland. This is not about academic theories; it is about the way in which we make development sustainable in the long run. We want, and I quote from Brundtland, "development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs." For the Scottish Executive, sustainable development is about two things. First, it is about making decisions with all the issues on the table, ensuring that we understand the implications for the three arms of sustainable development—economic growth, social justice and the environment. Secondly, it is about taking a long-term view. We have become used to talking about issues on a short time scale—a political time scale—and to looking no more than five years ahead. We must think about delivering continuous progress over a much longer period. Sustainable development is not new; it came to world prominence at the Rio summit in 1992. In 1994, the UK was among the first countries to address sustainable development. In 1999, the Secretary of State for Scotland's advisory group on sustainable development set out its proposals to the Scottish Parliament. Throughout the world, countries are addressing the challenge of sustainable development in ways that meet their needs, as Brundtland suggested. Issues such as climate change require global action. Making a commitment to sustainable development is no longer an option for us; it is vital to our lives and is a matter of life and death for future generations. It must be central to the work of government at all levels, and it needs to be translated into everyday language and practical methods. We must address the ways in which we can change our behaviour. Last year, the Secretary of State for Scotland's advisory group on sustainable development submitted its final report. It had worked for five  years to bridge the gap between the aspirations of Brundtland and the action that was needed in Scotland. The report sets out 10 key action points, which are addressed not to the Scottish Executive, but to this Parliament. It is an excellent piece of work and I commend it to members. In a sense, it has been my route map for the past eight months. As a top priority, the advisory group said that the Parliament and the Executive should demonstrate committed leadership. It also said that we should have a debate on sustainable development. Today's debate is the start of our discussions in the Scottish Parliament. We must further that debate so that people other than those who are already committed will begin to talk about the issue. The people who have the power to change our lives and deliver sustainable change should be involved in developing the structures and mechanisms that will make the change a long-term one. We will report to Parliament; I intend to keep members informed of progress. A key part of the remit of the ministerial group on sustainable Scotland is to support Cabinet colleagues in attempts to embed sustainable development in all their policies and programmes. One of the group's first conclusions was that some key players from outside the Scottish Executive should be invited to join it. We must ensure that some ownership of the group is by organisations other than the Executive. We also want the group's work to make a difference—that means securing the involvement of people from a range of sectors, in particular from the business, environmental and education sectors. I am delighted to announce the first of our appointments to the group; Kevin Dunion, director of Friends of the Earth Scotland has agreed to be a member. I invited him to join not merely so that he would agree with what we said, but so that he would help us to push on with the implementation of sustainable development objectives. I will inform Parliament of the full membership of the group as it is agreed. Crucially, devolution gives us the opportunity to decide on the implementation of policies that will be best for Scotland. Last week, we invited tenders for work on Scottish indicators of sustainable development. I know that for many people sustainable development is somewhat intangible, but we need to know whether we are making progress and whether the steps that we are taking are steps in the right direction. There are past examples of such indicators being produced in Scotland—that gives us a strong starting point. I have asked experts to look at that work and to compare it with the best in Britain, Europe and the world and to identify the best indicators for Scotland. We must also ensure that  those indicators have wider ownership than merely that of the Parliament; the Executive and I will be running a consultative process from early in the summer to ensure that. Once the indicators have been established, we can start to build objectives and targets into all our programmes. We need to set some priorities now, however. The key priorities in sustainable development should be to tackle the issues of waste, energy and travel. We know that reduction in the waste of resources is right; we know that raising energy efficiency and encouraging renewable energy is right; and we know that there is much more that can be done to make travel more sustainable. Waste, energy and travel bring costs to every business. Those are key concerns for everybody, every day. They are also key issues in the achievement of social justice. We have powers and we must ensure that they are used to maximum effect. I want to ensure that we provide guidance and assistance to a range of bodies in Scotland. That guidance will enable them to relate their everyday work to the Executive's overall goals for sustainable development. The ministerial group has agreed to convene a group that will develop guidance on identifying new approaches to the key issues and on how work on those issues should be related to other initiatives. Delivery by the Executive on the issues of waste, energy and travel will mean that companies will perform better and that public bodies will make better use of our money. We will all benefit not only in the future, but now. The challenge is to improve practice in order to improve our economic prosperity, to deliver on aspirations for social justice and to address long-term environmental quality. Using indicators, and with guidance and initiatives on waste, energy and travel, the Executive will have a powerful and practical approach to sustainable development. We are not alone—through the devolved Administrations in Britain and through the UK Government, there are initiatives to take sustainable development forward. The National Assembly for Wales has begun work on the issue. I have met ministers from the Republic of Ireland and the Northern Ireland Executive—ideas are coming together there, too. In England, the regional development agencies are advancing sustainable development as part of their remit. Even with all that activity, there is still value in our all coming together and considering an overview for the UK as a whole. The UK Government has proposed replacing both the British Government panel on sustainable development and the UK round table on sustainable development with a new sustainable development commission. I have agreed to work  with the UK Government in establishing that commission to ensure that it reflects the interests of people in Scotland and to ensure that its membership, remit and work programme help in examination of sustainable development practice. The commission must also add new ideas and innovation that we in Scotland can also examine. It is vital that we remain plugged in at the UK level while engaging at a European level. We have done much in the past eight months—our Parliament is already beginning to exert a new force for sustainable development. The constitutional steering group recommended that Executive bills should be accompanied by policy memorandums to cover the effects of those bills on sustainable development, among other things. I would argue that that is beginning to concentrate minds—we must think carefully about the impact of every bill. For some issues, such as the national park, that might seem relatively straightforward. For other issues, thinking is much more difficult and at a less advanced stage. None the less, that approach is a useful discipline and I hope that we can develop it. For example, we know that the planning system will have profound effects on our future—it defines much of the way in which we live. One of my initiatives is the announcement of a review of the national planning guidance system, so that sustainable development will be at the heart of our objectives. We are also about to consult on the building control technical standards for conservation of fuel and power. Energy efficiency issues are key to sustainable development and the building control system represents a practical way in which to address those issues. The Executive's report on social justice included targets and milestones and put our commitment to sustainable development well to the fore. Sustainable development has the power to deliver benefits to people who are socially excluded—benefits such as warmer homes, homes that are cheaper to heat, cleaner local environments and better public transport. In the programme for government, we said that we would work with people to develop greater understanding of and involvement in sustainable development. We will use all available channels, such as the civic forum, community councils, local authorities and the Local Agenda 21 process, in order to reach deep into Scottish life and to enable people outwith our Parliament to become involved in the discussions. I commend the SNP's sensible amendment—I have considerable sympathy with its main thrust and tone. In a sense, it is symbolic that I am able to agree with so much of it. However, I want to say a few words to explain the Executive's perspective and why we do not support the amendment.  We have a targeted approach. We have adopted milestones and are embedding the monitoring process. However, I do not think that sustainable development should exist in a vacuum, separated from other policy—it must be embedded in mainstream policy if we are to make real, radical shifts. We have good strategies in place on a range of issues, such as social inclusion, air quality, the national waste strategy, transport and the voluntary sector—and there will be more such strategies. Each of those strategies must deliver sustainable development and must reflect our key concerns about it. The establishment of a super-strategy, above all those other strategies, on sustainable development is not the right way forward, as it would separate us from the radical shift that we must make. At this stage, we should reject that approach. However, I agree with many of the other points that the amendment raises, such as on analysis, obligations, awareness and developing mechanisms and targets. I say that in a constructive way but—I do not think that consensus means that we must agree 100 per cent—I wish to oppose the amendment for the reason that I have outlined. I see the Presiding Officer instructing me to wind up—I shall begin to do so. We are beginning to make sustainable development a reality, both in the Parliament and in the Executive. We have begun to ensure that Victoria Quay meets high environmental standards. The vehicles that we use in the Scottish Executive are dual fuelled, which brings pollution benefits. Every letter that we write contains a declared environmental profile. The Parliament must also make the change; it must take sustainable development on board. It is important that each committee also does that—just as the Executive must address sustainable development, so each committee must make it a theme of the scrutiny process. The advisory group on sustainable development asked both the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive to take a lead. Sustainable development is about striking a balance and taking decisions that the next generation will be able to live with. We must put into practice that laudable objective. A commitment to sustainable development will place us among the more advanced Parliaments of the world. The opportunity is open to us—we must grasp it. I commend the Executive motion to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament places sustainable development at the core of its work and commends the Scottish Executive for its commitment to integrate the principles of sustainable  development into all Government policies for the benefits it brings to the people of Scotland, now and in the future.

The preparatory work for the new section of the M77 is proceeding in line with the timetable for implementing the scheme, which I announced in November.

Our intention is to ensure that the two schemes proceed in parallel. I know that East Renfrewshire Council and South Lanarkshire Council are extremely keen to make sure that the Glasgow southern orbital route proceeds properly and that the M77 proceeds as quickly as possible. The timetable that I announced is a two-year programme from now to construction starting in 2002. There is no need for anybody to be suspicious. We have started the preparatory work, orders have been laid and the scheme is progressing well within the timetable that I specified to Parliament on 4 November.

Yes. Let me make it absolutely clear. It is a £60 million scheme and a complex piece of work; it must be done properly and go through the right procedures. We are making sure that that is being done. I can give every assurance that we are going ahead with the scheme, as I announced in November.

I would not want to do anything that delayed or impeded progress towards the M77 scheme. That is why we are progressing with the approach that I have just outlined.

We have no plans to do so.

I am aware that my response to Mr Stone's first question did not sound very sympathetic or helpful.

Let me try to be more sympathetic and helpful in my second answer. Any planning condition or requirement in planning law must be reasonable, must be enforceable and must relate to the development. That does not mean that it is not a good thing to encourage the sale of local produce on the shelves of supermarkets or local shops. In fact, many supermarkets are open to that idea. However, any planning requirement must be enforceable, and that would mean that the proportion of local produce displayed on supermarket shelves would have to be monitored by local planning authorities. There would be major practical implications. Although I am ruling out the option that Mr Stone suggests, I certainly do not rule out other schemes to encourage supermarkets or small shops to take advantage of local produce. I hope that we can encourage the sale of local produce, but I do not think that the planning mechanism that he suggests is the best way to deliver that.

I do not want to stray too much into Ross Finnie's territory, and I know that organic farming is more in his patch than in mine. However, I think that there is an opportunity to engage in discussions with shopkeepers and with major supermarket chains to identify local produce that could be sold in their stores. I have no doubt that that would be popular, whether with small cheese makers or with small-scale organic farmers.

The policy of the Scottish Environment Protection Agency with regard to the disposal of short-lived radioactive waste in the NHS is to ensure that the material is disposed of in accordance with the terms of the authorisations granted under the Radioactive Substances Act 1993.

I can give the member the commitment that I will take the matter up with SEPA urgently. I will also tell SEPA that I am currently considering the Substances of Low Activity Exemption Order 1992, which is the detailed guide to the disposal of those types of waste. I will be happy to take that matter up and pursue it shortly.

My officials were advised on 24 January that the Government office for the north-west has submitted a steering group report to the north-west regional assembly for consideration.

I am well aware of the interest in ensuring that the road is brought up to the best possible standards. It is to that end that, when I last met Gus Macdonald, I raised the issue of that stretch of road with him, and said that we were very keen that it should be upgraded. If the north-west regional assembly confirms that the  recommendations are acceptable, I will write again and be in touch with Gus Macdonald to add our support to those recommendations.

We advertised in early January for consultants to undertake the preliminary stage of the study, and intend to make an appointment by the end of February.

I think that if he were to travel between Edinburgh and Glasgow, Mr Paterson would find that he would travel on the same stretch of road. The multi-modal study will enable us to take account of the views of the local authorities and the business community, and to examine the opportunities for improving access between Lanarkshire and the central belt of Glasgow and Edinburgh. It will also enable us to manage our road traffic in the future and to give people the high-quality public transport options that they need. We will ensure that the freight industry and the public transport operators can also contribute to that study.

I am happy to reassure Karen Whitefield that we will take forward those multi-modals. I visited Freightliner before Christmas, and we talked about the major infrastructure issues in the area. I am happy to take up the request to meet people from Lanarkshire in the future.

The Scottish Executive is responsible for safety on trunk roads. We review and monitor the routes constantly to identify and implement the appropriate accident investigation and prevention measures and minor improvement schemes. Road safety measures on local roads in the Highlands are the responsibility of Highland Council.

Mr Stone's point about the need to carry out research is absolutely correct. I know that Highland Council is reviewing its local roads and considering the measures that might be taken on them. Through our route accident reduction plans, we monitor regularly the state of the roads and identify improvements, which might be minor but which can make changes for the better in regard to both speed and safety. I also highlight the issue of tourists using our roads, in particular during the summer. We know that accident rates and hospital admissions in the Highlands are higher at that time of the year. We addressed that problem last summer by launching multilingual leaflets to ensure that people were aware of the safety implications of driving on single-carriageway roads, and to remind them to keep to the left.

Yes. We will consider any measures that help us to promote driver safety and safety on our roads. The measures mentioned by Rhoda Grant are precisely the sort of things that need to be done in addition to road accident reduction measures. It is important that we tackle both driver safety and the condition of our roads.

It is up to local authorities to identify appropriate levels of expenditure on all services. The Executive remains fully committed to ensuring that our expenditure on the trunk roads for which we are responsible leads to the highest possible standards on roads throughout Scotland, in particular in the Highlands.

No. The previous Government's decision not to privatise Caledonian MacBrayne was taken in 1994. It predated the transfer of transport responsibilities to the Scottish Office development department, of which Mr Mills was then head.

The decision to sell off the CalMac vessel to Sea Containers was taken by the then Secretary of State for Scotland, Michael Forsyth. Uniquely, a direction was sent to CalMac to force it to sell the vessel. It is not normal practice to give out information on any advice that officials give to ministers, because any such disclosure would harm the long-term future of the candour of the advice that they would feel able to give to the Government of the day.

That question has given a lot of information to all members of this chamber, and I am deeply grateful to Lord James. This Government's commitment is to retain CalMac's lifeline services. We have provided the highest ever levels of investment in CalMac. Two new vessels have been commissioned and will be built in Scottish yards. That is a record of which this Executive and this Parliament should be proud.

I absolutely recognise the commitment in the Highlands and Islands and off the west coast of Scotland to ensuring that CalMac provides the best possible services. We have absolutely no intention of privatising CalMac. However, we have to comply with European state aid rules and I have asked my officials to examine the matter urgently. Other European countries have had to investigate the issue of ferries and state aid and we will do that as soon as possible to ensure that we retain our lifeline services and that CalMac operates to the highest possible standards.

I will announce today the results of the strategic review of water charges for the period April 2000 to March 2002. Those are the first major strategic decisions on the water industry by the new Scottish Executive, in a new regulatory framework, and they will have a crucial impact on the success with which the industry meets a challenging future. Last September, I made a statement to this Parliament announcing the appointment of the water industry commissioner and setting out our approach to regulation of the water industry. At that time, I said that the Scottish water industry faces twin challenges: to meet the aspirations of the Scottish people in terms of environmental standards and drinking water quality and to do so at minimum cost to the customer. The strategic charging review is a vital step in meeting those challenges. I am today setting out the results of the first strategic stage in the charge-setting process, in which ministers take decisions on the overall revenue requirements of the industry to meet their investment needs, taking account of potential efficiency improvements and the external financing limits already announced. This strategic review covers a number of years—in this initial transitional round only two—to give the authorities a sounder framework for medium-term planning. For the strategic review, the authorities' revenue requirements are driven by their investment needs. Those are substantial for several reasons. The infrastructure on which we rely was put in place in the Victorian era and decades of under-investment mean that much of it needs to be replaced soon. The commissioner estimates that the cumulative underspend is close to £2.5 billion. We must ensure that the security of supply is maintained and improved. Mains bursts can cut off water supplies to thousands of people, as the incident earlier this week in Largs has shown. In the past few years, too many people in Scotland have found themselves in that worrying position. The longer that we put off this investment, the more of those types of incident we will see. European legislation rightly pushes us towards higher standards. We must improve our record on water quality and safety. The urban waste water treatment directive will require proper sewage treatment for all our towns and cities and the  drinking water directive sets tough new standards for lead and some other impurities such as trihalomethanes. Customer demands for better-quality water, greater care for the environment and improved service quality are growing. Despite the good results for this year, announced yesterday, we still need to invest more to clean up our beaches. As well as being unpleasant, dirty beaches have an economic impact that undermines tourism. Our programme for government therefore includes three separate commitments on water: cleaner bathing water, an investment in drinking water quality and proper waste treatment. The full range of challenges are set out in the water quality and standards paper that I published on 1 November. It clearly explains what ministers expect the water authorities to achieve on drinking water quality and environmental improvement. The quality and standards paper was the starting point for the water industry commissioner's review. As I said back in September, one of the commissioner's key responsibilities is professional scrutiny of water authority finances. Alan Sutherland has, in six short weeks, carried out an extremely rigorous review, and I am very grateful to him. He has transformed the terms of the debate by giving economic support and the customer regulator's support to the argument that greater investment is in the customer's interest. In his advice, he sets out the case for a major increase in investment in the water industry for the interests of the customer, which reflects his primary duty. In particular, he argues that a significant acceleration in investment is required to deliver what the quality and standards paper requires to renew and improve the Victorian infrastructure. I accept the commissioner's basic argument. Recent events in other industries have highlighted the importance of investment in basic infrastructure. I have decided to go most, although not all, of the way towards Mr Sutherland's recommendations, mostly because Scotland's water industry must be put on the road to sustainability, maintaining its infrastructure and improving quality. I have not accepted the recommendations in full, first, because some of the issues that Mr Sutherland raises need more public debate, especially in this Parliament; secondly, because our state of knowledge about the water industry's underground assets is incomplete. Further work is required to provide the necessary speed of replacement over the medium term. The commissioner's initiative on asset management planning, which I welcome, will help to fill that gap  in our knowledge. The overall revenue increases that I have decided on for the Scottish water authorities in each of the next two years are as follows: 15 per cent and then 12 per cent for the East of Scotland Water Authority; 15 and 12 per cent for the West of Scotland Water Authority; and 35 and 12 per cent for the North of Scotland Water Authority. The larger increase for the north is based on a fundamental reassessment by the authority of the investment that it needs to meet its statutory obligations, which reflect the inevitably higher cost of providing water services in remote and sparsely populated areas. As has already been announced, the Scottish Executive has increased NoSWA's external finance by 50 per cent over the two years to ease the impact on customers. The Executive's measures will finance a bigger investment programme for each authority. Among the benefits are spending of around £200 million on water treatment works, which will allow implementation of the cryptosporidium direction that I have just issued, which will minimise the risk of cryptosporidiosis outbreaks resulting from poor drinking water. My decisions take the form of charges caps, but, given the urgent investment needs of the authorities, I expect that their charges schemes will be in line with the figures that I have announced today. Increases on that scale are obviously unwelcome to customers, and I can assure members that I would not endorse them if I did not believe that they were absolutely necessary. It should be recognised that, although the increases are significant in percentage terms, they represent only an extra 60p per week next year for the average customer. I am particularly concerned about the impact of charges on low-income households. The current arrangements linking charges to council tax bands already provide substantial assistance to many of the less well-off. Band A households, which include a large proportion of low-income households, pay only two thirds of the average charge. Our legislation also ensures that people are never cut off. However, I have asked my officials to consider whether we can improve on the protection already provided by the current charging arrangements. The charge increases make it even more important for the water authorities to give their customers value for money. It is the authorities' response to that challenge that is crucial for the long-term health of the industry, and I am committed to ensuring that they meet it. I am therefore, today, endorsing two further initiatives put forward by the commissioner. The first will ensure that we have the information to  chart each authority's performance over time and to compare it with the other Scottish authorities and with the best in the UK. Benchmarking means learning from best practice elsewhere. The second initiative will introduce common customer service standards throughout Scotland. In addition, we will introduce arrangements to link the pay of chief executives to the overall performance of their authorities. The Scottish Executive will demand the highest standards of customer service and efficiency from our public water industry. There are other factors that will increasingly put pressure on the Scottish water authorities to improve efficiency and customer service. In particular, the coming into effect, in March, of provisions in the Competition Act 1998 will see growing competition in Scotland for the provision of water services. The key issue that we face is how best to achieve benefits for customers through greater choice and value for money, while continuing to achieve our public health, environmental and social objectives. That may mean legislation, and I will publish a consultation paper on this in the spring. Another key principle of the new regulatory regime is transparency. I can confirm that, today, the commissioner is making public both his advice and my response to it. I hope that that will inform debate on this crucial issue. Now that the overall decisions have been taken, the next step is for each water authority to prepare its annual charges scheme and submit it to the water industry commissioner for approval. If agreement cannot be reached, the scheme will be referred to ministers for decisions. It is at that stage that the charges faced by individual customers are determined. I expect that information to be available at the end of February. Today I am announcing substantial increases in water charges to meet the substantial challenges that the industry faces. There can be no compromise on drinking water quality and environmental standards. However, that means developing broad public support for investing in our future and consulting on where to strike the final balance between service quality and price. I am confident that the decisions that I have announced today promote the interests of customers by meeting the investment needs of the industry and enhancing its efficiency. That will mean a properly funded, successful and, above all, public water industry in Scotland, providing Scottish customers with the high-quality service that they deserve. Ensuring that our unique Scottish water industry compares with the best is a major challenge for the new Scottish  Administration and the Scottish Parliament. I look forward to working with members in meeting that challenge.

I refute the suggestion that the substantial increases in charges have anything to do with the different procurement procedures in the water industry. We do not have an ideological objection to involving private investment where that would lead to value for money and efficiency. Let me give the example of the Almond valley Seafield and Esk project. If we had pursued it under the original Lothian region proposals, it would have cost £170 million; the PFI proposal that East of Scotland Water is pursuing cost £110 million. It is possible to get investment in the water industry using both traditional procurement processes and PFI. It must be up to the water authorities to identify the most cost-effective way of doing that. That is why PFI has a place in the water industry—where the authorities see it as appropriate. It has a particularly important role in meeting the tight time scales faced by the water industry, following European directives. There is no shying away from those directives: we have to meet our obligations and to do so efficiently, with the best possible value for money. I refute the allegation that the increases are the result of lack of investment by Labour-controlled local authorities. During the 18 years of Tory  Government, local authorities did not have enough money to meet all the demands made on them for education, transport and a range of local services. The water industry was one area in which it was most difficult to identify sufficient investment. It is not fair to lay the blame at the door of Labour-controlled local authorities. They have done their best to ensure that investment is appropriate. Over the past two years we have ensured, through the use of external finance limits, that extra resources were made available to enable the water authorities to meet their investment programmes.

Ensuring that we get the correct levels of investment is a key issue. The charges that have been announced today are the result of having to deal with a massive backlog in investment. In the privatised water industry in England and Wales, that backlog started to be tackled in the mid-1980s. We in Scotland have to catch up to meet our international obligations. It is important that we address the implications of the Competition Act 1998 through this Parliament. That is why I indicated in my statement that I would return with a consultation paper that we could consider collectively over the next few months. It is why I have endorsed the commissioner's recommendation that we continue our review of the asset management process and identify the rate at which future investment is required to tackle the backlog. It is why we must promote the highest standards. The commissioner's suggestion of a high standards initiative is absolutely relevant in the context of the Competition Act 1998. It will ensure that the possibility that Murray Tosh has raised—of large industrial firms being cherry-picked by  major companies from elsewhere—does not become a reality. That is why the water industry has to face the challenge of becoming more efficient and providing the highest possible levels of customer care, and why the two additional initiatives that I am endorsing today are of such significance for the industry. We have spent three years getting together the components of the water industry that were in place before reorganisation of local government. The next challenge is to gear up the industry for increased investment and higher standards of customer delivery.

One of the key aspects of the increase in the North of Scotland Water Authority area is the extent to which the water authority has been involved in widespread consultation with users to ensure that people are aware of both the prospect of substantial investment and the possible impact of that investment. There has been extensive discussion in the north of Scotland. I know that the dispersed nature of the population means that this will cost more in the north. That is why I have ensured that the information is available widely. We can read the water industry commissioner's statement on that point. As the Minister for Transport and the Environment, I will examine the possibilities of managing the process in terms of the impact that it will have on the lowest band of council tax payers and will try to mitigate the impact on them. I must stress that, although the potential rise is high, the rise in practice will not be as high as that.

I can say that the decisions that I have announced today do not have any impact on the size of the increases that Elaine Thomson is talking about. Trade effluent charges are a separate matter. It has been clear for some time that there are major challenges in dealing with the issue of trade effluent. I look forward to the publication of the Cordah report, which we expect to receive shortly. That will let us move swiftly to address the issue with the fish processors and with NoSWA.

I do not see the need for an inquiry. Fergus Ewing might have noticed that NoSWA published a review of its corporate planning process. I ask him to examine that carefully, in addition to the work that has been done in addressing the future charge levels for the NoSWA. I remind Fergus Ewing that NoSWA meets widely varied needs from Dundee and Aberdeen to Orkney, Shetland and the Highlands. The major European requirements present a challenging prospect. I refer him to the corporate planning document that identifies the process that NoSWA has gone through in improving its approach to procurement and management of the services, and encourage him to take forward the debate on the way forward for the water authority.

That is correct. It would not be acceptable for people in the Highlands and Islands to have lower water quality, less safe water and a less secure water supply than people in the rest of the country. When I was in Inverurie in the summer, I witnessed the collapse of the water mains there. I saw the problems that are caused when sewage goes straight into rivers. We need investment that is swift and achieves value for money. Customers must see that the process is being managed effectively. Those are the objectives that we have for the industry in the north of Scotland.

It is important to establish a language with which to examine what is happening in the water industry, one that identifies the key challenges and benefits of that investment. The approach taken by Mr Rumbles is not the best way forward. It is important for each authority to explain, in value-for-money terms, what customers will receive in practice, exactly what level of investment is to be delivered and what that will mean for water quality and standards. Each water authority must take that approach. I know that the water authorities are considering that question carefully, so that their customers will understand the benefits of the rises.

Absolutely—that is in our interests. The Executive is committed to ensuring that the water industry is managed efficiently and  effectively by the public control mechanisms that we have identified, although that does not rule out private sector investment, where it would be appropriate and where it would meet value-for-money objectives. However, Mr McAllion was right to say that the increases that we are recommending today will not lead to the situation where Scottish water consumers pay the levels set by the privatised water industry in England and Wales. In order to give a sense of the impact of those increases in real terms, I reiterate that the average water consumer's charges will rise by in the region of 60p a week—40p for people in community charge band A. The percentages may seem high, but the amount a week for the next year, in terms of pence, is comparatively low.

In terms of what we mean by low-income households, we must consider both community charge bands and the issue that people may be on a low income, yet live in a house that does not have a low community charge band. From talking to the water authorities, I am aware that they are also conscious of—and most concerned about—those issues. I hope to carry out the review swiftly, so that the answers are available in time for the next annual water authority charge round. Last year, I considered the impact of future price rises on the voluntary sector, which must be taken seriously. By announcing a two-year scheme for water charges, people can look to the future. However, we must still identify the possible impacts and ensure that we seek to mitigate those impacts where there are opportunities to do so.

That is precisely why we need to consider the situation and determine what possible measures are available. I agree with Cathy Jamieson absolutely that, although to some people 40p seems like a small amount of money per week, to other people that is a significant amount. We need to take that seriously.

On the issue of the investment that was possible following the write-off of debts, the Scottish water authorities gained a higher proportionate write-off than those in England and Wales. On the bond issue, I am happy to put my answer in writing to Mr Salmond afterwards, if he wants me to do that.

The purpose of the quality and standards paper is to identify the levels of service that are required throughout Scotland, in the light of the demands of a number of European directives. It is important that we satisfy those directives in the most cost-effective way possible. The purpose of the quality and standards paper is to identify that. I give Des McNulty an assurance that our key objective is to meet those requirements of health and environmental standards at the best cost.

In December 1999, West of Scotland Water sent more than 15,000 letters to its business customers and representative groups to consult them on proposed changes to the way in which charges are calculated.

This is a wonderful opportunity to clear up some misunderstandings. Mr Lyon's remarks make a great headline, but the reality is that the business community—in particular smaller businesses—requested a fairer assessment of how its water charges are calculated. Extensive consultation took place before the 15,000 letters were sent out by West of Scotland Water. The proposed changes were also approved by the former Water and Sewerage Customers Council as a better way of assessing the charges. The charges are not new, as the headlines would suggest, but are a reassessment of the existing charges to make them fairer, in particular for some of those businesses that had complained to West of Scotland Water. It is hoped that the previous consultation exercise and the information that went out before Christmas will make the situation much clearer.

In the first instance, such disputes would have to be taken up with West of  Scotland Water. I would hope that an amicable agreement could be reached once the principles of the charging approach had been discussed in detail and understood. West of Scotland Water's view is that it will not cost any of those businesses any resources to calculate the new figures. The process that has been adopted should not require any extra resources.

The UK Transport Bill makes provision for the devolution of certain executive functions relating to the operation of railways in Scotland. That is in line with the announcement made by Henry McLeish on 31 March 1998. The Scottish Executive is in regular and close contact with the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions on those matters.

Once again, we will have to agree to disagree on that matter. I have had some fruitful discussions with the British transport police, examining their strategic priorities for Scotland, tackling the problems of safety on the railways and examining how that fits in with our local community safety strategy. The Transport Bill gives us substantial powers in Scotland to get the railways that we want and need for the future. That is the challenge that we face and we are in regular contact with our colleagues in the rest of the UK to ensure that such matters are delivered throughout the UK.

The shadow strategic rail authority has already begun the franchise replacement process. The issues that it is highlighting are relevant. Commitment to higher investment and better service, safety and value for money—those are the things that Scottish passengers want from our rail service. Throughout the franchise replacement process, those are the things that will be at the forefront of my mind.

We have just heard a fairly fundamental misconception. The fact that the ScotRail franchise costs us less money every year is a result of the original franchise agreement. The investment is coming into Scottish railways. It is a good news story, not the bad news story that Mr Tosh suggests. There are many issues that we need to consider in terms of the vision for the future of railways in Scotland: the Stirling-Alloa-Dunfermline line; the Borders railway issue; improving the number of services on our lines rather than simply adding more lines; and opening new stations. We want to ensure that we deliver benefits for every rail passenger in Scotland.

I thank Duncan McNeil for giving members an opportunity to discuss this important issue. Some of the detailed points raised by members in the debate are precisely those to which I wish to respond. We need more clarity on the role that we can all play. I will kick off by saying that Duncan McNeil's comments on the economic achievements of Inverclyde—the success that has been generated locally in terms of inward investment, such as the call centre that is being established—are well noted. A lot of work has been done and the Executive fully recognises the importance of transport infrastructure and investment in encouraging new businesses to come to Inverclyde and existing businesses to develop and grow. His points on housing, education and tourism are also extremely relevant, as flooding has a direct impact on a whole range of interests in our communities. We must reflect on Hugh Henry's point about the devastation that flooding can cause individuals by destroying houses, for example. The Executive takes flood prevention and the consequences of flooding extremely seriously. Before Christmas, Greenock, Port Glasgow and Gourock experienced exceptionally heavy and sustained flooding. Transport was disrupted and property both threatened with floods and flooded. However, it is not the first time that floods have occurred. Duncan McNeil made a critical point at the start of the debate. We need to consider how to tackle flooding in future. That will involve identifying those areas that are at risk from flooding—we must take a long-term view but also act now. We know that people do not regard flooding as a top priority until it happens. Part of the trick will be to ensure that we consider prevention rather than tackle the problem after it has occurred. The comments made on that point by Duncan McNeil, Annabel Goldie, Colin Campbell and Hugh Henry were all correct.  It is important that, as Minister for Transport and the Environment, I advise members that I heard about the flooding in Inverclyde on the same day as we launched the Executive's climate change study reports. Unless we begin to tackle climate change, the future will hold more severe flooding and heavier and more sustained rainfall. We take the view that we must start the work on this long-term issue now, although much has been done in the past few years. The Executive must play its part as well. Duncan McNeil highlighted extremely effectively the significance and importance to Greenock and Port Glasgow of the A8. The problems are partly caused by the fact that the A8 is a low-lying route and tends to bear the brunt of major flooding. Unfortunately, the flooding this year was more severe than usual. I recognise the importance of the fact that, when the A8 is impassable, there is no suitable method of traffic diversion into the area. I hope that members will be pleased to hear that immediate action was taken to minimise the likelihood of the road flooding again. Known trouble spots have been checked and pipes and culverts have been cleaned to ensure that they operate at maximum efficiency. However, initial investigations by Inverclyde Council have identified that, in addition to the possible problems caused by watercourses and culverts, there may also be problems with the sewerage system, to which Duncan McNeil alluded. That is why the work of West of Scotland Water in continuing to support and assist the investigations, as well as in carrying out works to prevent its sewers flooding, is incredibly important. The surface water drainage system in parts of the area is old and records are not always available. The information made available by the investigations will be critical in enabling us to move forward. Several members mentioned a multi-agency approach. I absolutely agree that such an approach represents the effective way in which to tackle the risks to property and infrastructure. Progress has already been made in Inverclyde. Annabel Goldie referred to a meeting held in December. It has been agreed that the council should appoint consultants to examine the worst-affected areas, to report their findings and to make recommendations for remedial action, which will be acted on by the agencies involved. I assure members that the meeting, whose participants included the Scottish Executive, Inverclyde Council, Strathclyde police and West of Scotland Water, is not the end point; it is the point from where we will move forward. We have a multi-agency approach and the challenge is to ensure that we take that approach forward effectively.  I hope that the consultants will make their recommendations within a couple of months. The timetable for implementing the flood prevention scheme—or any measures that arise from it—will depend partly on its complexity and partly on the extent to which agencies can programme in the work. The Executive will of course be responsible for any measures required to improve the A8, subject to the availability of funding. The Executive is also providing grant support for eligible, confirmed flood prevention schemes. What Hugh Henry said about that was very relevant. There has been investment and Renfrewshire Council has identified flood prevention schemes, under which councils are eligible for up to 50 per cent of funding. The point is to get the process moving, to get the schemes under way and to get the Executive to consider them. Councils have an important role to play in implementing legislation to tackle flood prevention. Although we can debate this matter in Parliament and discuss the issues once floods have occurred, the key thing is advance planning, with local authorities working out the local priorities. They can identify the areas—which they know best—that require attention and then approach the Executive with flood prevention schemes. The Flood Prevention and Land Drainage (Scotland) Act 1997 translated many of the permissive powers that councils had into duties. The act requires local authorities to assess watercourses in their areas and to find out whether they are liable to flood non-agricultural land. It requires councils to maintain those watercourses, ensuring that the likelihood of flooding is reduced, and to prepare and publish reports at intervals of not more than two years, identifying the measures that they have taken and those that they think important to prevent or lessen the impact of flooding. The reports should specify all occurrences of flooding of non-agricultural land. That information is being collected; we need it to be translated into flood protection schemes. To date, Inverclyde Council has proposed no schemes and has not asked the Scottish Executive—or its predecessor, the Scottish Office—for additional funding. However, I know that the council is addressing flooding concerns and that it is proposing to submit two flood prevention schemes to the Executive for confirmation in the next 12 to 15 months. Hugh Henry's points on the planning process were relevant. Once schemes have been submitted to the Executive, they need to go through the planning process. It is important that the Executive processes inquiries as swiftly as possible, and it is up to the council to attempt to  secure agreement locally, because the schemes are critical in tackling the long-term problems of flooding. Work is proceeding to tackle the problems of flooding, but we also need to take a long-term view. The Executive has set out guidance in its national planning policy guideline No 7, on planning and flooding. That guidance enables local authorities to begin to address the issue. Annabel Goldie's anecdote about playing hockey in appalling weather conditions—some time ago—is relevant, as many playing fields and other areas where there is currently no construction might be prone to floods. It is important that, any time a new development is identified and proposed for a site, the local authority examines the potential risk and works with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency.  We should tackle the long-term problems with existing developments—we will tackle all the problems that Duncan McNeil mentioned in his speech—and look to the future. At a local level, that means planning and flood prevention schemes. At a big-picture level, it is a matter of how we tackle issues that may seem intangible, such as climate change. I thank all the members who took part in this debate, which I think has been constructive. I hope that they can now make progress with related issues concerning constituents or local councils.  Meeting closed at 17:33.

Everyone has a right to expect that the quality of the air that we breathe will not be detrimental to our health and our quality of life. However, poor air quality can be one of the triggers for asthma attacks among the 3 million asthma sufferers in the UK. Only yesterday, my colleague Susan Deacon met organisations to talk about the impact of asthma. In Scotland alone, it is estimated that 10 to 15 per cent of children and 5 to 10 per cent of adults suffer from asthma. Pollution can exacerbate the condition of those who are already ill and it contributes to the hospitalisation and early death of thousands of people every year. Air pollution hits hardest the most vulnerable in our society, in particular the old and young. It tends to be worse in our heavily congested inner-city areas, where it exacerbates the poorer quality of life and higher social deprivation. However, even for healthy adults, air pollution has an effect on the overall quality of life. In addition, its effects are more obviously seen by all of us through damage to our urban environment, buildings and countryside. I am pleased, therefore, to announce the publication today of "The Air Quality Strategy for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland". Copies are available for those who are interested. The national air quality strategy was first published in March 1997. It fulfilled the requirement, under the Environment Act 1995, for a national strategy setting out policies for the management of ambient air quality. In July 1997, the new UK Government endorsed the strategy and implemented it so that local authorities could begin the process of local air quality management. The strategy gave local authorities a new responsibility to review and assess air quality in their area and to take action when air quality objectives were unlikely to be met. However, the Government felt that more could be done to improve air quality, and an immediate review of the strategy was announced, to look at the prospects of delivering cleaner air more quickly. Tackling air pollution is one of my top  environmental priorities, which is why, as soon as I came into office, I endorsed the revision of the air quality strategy. Throughout the process, officials in Scotland have worked closely in partnership with the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions, the National Assembly for Wales and the Northern Ireland Department of the Environment. Today, with the publication of the comprehensive new air quality strategy, I am delivering the results of that partnership. It will deliver real air quality benefits and a significant reduction in pollutants. The new air quality strategy sets out the strategic framework within which air quality policies will be taken forward in the short to medium term. The strategy sets out air quality standards, with objectives to be met for eight of the major air pollutants. The original attainment date for all pollutants was the end of 2005. The revised strategy sets tougher objectives for benzene, 1,3-butadiene and carbon monoxide, bringing forward the attainment dates for those objectives to 2003, and for nitrogen dioxide reduction to 2004. The most positive outcome is for lead. Current policies enable the date for achieving that objective to be moved forward from 2005 to 2004, with a much tighter objective, halving the present one, to be set for 2008. The hourly and daily objectives for sulphur dioxide have also been brought forward to 2004, although the 15-minute objective remains unchanged. The ozone objective remains unchanged, pending the final form of the proposed national emission ceilings directive and negotiations on the United Nations environment committee multi-pollutant protocol. There is more work to be done there. The objective for particles has been replaced for the time being with the less stringent European Community limit values. The shift of the objective to the EC limit values drew the most comment during public consultation on our plans to review and revise the strategy. We have carefully deliberated on the responses received to the proposal to make that change. The original strategy objective for particles was set on the basis of the best available knowledge at that time. We now know from the extensive work carried out by the airborne particles expert group that the objective is simply not achievable, at least in the short term. That is due in part to the contribution that pollution from mainland Europe makes to particle levels in this country. We are anxious to ensure that the strategy objectives are seen to be challenging and achievable. If they are to be regarded as serious policy aims, it is particularly important that they are  seen as realistic in terms of being achievable. With that in mind, it was decided that action should be concentrated in the short term on achieving the EC limit values by 2004, as that is the only internationally recognised alternative target. That target was set following recommendations made by the World Health Organisation. However, it is important to emphasise that the EC limit values should be seen as a staging post and not the final outcome; it gives us a chance to gear up on particles. In view of the importance of the health effects of particles, I am anxious to set my sights beyond the immediate need to comply with the EC limit values. Work is already under way UK-wide to consider further the health effects of particles, the costs and benefits of reducing particles and the effects of recent policy developments on particle levels. On completion of the review of local air quality management by local authorities and assessments by June this year, we will have access to a comprehensive and complete record of air quality throughout Scotland. That will be hugely beneficial and will allow us to progress further. While we generally enjoy good air quality in Scotland, it is quite possible that the outcome of the review will demonstrate that our urban areas share many of the air quality characteristics of towns and cities throughout the UK—dominated by pollution from transport emissions. However, given Scotland's unique geography, I have asked my officials to consider the data contained in the reports so that I can decide whether there might be scope to introduce a more stringent objective for particles, to ensure that the people of Scotland continue to enjoy cleaner air. I would hope to be in a position to announce my decision on that by the end of the year. Air pollution is trans-boundary by nature—it does not respect boundaries or borders. For that reason, many of the problems associated with poor air quality need to be tackled at international and European levels. Many of the objectives set in the strategy will help to ensure that Scotland meets its obligations under the EC air framework directive. However, the strategy recognises that international and national measures may not always be specific enough to tackle localised pollution. That is why local authorities have been given responsibility for local air quality management. They are best placed to identify air pollution hot spots and to take action that will be effective in tackling the problem. The outcome of the review that Scottish authorities are undertaking will, for the first time, allow us to ascertain whether there are any air quality characteristics that are particular to Scotland. Should any specific Scottish issues be  identified, I will consider whether they need to be addressed through separate Scottish policy measures, or by the possible establishment of an air quality strategy for Scotland. The process that led to the publication of the new strategy today is an example of open government. Monitoring progress towards the objectives set in the strategy will be equally open. The regulations bringing into force the new objectives set out in the strategy will be laid before Parliament within the next few days and will be subject to an affirmative resolution. An important challenge will to be to raise public awareness of air quality issues, so that they are taken into account at all levels of decision making. I intend the new strategy to provide a sound framework against which decisions can be taken. We all have a part to play in ensuring that things work together—from town planners deciding on the site for a new superstore and transport planners making decisions on traffic management, to each of us as individuals making our daily transport choices. The publication of the air quality strategy today brings cleaner air a step nearer to everyone across Scotland. The strategy is an important part of our drive to protect public health and our environment and to secure lasting improvements to air quality.

I am nervous that consensus might be breaking out, but Kenny MacAskill's points are important in relation to the whole issue of particulates. The information on last year's figures will be available in April and, at that point, we will be in a better position to examine the number of days on which those limits have been breached. What is critical is that we are not at the end point of where we want to be on particulates. There are other  problems with particulates. For example, PM 10 is nasty and causes major health problems if it gets into people's lungs, and PM 2.5 , which is even smaller, causes us even more damage. Re-examining particulate levels at the end of this year will give us an opportunity to consider in much more detail the issues raised by Mr MacAskill and to consider the very small particulates, which are invisible but have a genuine impact on health. In the meantime, we will go full steam ahead with our programme to ensure the implementation of particulate traps for lorries. A Government scheme encourages the implementation of such traps through vehicle excise duty reductions. I accept Mr MacAskill's point: we are not at the end point and we need to do more surveying, but much can be done over the next year before we review particulates again. I also accept his point about specific Scottish issues on which we could make progress on particulates. I want to take the next year to look at that in much more depth.

I will take the consensual route yet further by saying that Murray Tosh's comments on vehicle emissions are highly appropriate, in the sense that one of the ways in which we can  improve our air quality is to improve the standards that are applied to new vehicles. There is an EU agreement on that, which will bring about real improvements in air quality. However, we cannot be complacent. A number of initiatives are taking place across government—the power-shift initiative, in which we invest resources, is a good example. I have visited one or two demonstration projects to see the cars and vans that are out and about. The initiative encourages private companies to change over to more innovative fuels such as LPG, and to use low-sulphur and electric vehicles. The Scottish Executive uses a number of such vehicles for its own transport and is encouraging their wider use. We need to make people aware that such choices are becoming available. A good way to do that is by using the Government's advertising capability and power to raise awareness. We need the facilities to enable us to fill up those vehicles with innovative fuels; that key issue is under consideration by the Executive and the UK Government. Catalytic converters and the reduction and elimination of lead in petrol are good examples of how vehicle technology has improved. It is critical to look for the areas in which most impact can be made, as fast as possible. This air quality strategy allows us to monitor that.

Tavish Scott referred to the figures that Friends of the Earth discussed this week. I will comment in particular on the figures relating to ozone. The ozone problem will not be solved overnight. It is not just a UK problem; much of it is imported. That is why we need international agreement on tight environmental standards. The UK is playing a full part in delivering those standards. The agreement on sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxide, volatile organic compounds and ammonia that was reached by the United Nations environment committee in the past year will be critical to reducing the amount of ozone. We had high levels of ozone last year because  we had an excellent summer in Scotland. Photochemical reactions created an ozone problem. We know that that causes serious problems for health. We cannot be complacent about ozone, but we must tackle the problem through international measures. Dealing with road traffic has to be part of our strategy for air quality. Murray Tosh's point about improving vehicle emissions is also critical. I hope to speak to Parliament soon about improving transport choices, in the context of the integrated transport bill. Local authorities will be important in identifying hot spots—where the worst areas for air quality are—and must develop traffic management solutions that can be put in place locally. Local authorities must give a message to people to make better transport choices—they must encourage people to walk or to cycle, which are healthy options, and ensure that the air is clean for them to do that. They must generally promote sustainable forms of transport. Emissions from cars and lorries are an important, but not the only, part of the picture, and the ozone figures, too, must be considered.

I talked about that with the transport commissioner when I was in Europe a couple of months ago. In the past few weeks, there have been experiments in Italy to find out what would happen if people got on their bikes, walked or used buses. We might want to consider that idea in the future. There is a range of things that we could do to implement European directives. The air quality directive is critical. We need to play a full part in Europe. We must examine the best practice of other countries, pick up on innovative ideas and ensure that we have a dialogue so that we take a collective responsibility for the impact of emissions, whether they come from this country or elsewhere. I am keen to consider new ideas and best practice, which can be promoted in the Scottish Parliament.

Monitoring through the air quality management process enables local authorities to pick up on the key local problems. That is a critical way in which to bring transparency to the process. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency also has an important role to play, as many non-traffic-related pollutants come from industrial processes. Part of the strength of the air quality strategy is that it must link into monitoring pollutants produced by different businesses, to ensure that the best environmental techniques are available to those businesses and that they are capable of meeting the targets that are set in the strategy. Therefore, it is important to focus on the full range of pollutants that exist and to consider the different mechanisms for tackling them. Local authorities have a key role to play in identifying hot spots. We must ensure that there are links between SEPA and local authorities, on their planning and monitoring powers, that there is joined-up thinking by local authorities, SEPA and the Scottish Executive and that there are also links into local businesses.

That was an extremely creative question. I look forward to an outbreak of consensus when I introduce my transport proposals. The local authority measurements will be particularly useful to us this year. They will bring a transparency to local hot spots and will allow us to identify where the key problems lie in Scotland.  They will also allow us to link into other policies. In my statement, I said that the measurements will allow us to examine the issue of particulates in a bit more depth, once we have the recommendations from the panel on air quality. By joining those pieces of information together, I hope to be able to look more sensitively at some of the issues that may be specific to Scotland. Local authority monitoring will be vital to that process.

The principal reason why carbon dioxide is not a key part of the strategy is that we are already working towards meeting other requirements on carbon dioxide, on which we must deliver because of our international obligations. However, members will notice that carbon monoxide is covered in the report. We have tightened our objectives on carbon monoxide by bringing them forward by two years. The report identifies eight pollutants and I am happy to discuss them with Linda Fabiani later, should she wish.

It is not only people who live in congested areas who are affected by the pollution caused by traffic congestion. One of the main groups of people affected are those who experience traffic congestion sitting in their cars. We must tackle that problem by piecing together the information received from the local air quality strategies while, at the same time, considering recommendations from local transport strategies. If we can begin to make those links between air pollution and traffic management schemes at a local level we will, I hope, reduce some of the air pollution that we experience. The process of air quality management has already raised such issues in certain local authorities. For example, we know that in the bigger cities, where the key problems lie, transport planners and local authorities are already beginning to turn their minds to questions such as, "What are the right traffic management opportunities?" and, "How can we provide solutions at a local level?"

Following correspondence with Margaret Curran, I am also aware of her interest in the matter. I know that Dorothy-Grace Elder has raised it before. We need to address a range of air pollution problems. The discussion that we had at the Transport and the Environment Committee meeting earlier today focused on how to tackle the problem of landfill throughout Scotland; how to reduce the waste that we create in the future; and how to deal with it in more environmentally friendly ways. It is a major challenge, and the national waste strategy is probably the way to deal more effectively with the issue that Dorothy-Grace Elder raises.

The prime issue for the nuclear industry is more one of safety, rather than the smells—

Nuclear power is dealt with by a series of management practices. SEPA is the main authority dealing with it in Scotland. It does not come under the air quality strategy. It is another issue that we can discuss on another day in relation to waste management practices.

As I made clear in  my statement to Parliament on 4 November, that proposal is to be promoted by the local authorities. Discussion focused on how they might deliver their proposal.

I shall be extremely careful where I sit the next time I come into the chamber; I did not realise that it had such significance. The key issue about the M74 extension, as was made absolutely clear in the strategic roads review, is that the project must be considered carefully. It would be a major urban motorway, running right through the centre of a city. There would be a lot of local traffic as well as a high proportion of commuting traffic. The matter therefore fits extremely well into the local transport strategies that are being developed by local authorities. Those issues, together with others relating to funding and to the opportunities that are available under the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991 and under the proposals for local road-user charging, which I have already indicated to Parliament will be introduced in the integrated transport bill, can all be taken forward by local authorities.

The issue of blight was raised by one of the councils at that meeting; it is one of the many matters that I am currently considering.

Regulation of the disposal of radioactive waste in Scotland is a matter for the Scottish Environment Protection Agency.

It is important that that is done in a transparent manner. Radioactive waste is disposed of at 12 sites in Scotland, which are regulated. I have ensured that that information was placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre. It is important that that information is available. I have every confidence that SEPA is monitoring those sites. If Mr MacAskill would like to raise any particular matters with me, I should be interested to hear from him. I answered his question on radioactive waste issues before Christmas. I should be happy to deal with detailed, specific questions if he has any others.

Decisions about the introduction of traffic-calming measures on local roads are the responsibility of local authorities. The Scottish Executive is responsible for trunk roads. We are not aware of particular safety problems on trunk roads in Aberdeenshire associated with rural schools.

We have said that we are happy to consider the issue of road markings outside those schools, to help identify the need for safety measures there. The issue of lights is being progressed by officials of the Scottish Executive and local authority transportation officers.

The Scottish Executive is addressing the distinctive transport needs of rural Scotland by investing over £43 million this financial year. That supports Caledonian MacBrayne Ltd and Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd, ferry services to the northern isles, public and community transport services and rural petrol stations.

Karen Whitefield has raised an important issue concerning the continuity of services—in particular bus services—in rural areas. Her points are very relevant in the context of our integrated transport bill, which I will introduce to Parliament next year. That bill will examine the whole issue of improving bus services, especially in rural areas, and ensuring that we improve the quality of consultation with local people.

The Scottish Executive and the UK Government will be publishing in the new year a road safety strategy for the period to 2010. Since 1980, fatal and serious accidents on Scottish roads have halved.

The priority that I suggest is to go ahead with our pilots on home zones so that we can examine opportunities to create safe areas around schools and in residential districts. I encourage local authorities fully to take up the opportunity to reduce speeds to 20 mph in areas where they think that there are good road safety arguments to do so. I also encourage them to take up the guidance on safer routes to schools that I published last week, which talks about giving pupils choices on safe routes to schools with which parents can be happy and which can help to reduce congestion on the roads. A range of mechanisms are available and it is critical that they are employed in the context of the local transport strategy of each local authority.

I am grateful to both Tricia Marwick and Helen Eadie for initiating this debate. It is unusual to achieve such unanimity throughout the chamber and to have so many members present for a members' business debate. That reflects the frustration, the irritation and the anger that exist in Fife. I have been made aware of the postcards and letters that Helen Eadie has received, some of which have been diverted to my office.

The unanimity that I was assuming was the fact that all members want a dramatic improvement in the quality of rail services to Fife and the rest of the country. I am sure that there are details—of which privatisation is the major one—on which we will disagree. However, the overall objective of improvement must be one on which we all agree. I want to express my concerns, as a minister, that the rail industry is not meeting the needs of Fife commuters or the needs of Fife leisure travellers. We must sort that out. I am well aware of the growing complaints, and I know that, although we are trying to persuade and encourage people out of their cars and on to buses and trains, the Fife rail service is not a good advert. That does not make my job as a minister any easier. Understandably, the prospect of being squeezed like a sardine in old rolling stock, as several members have pointed out, does not entice people further. If rail services in Fife are to make a full and increasing contribution to integrated transport and give people a real choice, the service will have to improve dramatically. Companies know that, as I have met them and told them so. I have told them of the Executive's objectives and of the daily complaints that I receive from individuals in Fife. They know that there is concern.

I used the term companies advisedly. The problem is not with only one company. People read the Official Report of the debates that we have here and so the message will come across loud and clear. I expect that every rail company will read the Official Report of this debate to find out which members have contributed and to read the points that we have made. This is therefore a useful debate. It is very much in ScotRail's interests in particular—because of its franchise—for it to read the Official Report and listen to what we have been saying. That company is number 2 in the UK—behind only the Isle of Wight Railway Co—which is a position that it will want to retain. I do not think that it would want to slip down the league of rail companies, particularly given the observations that members have made on some of the other rail companies. That would dent its pride, but also hit its pockets and those of its shareholders. There are very compelling reasons, based on self-interest, for ScotRail to want to improve its service. ScotRail is also a net beneficiary by several million pounds a year from incentive payments that it receives from the shadow strategic rail authority, because historically it has exceeded its punctuality and reliability targets across most of the Scottish network. The situation in Fife is not one that the company will want to allow to continue. The contract that governs the ScotRail franchise guarantees £1.3 billion of public funding for the seven years of the franchise. In 1998-99 alone, public funding helped to support 2,000 services a day, providing 59 million passenger journeys over the year. Money is going into the rail service; we need that money to be matched by decent services. In Scotland, we spend just over £200 million. For that, we want to get secure investment that is based on a contractual commitment to increase the quality and level of services. That is linked to the amount of money that goes to Railtrack in the form of access charges. Under the terms of its licence, which is the responsibility of the Office of the Rail Regulator, Railtrack is obligated to invest to improve the rail network. If we are to have an efficient railway that meets the  needs of the customers, whom all members here represent, Railtrack must increase the investment that it currently plans to make. There is some evidence that benefits are beginning to come through—Nick Johnston said that I would probably want to refer to one or two of them. Increased expenditure is coming through on other routes—the Edinburgh-Falkirk-Glasgow and the Aberdeen-Glasgow-Edinburgh routes. As members have pointed out, that is intended to free up other routes for refurbishment, including the Fife line. We should expect faster, more comfortable trains with increased seating capacity, to improve what is currently a substandard service. People would not get those improvements if the Government were not underwriting them. The challenge is to ensure that they are of the right quality and the right standard. That is a very good objective. Part of the problem is that ScotRail's commitment to improving services has been let down by the inability of suppliers to meet delivery dates, as Tricia Marwick mentioned. That is the consequence of having a trainbuilding industry that, after privatisation, received virtually no orders for new trains. Now huge numbers of trains are being ordered and the industry has not been able to cope. We will have to ensure that that is tackled, because it is not acceptable for Fife commuters to pay the price. We know that investment is only part of our toolkit for improving performance and for ensuring that the railways meet passengers' needs. The UK transport bill that is being considered at Westminster will enhance the powers of the strategic rail authority, which will mean a more effective strategy for Britain's railways. It will give this Parliament and Scottish ministers the powers to direct and guide the strategic rail authority for the services that are currently operated by ScotRail. Those powers are coming to us at a critical time in the development of rail services in Scotland. This is a time of expansion. The experiences of people in Fife are due partly to failures in the system, but partly to the fact that people want to use the trains rather than to drive and to have to dictate their letters while driving—I am sure that that was a slip of the tongue by Nick Johnston. We want to make it easier for people to make that choice. My hope is that today's debate will put rail services firmly on the agenda and let people know that the Parliament is committed to improving the quality of rail services. Sir Alastair Morton from the strategic rail authority has made it very clear that the performance of the train-operating companies that bid for franchise replacements will be a major consideration when those bids are assessed. The  performance of rail companies now will affect the extent to which they run rail services in the future. They all know that, and that is critical.

That is an interesting point. The levels of reliability that ScotRail is trying to achieve are up in the high 90s. If there are regular problems in Fife, that will feed through to those performance figures. Leaving aside the publicity that MPs and MSPs have given to the problems of Fife rail services, the problems will show through in the figures and will be an issue when the franchises are replaced if ScotRail cannot tackle them.

No, I am about to wind up. Helen Eadie has been one of the key people arguing for investment in Fife rail facilities. Improvements have been made in the rail services between south Fife and Edinburgh, such as the construction of Dalgety Bay station and of Queen Margaret station in Dunfermline. We must tell people listening to—or reading—this debate that improvements will be made. From the middle of next year, 300 additional seats will be available on trains in peak hours. That is earlier than the requirements of the franchise demand. However, I know that members who have made speeches today will not be satisfied until their trains are not overcrowded or late. That will be the test of the improvements. Another issue that was raised was access to rail stations—Marilyn Livingstone made that point most effectively. It is important to have good car parking facilities, as well as good bus timetables that link in with train services. The bus service from Inverkeithing to the airport is critical to the future of access to integrated transport. It is also important to have decent places for people to sit at stations, and decent cycle access. The whole quality of the rail experience must be improved. Investment in Fife's rail services since 1997 amounts to £6.5 million, in addition to the support that the Scottish Executive provides through ScotRail. We need to get value for money and ensure that people experience the benefits of that.  Everybody else has declared an interest, so I will finish with my declaration of interest. As a representative of Edinburgh Central, I am all too aware of the problems that we experience when people from Fife and other places feel that they are forced into their cars. This is not just a problem for Fife commuters and residents; it is one for the central belt of Scotland as well, and we must tackle it collectively. I thank Tricia Marwick and Helen Eadie for securing this debate. The test will be delivering the services in the coming months.

Yes. The shadow strategic rail authority administers the rail passenger partnership scheme, designed to encourage improvements in the rail network. The Scottish Executive will be consulted on applications from Scotland.

The budget will be allocated for the whole of the United Kingdom. Schemes in Scotland will have to be justified in terms of their effectiveness for the whole of the UK rail network. Resources for the Scottish passenger franchises, which have already been discussed in Parliament, are also available from the shadow strategic rail authority, amounting to £120 million this year alone.

The enabling legislation will be brought forward early next year. Once it has received royal assent, we will prepare, after full consultation, a designation order to set up a national park in Loch Lomond and the Trossachs, and set its boundaries. The order will be subject to approval as normal by the Scottish Parliament.

I would be happy to consider representations from different areas on whether they want to be included or excluded in the national park's boundaries. I am happy to announce that I have asked Scottish Natural Heritage to continue its work on both areas of potential national park status and to take forward discussions with local stakeholders and interest groups. It seems appropriate that those discussions could continue in the area that George Lyon has described.

The route action plan study is in the final stages of preparation. I expect to receive a report for my consideration in the near future.

It is important that we get the action plan right and that we identify the correct way forward. I am keen to ensure that, on that road and on many others in Scotland, we make the right decisions. We do not have enough resources to do everything, but I am keen to take the views of Mr Morgan and those of my colleague Elaine Murray, who has talked to me about this issue. I know that the A75 is a matter of great concern in Mr Morgan's area and I hope that we will be able to produce a finalised plan soon.

I understand that Railtrack is currently working with Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive to assess options for providing a rail link to Glasgow airport. A rail link to Edinburgh airport has also been examined a number of times.

I am happy to remind Mr MacAskill that air passenger duty is a reserved matter. I am keen to ensure that the Scottish Executive takes forward the issue of improving access to airports. I do not know whether Mr MacAskill is aware of the current Scottish airports study, which will examine our airports in terms of the next 30 years. Access and surface links will be examined in that study. I expect to take forward its key recommendations to ensure that we improve access to airports, as we did only two weeks ago through the new service linking passenger rail services from the north of Scotland via the Inverkeithing airport link, which is now running regularly.

The Scottish Executive does not hold the information requested for the current financial year. The provisional outturn expenditure for concessionary travel schemes that are operated by local authorities for the 1998-99 financial year is £41.6 million.

It is worth commenting on two things. First, there are the community transport initiatives in rural areas, which the Executive is supporting and which have a direct benefit for elderly people. The other is our objective of improving and harmonising existing concessionary fare schemes throughout Scotland. I call to Dr Jackson's attention the scheme that the Executive launched last week. That scheme results in blind people getting free travel throughout Scotland.

I am glad that members have made it to the chamber this morning. I know that waste is not as high up the agenda as housing, education, health and transport, but we must face up to its links with all those issues. Over the years to come, we must address the issue effectively, as a political priority. This statement is intended to start off that process. In our everyday lives, all of us produce waste—a staggering amount of it. In Scotland alone, we produce around 3 million tonnes of household waste a year. That is more than half a tonne for every person. Put another way, every one of us puts something like 10 times our weight in our dustbins every year. Shops and offices produce another 2 million tonnes, and industries another 7 million tonnes per year. The cost of dealing with waste is huge—much greater than it needs to be. If we can cut down the amount of waste we create, we can save money and, at the same time—which is hugely important—reduce the harm we do to the environment. Waste means that we are using natural resources that we could have saved. Everything we throw away represents a waste of resources. Waste going to landfill also means risks for the environment. As waste disintegrates, it produces polluted water, which can pollute watercourses if it is not controlled. Waste also produces gases, mainly methane, which contributes to air pollution and climate change. In addition, the transportation of waste when it is collected and disposed of uses significant amounts of energy and produces carbon dioxide. We cannot go on wasting resources as we do now. Our programme for government commits us to working for the efficient use of waste and resources. A radical approach to waste is a central component of our emerging strategy for sustainable development. A raft of legislation that has already been agreed to, or is in process in Europe, will require us to change. I cannot pretend that Scotland is leading the field on this matter. We are a long way behind our counterparts in Europe. We need a systematic approach to tackle the problem. The Scottish Environment Protection  Agency has produced a national waste strategy for Scotland, which gives us that. I hope that members will have the time to read it and consider its local implications. When the Executive published "Making it work together" in September, we promised to adopt a national waste strategy by the end of the year. I am pleased that my statement today effectively means that we are adopting SEPA's national strategy for waste. It has given us a framework for action and a document against which we can measure our progress. It sets out a number of key principles, which we must follow. We should minimise our waste. If we cannot minimise it, we should re-use things rather than throw them away. If we are forced to dispose of things, we should seek to recover value from them through recycling, composting or energy recovery. Disposal of waste to landfill should be an option only if none of the other options is possible. At the heart of the strategy is the proposal that area waste plans should be prepared by groups of local authorities working with enterprise agencies and consulting waste producers and the waste industry. Eleven areas are proposed, most of which cover several local authority areas. The groups will plan how waste should be dealt with in their areas, and SEPA will facilitate that work. Grouping local authorities should help to create economies of scale and enable the planning of joint waste facilities when that is the best way to proceed. Participation in the waste area strategy will be voluntary, but I hope that all local authorities will participate in a positive spirit. They may want to group themselves in combinations different from those suggested by SEPA. That is their choice, but I want early progress. I am inviting local authorities to complete their first area waste plans by the end of next year. If satisfactory progress is not made by then, we may have to consider imposing statutory requirements for the plans to be produced. Planning authorities will also be expected to adopt structure and local plans that are in line with the agreed waste plans. This strategy will set out targets that we are under a legal obligation to meet. They include targets for recycling packaging and restrictions on landfill. The strategy also suggests several voluntary targets, for example reduction of industrial and municipal waste. Further targets for recycling of household waste and construction and demolition waste will be developed following research. In Scotland, we currently rely almost exclusively on landfill sites to dispose of waste. Many of our sites are old-fashioned and in need of modernisation. We are currently consulting about  how we should implement the EC landfill directive, which sets out targets for the amount of biodegradable municipal waste sent to landfill. The first of those targets is that by 2006 we must reduce the amount of biodegradable municipal waste going to landfill to three quarters of what went to landfill in 1995. We all know that none of the ways of disposing of waste is particularly popular. My postbag and, I suspect, those of other members is testament to that. People who live near landfill sites often complain about the problems that they can cause, although they should be minimised through proper management and effective regulation. Other people are concerned about incinerators. Our strategy makes it clear that, on present trends, several major treatment facilities or a larger number of smaller facilities will need to be developed in Scotland. The strategy does not specify what sort of facilities should be provided—that will be a decision for local authorities. We must be clear that if the targets that we have to meet under the landfill directive cannot be achieved through waste minimisation, the development of composting, recycling and recovery facilities, we will not have any option but to pursue the development of some large incineration plants. That is what we face. If we produce waste, we must deal with it. The more we can minimise waste, or re-use and recycle it, the less we will have to deal with it through landfill or incineration. We must move away from our existing practices. A move away from our reliance on landfill will cost money. The Scottish Executive has had discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and agreed that, in the first instance, additional local authority expenditure will be required from next year for preparatory and planning work on implementing the strategy. I am pleased to announce that £2.5 million per annum will be available for this, starting next April. I have also announced plans for extra funding for SEPA in future years, to allow it to increase its work on implementation of the national waste strategy. We are working in partnership with SEPA, COSLA and others to identify the full implications of the strategy, in which SEPA proposes a number of changes that might require primary legislation. I will consider those carefully before deciding whether to recommend them to my colleagues and Parliament. We are looking for change from local authorities and commercial and industrial waste producers, but we need to change our attitudes as private individuals. We are probably all guilty of throwing things away without a thought: a complaint that I frequently hear is that the dustbins that local  authorities provide are not big enough. We have to change our attitude. Education has a role to play in letting our children grow up with better habits than we have. However, we have to change everyone's awareness of the waste that they produce. We cannot wait until the next generation. Our landfill directive targets must be reached. One of the commonest complaints in my postbag is about the lack of recycling facilities. There is not enough recycling in Scotland. Many local authorities have tried to get schemes off the ground but given up when they have been unable to find markets for the materials they have collected. We are trying to do something about that. In the summer, I was delighted to launch a new initiative, the recycling market development project, which is aimed at demonstrating the value of materials produced from recycled waste in Scotland. We cannot make much progress on recycling unless we have the facilities to separate out waste. Last month, I was pleased to be at the opening of Glasgow's new materials recycling facility at Polmadie, which is the first facility in Scotland that deals with separated household waste so that it can be recycled. It is part of Glasgow City Council's integrated recycling programme. I hope that the scheme will be the first of many in Scotland. It is clear that SEPA's national waste strategy is only the framework for major change that requires action from a large number of actors. We are only at the beginning of delivering that national waste strategy and we need to do a great deal of work before we can reach our targets. The Executive is committed to playing its part, but change can be achieved only through partnership. I want to work with SEPA, local authorities, the waste management industry, waste producers, members of the public and the voluntary sector to tackle waste in a radical way that will not leave a harmful legacy for the future.

Members will not be surprised to hear that I do not agree with Mr MacAskill. He has raised the fact that the landfill tax is a reserved matter. While I am happy for him to do so, I think that the landfill tax is hugely important. One of the key points about our waste strategy is that people who produce waste must account for it and include the real costs of it in their operations. Landfill tax lets us do that. By allowing employers to reduce their national insurance contributions, we give them a practical benefit for focusing on reducing their waste. Extra money is going to SEPA and to local authorities. In addition to the resources that SEPA will have, it will increase its fees for monitoring and dealing with waste management applications. That will allow costs to be met and it is important. Local authorities need some extra resources to let them get on with their task, which is huge. I have no doubt that, in future years, we will examine further how local authorities can deal with their task. We need the economic instrument represented by the landfill tax to ensure that we can deliver practical reductions in waste creation. To give the example of construction and aggregates, a landfill tax pushes developers towards recycling materials. The benefits of that are a cut in the pressure on new aggregates quarrying and the re-use of materials in building. We need a critical mass so that the elements reinforce one another: economic instruments; the use of our national agency, SEPA; the positive actions that local authorities can bring to bear. That is the right approach.

Local area waste strategies are the key place to decide the most cost-effective way in which to manage waste disposal and recycling. One of the key points that I made, which is accepted by everybody in the waste industry, is that there are insufficient incentives for recycling. Many local authorities have gone down the recycling route only to find that they cannot sell the products of recycling. That is the point of the REMADE project; we have to change the economics of the collection and use of waste. The idea of area waste plans is that they will allow local authorities to get together. The £2.5 million that I am allocating from April next year is intended to let them get on with that process. I do not want anyone to be under any illusion. The production of the waste strategy today is not an instant solution to the problem of waste. It will be a long-term process; this is the start of our tackling the legacy of the waste we produce. In terms of local authority expenditure in future, the work that is done in local authority waste strategies will inform our future resourcing to local authorities. That has to be looked at now. I refute the suggestion that the draft strategy has been diluted. Implementing SEPA's strategy will require radical change on the part of local authorities, developers and society as a whole. We have not really got to grips with the fact that the waste that we produce is an inheritance for the future. The people who live around existing landfill sites know the issues that exist; the question is what we do with our future landfill targets.

I agree with Mr Scott about targets. We are looking for further advice from SEPA about what would be realistic. We could have an aspirational target of 25 per cent, as has been mentioned in the past, but we are nowhere near meeting that. It comes back to the points made by Mr Tosh about local authorities being able to get to grips with recycling. This strategy is hugely ambitious and we are way behind our European counterparts. The challenge is to learn from what they and other countries have been able to do. The REMADE project, which involves recycling facilities, is informed by the experience of Seattle, where recycled waste provides economic benefit, as other products can be made from it. There are many key issues that need to be addressed in implementing this strategy. A more integrated approach, in which local authorities work with SEPA and waste producers, will allow us to deal with, dispose of and recycle waste intelligently—in an environmentally friendly and cost-effective way. We are not there yet, but I hope that the national waste strategy will begin that process. This is an issue that we must all address urgently.

I thank Mr Harper for his overall support. Creating incentives for the move towards waste minimisation is critical and must be addressed. It is possible to re-use waste through incineration and waste energy schemes, but such schemes are expensive. That is why we want to bring local authorities together to work out deliverable strategies. Investment in new plant is hugely expensive. Before this morning's meeting, I was talking to my colleague, Mr Scott, about the Shetland issue. The capital expenditure required is considerable, although the money comes back if waste is re-used as an economic resource. That is why we need collective strategies between local authorities. It is the Executive's job to encourage that and to give a realistic time scale—the end of  next year—to get the discussions going. Local authorities will have to review their positions.

That is where several different Government mechanisms must come into play. The landfill tax provides incentives for local authorities and waste producers in the commercial sector to reduce the amount of waste. If they do so, it also provides a benefit in the form of reduced national insurance contributions. There is a particular issue about construction and demolition, as I said earlier. Through our planning guidelines, we are encouraging the re-use of existing buildings—something with which most of us agree—and the recycling of construction materials. Landfill tax provides an economic imperative, planning guidelines give encouragement and the monitoring of landfill sites is an important part of the strategy. People must have permission to put material into landfill sites and it must be monitored by SEPA. We have to ensure that monitoring is rigorous, open and transparent so that people who live near landfill sites are confident about the process. SEPA is currently considering that. It is a question of using all the different mechanisms at our disposal. At the end of the day, it is about common sense, particularly in relation to construction and demolition materials. We need economic instruments, planning persuasion and appropriate facilities to deal with the issue.

The problem of waste creation  does not stop at the border. The whole point of the landfill tax is that it provides an incentive across the United Kingdom. If a firm operates in Scotland and in England, should it pay a different tax for its use of different landfill sites? There is a strong argument for us to take responsibility at a UK level. The national waste strategy that SEPA has produced for Scotland, and that I am commending to Parliament, states that there are particular things that the Scottish Parliament can do to encourage local authorities and to allow SEPA to address the issue properly. Pretending that this issue stops at the border, or that there should be a different landfill tax north and south of the border, is ridiculous.

I will note the comments that have been made about that planning application, but—as Mr Fergusson will understand—I will not comment on it directly as it will have to be considered by Scottish ministers. Mr Fergusson has raised an important question about the proximity principle. How does that principle apply in rural areas? If in urban areas waste has to be disposed of because we have not managed to recycle it or to minimise the amount being created, it may be possible to carry it over relatively short distances. In rural areas, however, there is a particular problem of economies of scale. There are no easy solutions to that: that is why we need to emphasise the importance of waste minimisation and recycling and why I want local authorities to get together to find the most cost-effective way of tackling waste management. In rural areas, the proximity principle is more difficult to apply and must be weighed up against landscape and environmental issues. Mr Fergusson can rest assured that, if there was a simple fix, I would be recommending it. This is an issue that every local authority will have to wrestle with, unless we begin to tackle waste minimisation, re-use and recycling.

SEPA acknowledges the problem with landfill sites that have been in existence for some time. I have received parliamentary questions and letters from several members on that issue. In addition to recovering an appropriate amount of money from waste operators to enable it to monitor effectively, SEPA is considering prioritising the monitoring of individual sites. Some sites—the older ones—clearly require more monitoring. Our standards are now higher than they were when those sites were created. Monitoring, its regularity and its prioritisation are important issues. SEPA has to make those judgments, taking into account local concerns. There must be dialogue and communication with local residents; SEPA is keen to improve that. As for the economics of recycling, I was hugely impressed this summer by the work of Scottish Conservation Projects in the east of Scotland, which it is managing to carry out because the deal was negotiated several years ago. The challenge is that the price of recycled materials goes up and down. By getting local authorities to work together, and with the fruits of the REMADE project, we hope to be able to stabilise the market and provide a much stronger economic incentive for recycling materials.

I take your point, Presiding Officer, and I will be brief. The question raises two issues. The first concerns existing landfill sites. I acknowledge what Dorothy-Grace Elder says about local people's concerns about the sites that are being operated. SEPA should consult people and ensure that waste operators are carrying out operations to the right standards. Any such exercise should be done transparently. The second issue touches on the future of landfill sites. We already have landfill sites; the question is what we can do now to prevent future landfill problems. Although that is partly an issue for SEPA, it raises the wider issue of the waste that society produces, which is a problem with no easy solutions.

We can investigate that possibility. We need to consider whether to have landfill or waste disposal sites dispersed around the country, which makes it more difficult to get economies of scale to use rail, or whether to concentrate facilities. There is no short answer to that pertinent question.

Mr Chisholm is absolutely right. The target that he mentioned is a European requirement that will have to be met under the landfill directive. However, that is not such a challenging figure; the 50 per cent reduction that will be brought in after 2006 will be very challenging. That long-term issue concentrates my mind and the challenge now is to put in place a robust strategy to meet those long-term objectives. Although I said that we did not have current targets, we have had aspirational targets and many people are aware that local authorities have fallen behind in dealing with recycling targets. We need to change the economics of this issue and I look to SEPA to give us realistic targets to concentrate everyone's mind. It is hoped that the combination of local authorities working together in groups and SEPA's work will inform the discussion. More work has to be done to identify not only realistic targets, but targets that will persuade us to take difficult decisions.

I am grateful to the member for that question. The issue is how we tackle untreated sewage waste, which we are committed to phasing out by the end of 2001. The agriculture industry is examining the issue very carefully. Another issue is the need to treat sewage waste. The member is right: waste was previously dumped elsewhere without further thought. Higher environmental standards are having an impact in ways that were not initially intended. We will need to consider the application of sewage on agricultural land. Research is being done into the matter and I look forward to the results. Sewage sludge can also be burned, which is what happens in some countries. There are a variety of choices and the problems need to be addressed.

I congratulate Bruce Crawford and thank him for lodging the motion, which has opened up the issue of east coast access to ferry services from Scotland. The idea has been around for a long time and it is appropriate that it should be the subject of one of our earlier discussions in the Scottish Parliament. Tonight's debate has shown that while there has been much discussion before, the real challenge is to promote action. I want to cover three main areas. First, I will cover the policy framework, because Bruce asked a large number of questions about how the Executive views the proposal. I will then talk about what the Executive can do. Finally, I will pick up on Tricia Marwick's comments about the challenges of the project and where we go next.  We have a strong and robust policy framework. Many of the issues raised today relate to policies for which the Executive already has a policy framework in place, which can be used as a background to discussing the issue. I will not go through the whole list of statistics that members have raised, but I will pick out three. In 1997, freight going by heavy goods vehicle outwith the UK from Scotland totalled 629,000 tonnes. In 1996, more than half the tonnage going by sea went via the Dover strait. More than 940,000 tonnes of freight for outwith the UK was lifted by rail in Scotland. We know that we have a significant export market. I take on board fully Tricia's comment that freight movement by sea is a competitive market. Policies on east coast access must therefore be developed in that light. It is not the nationality of our ports that is the problem, but the physical lack of access in Scotland and the distances that need to be travelled. Those are the issues on which we must focus. There are four key policy areas for which the Scottish Executive has a positive policy framework. First, it is absolutely vital to take freight off roads. That underpins our commitment to a sustainable distribution policy for freight. We are committed to removing 15 million lorry miles a year from the roads by March 2002. That is not an easy or straightforward target, but it is one of the key aims that inform the debate on Rosyth. Secondly, an integrated approach to transport is at the core of our transport policy. That framework has been set out in our decisions and in our funding mechanisms. Thirdly, we need locally driven transport strategies. Keith Raffan made a point about the need to tackle congestion. I want to take the opportunity of tonight's debate to pay tribute to the work of Fife Council in promoting practical alternatives to road congestion. The council is doing some solid work and I encourage it to continue with that. There are opportunities in Fife to pull together the local council, the local enterprise company, port providers, Railtrack and other bodies that could be involved to promote a powerful local transport strategy. The last of the four policy areas is ports policy, and to get that policy right, it is important to work in the wider UK context. We want to enable multimodal ports, with transfer from rail to ferry and from road to ferry. We want to ensure that we get it right, and that the shadow strategic rail authority, Railtrack, the rail freight operators, port owners and the shipping companies will be involved. It is a challenging agenda but, I believe, a positive one. I believe that the Executive has set the right  framework.

I will come on to Mr Tosh in a minute. This is not just a matter of the right framework; it is about what we are doing now. We have a freight facilities grant that is available for developing rail facilities at ports. We are looking for applications so that we can identify appropriate funding. Existing rail links, including Rosyth, could be eligible for the grant—we need the applications. On rail services to Rosyth, it is welcome news that Railtrack will submit a freight facilities grant application for the Stirling-Alloa-Dunfermline freight link. We will consider that application seriously, and it should be approached in the context of overall freight facilities. There is also the prospect—this is where the UK Government is important—to extend the freight facilities grant scheme to short sea and coastal shipping, which is already a firm UK Government commitment. I welcome that commitment, which is extremely relevant for Rosyth and for Scotland. On Scott Barrie's comments on the Kincardine bridge, as he will know—and I will remind him—we have given the go-ahead on the strategic roads review announcement. It is also our policy to encourage other agencies that are involved, and I highlight the joining-up of their approaches. Their work was mentioned by Tricia Marwick and Bruce Crawford, and it is important that we maximise effectiveness. Scottish Enterprise is playing a key practical role. There is also funding from RAPID, an EC-backed scheme which could, if qualification is achieved, assist in associated property development around the port area. Environmental funding could assist with abnormal ground conditions or environmental improvements.

I am happy to take an intervention.

Whenever anyone says  "respectfully suggest", I treat it with extreme caution. However, I accept the point that Murray Tosh makes. We will debate the overall strategic transport framework when we come to debate the integrated transport bill. I will be happy to engage in such a discussion then, and the subject comes up in many of our debates; transport is vital to Scotland's prosperity. The other way in which Scottish Enterprise can support the development of transport links is through marketing assistance. There has been a lot of work on that from Scottish Enterprise already. I am sure that members will be aware of the report that it produced last year, which has pushed the debate ahead and has added a great deal of depth to what members have raised in the debate. Scottish Enterprise has also played an important role with regard to European funding sources.

Not just now, thank you. The pilot actions for combined transport programme—the PACT programme—supports innovative combined transport services. I understand that a PACT application might be considered, and could build on the earlier support from the scheme for initial feasibility work. The application is being made in a competitive situation, but I believe that further work could be done. On future challenges, I am convinced that the work already being done on transport links will take the debate further. The Scottish Executive will fully support such an agenda. The framework set by us allows and positively encourages developments such as that at Rosyth. One of the challenges is to highlight for shipping operators the port facilities available and how they can be promoted. We need to study the market carefully and to examine how ferry and shipping operators might be attracted to the routes that have been mentioned. There are some hard questions—Tricia Marwick raised the matter earlier—and I believe that we need to give them further consideration. We need to ensure that the project is co-ordinated. I pay tribute to the work of Fife Council, Scottish Enterprise, Fife Enterprise, the port authorities, rail freight interests and the many others involved in the work. I welcome the establishment of a project steering group as a means of taking the work forward practically and positively. The Executive is clear that a ferry service from the east coast of Scotland would be welcome.

No thank you, I am winding up. I know that Henry McLeish visited Babcock at Rosyth on Tuesday this week and met the trade unions and senior management.

No.

I did not think that I was revealing anything particularly exciting—it is simply that work is in progress and that the steering group is a further stage of development. Henry McLeish has been pursuing the matter—

Does Fergus Ewing have a point of order?

If it is not a point of order, I would like to continue.

I am not accepting an intervention—I have just taken one from Bruce Crawford. We have talked about how the Scottish Executive plays a full part in regeneration and diversification at Rosyth. That is an exciting issue for us, and I am glad that it has been debated early in the life of the Scottish Parliament. The policy framework, the role that we can all play and the role that the Government can play are clear—our challenge is to progress the matter collectively. Work is already being done, and I hope that the debate has helped to lift the issue up the agenda and that it has added value to the discussions that are already taking place in Fife.  I thank Bruce Crawford for raising the issue and I hope that we will be able to report success in future.

We are reviewing compulsory purchase powers as part of our commitment to modernise the planning system. Any legislation that we bring before the Scottish Parliament will need to be compatible with the convention.

Every decision that we make will have to be in line with the European convention on human rights. It is important to state that decisions on compulsory purchase orders involve weighing up the public and private interests. All those issues have to be taken into account.

I would be quite happy to provide a written answer to Mr Fergusson on that question. He has raised about four issues, all of which are complex, and I do not want to give an answer that might miss out a legal issue that ought to be brought to his attention.

I would like to thank the members who have remained in the chamber to listen to the debate. I would also like to thank Michael Matheson for raising the issue, as the debate has highlighted some important  questions that I would like to address. I want to make it absolutely clear at the outset that public health is a key concern for the Scottish Executive and for the water authorities. That said, I want to talk through some of the points that Michael made. There has been a full study into the particular issue that he raised and an exchange of letters. Michael quoted from one of those letters, but he did so selectively. A series of samples have been taken and analysed. A consultant on public health medicine, who came into post only in February 1999 and can, therefore, be regarded as independent on the issue, examined a total of 30 samples. Only two of those gave unusually high readings—the original sample, to which Mr Matheson referred, and another taken in April this year. It is the consultant's view that, because all the other samples yielded normal results, the sample that was identified as not meeting standards might have given a false reading. There has been a great deal of research into the issue and action has been taken.

No, I have only a few minutes and there are many points to answer.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I was very patient when listening to Mr Matheson. The letter to which I am referring is that of 15 November, which, I assume, is the same letter from which the member quoted. The press release that was issued after the survey was carried out stated that "there is no known harmful effect on health of the consumption of drinking water which has intermittently high levels of iron, manganese or aluminium". The consultant spoke to a number of local residents and gave them the same information. The critical issue that today's debate has raised is the need to ensure that people understand the process and have confidence in it. The issue of water supplies in Bo'ness has a long history, but it is not true to say that nothing has happened to address it. The water authority has acted to tackle the problem of water discoloration by scouring the pipes. Donald Gorrie, Alex Neil and Cathy Peattie are right about the need to ensure that there is high investment in our water facilities. There have been attempts to deal with sediment that has built up by reorganising the pipe layout on Angus Road.  I am struck that Michael Connarty has taken up the issue on more than one occasion. Anyone who knows him will be aware that he is not the sort of person who can be fobbed off—he is a persistent character. Information that he has chased up has reassured him that there is no risk to public health, the only evidence of contamination being the sample that was taken in November 1998. I would have hoped that the explanations that Mr Matheson has received, both from East of Scotland Water and from Forth Valley Health Board, would have reassured him that there is not a big problem with the water supply in Bo'ness. Mr Neil is right to welcome the fact that we have had an opportunity to debate the issue. I should add that the matter was followed up by the Scottish Office after a series of complaints were made both to the local authority and to East of Scotland Water. The health authorities have been fully consulted. It is not just the water authority that has to account for itself—Forth Valley Health Board is involved, as well as the local authorities. There is a procedure that must be followed. The water authorities are under a statutory obligation to produce an annual report on water quality in their area, and to submit that both to the local authorities and to the Executive. I stress that, if members of the public have concerns about their water supply, the water authorities will take samples from their tap and analyse them to ensure compliance with regulations. Customers will be informed of the results of that analysis. We also produce an annual report on the quality of drinking water, which was submitted to the Parliament's information centre and which I announced in a press release. I encourage members present to study that statement and to identify issues that they may wish to raise with me in the light of it. Local authorities have a statutory duty to keep themselves informed about the quality of water supply in their areas. The water authorities are required to notify the local authorities, the health board and the Scottish Executive of any event that affects or is likely to affect the water supply in their area. There is a clear set of procedures. I agree with the points that Donald Gorrie made about investment in public services. Significant investment is being made in East of Scotland Water to meet the requirements that are set by Europe and the Scottish Executive. However, I would dispute his comment that we have replaced Conservative councillors with Labour councillors. There is a process of applications, and local people—not just councillors—can apply to sit on water authorities. The appointments that were made this year showed an interesting mix of political backgrounds—the appointees were not all Labour members. The Water Industry Act 1999  gives us the transparency that Mr Gorrie and Mr Neil are looking for. We are in a period of transition: we have a new Parliament, new water legislation and a new water industry commissioner. We have the opportunity to get things right. It is important that we make sure that when complaints are raised, they are followed up. The specific case that we are discussing today was checked by the Scottish Office earlier this year and officials have told me that they are satisfied that the correct approach was taken. Water authorities have to hold regular meetings with consultants in public health medicine from the health boards in their supply area—it is not only people in the water authorities who are involved in discussions. If a water quality issue is thought to pose a threat to public health, those consultants have to advise the authorities on whether it is safe to continue using the water. If a hazard is thought likely to affect more than a small number of people, the consultants in public health medicine will advise that a multi-agency incident control team be set up to co-ordinate the investigation and management of the hazard. The primary aim of the incident control team is always to protect public health. Operational support and advice is provided by the Scottish Centre for Infection and Environmental Health, which is frequently consulted by consultants in public health medicine and by local authority environmental health departments. The centre is satisfied that there is a clearly defined and effective mechanism for providing medical advice on water quality issues within Scotland. Cathy Peattie raised a point about the way in which we test water. In this case, a problem with the way in which we test water has led to the debate. A water sample was collected and tested, but it was not collected in controlled circumstances. I am told that there must be a chain of custody. For instance, if someone was being tested for drugs, neither they nor any sample that they were required to provide would be left unsupervised. The same applies to testing for water quality. We can never be complacent, but I am satisfied that the facts of the case that we are discussing have been examined and that there is no on-going pollution problem with the domestic water supply, nor is there a risk to public health. I am also satisfied that East of Scotland Water operated in an open and accountable manner and that there is no need for a review further to the review that has already been carried out. I thank Mr Matheson for raising the issue because there is a need to ensure that local  issues are dealt with effectively and through the correct procedures.  Meeting closed at 17:44.

The A8000 is a local road and responsibility for its upgrading therefore rests with the City of Edinburgh Council. The Executive has no plans to expand the trunk road network.

I am well aware of the intensity of congestion in and around the area of the Forth bridge. I am happy to say that the local authorities are working on that matter; I am meeting them in December to discuss the research that the Scottish Executive is doing and to discuss strategies for improving investment and the facilities in the area.

I last met the North of Scotland Water Authority on 14 September 1999 to discuss strategic issues in relation to its corporate plan.

One of the key measures in the Water Industry Act 1999 was the establishment of the Water Industry Commissioner for Scotland. It will be his job to look independently—from a customer's point of view—at the investment programmes and charging of the three water authorities and to report to me. The report will then be considered by the Scottish Executive.

The First Minister, the Deputy Minister for Highlands and Islands and Gaelic and I met the chairman and the managing director of Caledonian MacBrayne on 21 September. During that meeting, a range of matters were discussed.

That is a commercial venture, and I know that people in George Lyon's constituency have a great interest in it. I am aware that Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the local council have provided money for a campaign to promote tourism in the area. The commercial decision is for CalMac to take. The service is not a lifeline ferry service, but I am aware of the interest in the route. I will be meeting Sea Containers on 2 December to discuss a range of issues.

Land use planning and development in the area of Portmoak airfield is a matter for Perth and Kinross Council acting under national and local development control policy.

I am aware that an appeal about further development in that area is currently in abeyance. The issue is being considered and the council, the air operators and representatives of the equestrian centre are in negotiations. It is hoped that a mutually acceptable solution will be arrived at. If there is no resolution, the appeal will come back on the agenda. I assure Mr Johnston that the issues of safety that he raises will be taken on board by the Scottish Executive reporter when considering any appeal.

The matter is the subject of a formal complaint made by the coal industry to the Office of the Rail Regulator on the basis of the possible abuse of a dominant position by English Welsh and Scottish Railway. The outcome of the rail regulator's investigation is awaited.

I am aware of the significance of the transportation of coal by EWS. The lead in addressing that matter has already been taken by Brian Wilson at the Scotland Office. He has been keeping Henry McLeish and me fully informed of developments and we are all trying to address the issue. The Office of the Rail Regulator is critical in terms of ensuring that there is a proper judgment on this issue and that full attention is given to it.

How little time, Sir David?

I will try to be brief. I thank Christine Grahame, who has taken an interest in reopening the Borders railway, for lodging the motion and for enabling us to have an all-party discussion on the issue. I start by agreeing with the sentiments of the motion about the importance of railway lines to the economic and social well-being of any region. In that respect, the Borders stands out. The Scottish Executive's transport policy shares—indeed, has at its core—that general premise. That premise underpins recent announcements such as the outcome of the strategic roads review and the latest round of public transport fund awards, which amount to £26 million. We know that good transport links are essential. That is as true for urban areas as it is for remote rural locations. The Borders railway feasibility study is part of an overall approach to improving rural transport. I do not want to look just at rail; I want to reflect on how we can improve choice for people in the Borders. The points were well made about car  dependency, infrequent services and the poor quality of public transport, which are problems for the elderly and the unemployed in particular. I assure members that our response to those challenges has been to explore and support a number of practical steps, including innovative transport projects, such as voluntary or community transport initiatives through the rural transport fund and the public transport fund. The development of a national transport timetable will mean that people will know what choices are available and that we can strengthen existing public transport opportunities. A working party with members from Scottish Borders Council, Scottish Borders Enterprise and the tourist board has done much work to tackle rural isolation in the Borders and to look at economic regeneration there—the investment made through that is important. Recent developments have included the information and communications technology link to the Heriot-Watt campus at Galashiels, the links with Locate in Scotland to promote the area to inward investors and the new long-term jobs in Selkirk. The work that is being done is critical. It has led us to have the feasibility study to examine the Borders railway line. It is important to view the feasibility study as a positive development in itself. I assure members—

No, I have so many—

There is general agreement that we need to consider a direct rail connection, inward investment and access to employment and learning opportunities, as Karen Gillon said. We all know that the Beeching cuts were a tragedy but it is in that context that we must consider the feasibility of reinstating part, or all, of the Waverley line. I will not make showy announcements today, but I give a commitment that the great interest that Mike Russell, Euan Robson and Ian Jenkins said existed in the Borders will be taken into account when the results of the feasibility study are considered. Today is not the day to make an announcement, as we have not received the study, but I assure members that we will consider the study seriously. A great deal of work has been done by Borders Transport Futures Ltd and the Campaign for Borders Rail. I welcome that work and thank those organisations for, in effect, putting this item on our agenda, which has led to this debate.  Our railway industry is different from the one that we had 30 years ago, but that gives us opportunities. The UK Government inherited a privatised and fragmented rail network, but the demand for rail travel is growing dramatically. That does not make it easier to examine the industry, nor does it solve our problems, but it does create a new climate. We have the opportunity to create an integrated transport system, and that will come from the UK Railways Bill and from our work in this Parliament. The devolution settlement gives us a role in promoting the railway industry. Our funds are not inelastic, as members will know, but we already support passenger rail in Scotland with £208 million a year. I want to examine how we can make that support more effective. The points made by David Mundell are precisely the ones that I am looking at—how can we expand our rail services as well as look to new rail services and investments? I know that members are coming to me with demands for new rail investment. I welcome that. We must examine our priorities. We know that public support for rail investment is critical. The economic and value-for-money arguments alone mean that we need to invest the money. That is a challenge because we do not have an unlimited budget. I want our railway network to grow. We need to demonstrate value for money and we must look at the priorities in the context of an integrated transport system, reduction of congestion, improvement of access and of inclusion and social, economic and environmental gains. Those are the criteria against which we must measure the expansion of new railway services, and they will apply to all proposals in Scotland, such as the Borders railway proposal and the feasibility study. I am sure that that study will take us further down the road of looking at the options and the finances. The study will not make the decision, but it will be important in giving us more information to think about options. The final decision will rest with me, in partnership with the various public and private bodies that members have mentioned, and it will have to be set against the other important and justifiable claims on our tight resources. However, as Christine Grahame observed in her introduction, home rule enables us to focus on transport issues. The choices are not easy, but our feasibility study will allow us to consider the options that are available. That is a great step forward. If there is a message to take back to the people in the Borders, it is that we will give the study careful consideration. I thank members for staying behind to take part in this debate. It is an important subject, and one  to which I hope we shall return.

Are the Tories not winding up?

I see—John Young was the official wind-up. [Laughter.] I had not realised that. We have had a rather curious set of Opposition speakers. On the one hand, Mr MacAskill would construct all the roads everywhere; he would add a few that are not even on the list. On the other, the Tories have said that they would have built all the roads, if we had not voted them out of office a couple of years ago. The truth is that the Tories did not have the money to build all those roads in their budget, and neither would the SNP have the money to build those roads in its budget. We know that from the SNP's budget in the run-up to the election. We also know that some of the money in the SNP's budget would have come from the fuel duty escalator. In its budget for independence, which was produced reluctantly in the last stages of the general election campaign, the SNP allocated fuel duty without any reduction. On the SNP's budget figures as recently as April 1999, it would have kept the fuel duty at its current level. Given the SNP's budget policy, we are rather fed up with the SNP complaints. We now find out that roads will not be paid for from the fuel duty escalator. I heard Mr Salmond saying on the radio the other morning that the SNP would pay for it from income-based taxation. That is an interesting development. Just over a year ago, Alasdair Morgan said that the SNP would use the penny for Scotland to invest in roads. Within 24 hours that policy was abolished, but now the SNP has returned to income tax as a way of raising investment for roads. Let us look at the budget and the amount of money that we need to spend on roads. Mr MacAskill's programme aspires to spend £800 million on road construction. Where will that money come from? We will need not just one penny for Scotland, but rather a lot of pennies. SNP members' comments today completely miss the point.

No. Today's strategic review is about choices. We have had to make difficult choices.

No, I will not. We have used criteria of accessibility, integration, safety and environment. It is critical to take all those things together. We have a costed roads programme, which means that the roads that are listed today will go ahead. We expect a start date in a couple of years' time for the M77, Fenwick to Malletsheugh, with a completion date three years later. That route will cost £60 million. Construction on the A1, Haddington to Dunbar, could begin in the next two years. We need to go through the planning process for that. The cost will be £32 million. Construction on the A78, the three towns bypass, could begin within the next couple of years. The work will cost £26 million. Construction on the A830 should begin next year and will cost £10 million. Construction on the A96 should begin within the next three years and will cost £12 million.

No, I will not, Mr Tosh. The programme is costed. It will be implemented using the money that is currently in our budget and the money that we have programmed over the next three years. The comments that members have made acknowledge the importance of integration. It was even acknowledged by the SNP members, which came as a surprise, because they have said that they would spend £800 million on roads and on a whole wish list of other transport issues. We have to prioritise; we are a Government with a budget. Mr Nick Johnston said: "Nobody wants to see diversions from health and education". That is absolutely true. We need to work within the existing budget and our challenge is to prioritise effectively. That is what we have done. We also want to make the most effective use of our existing infrastructure. That is why we think that it is important to take an appropriate amount of freight off the roads. To answer Mr Young's question, it is not about getting all freight off roads. Last week, I spoke to the Road Haulage Association, to say how important we see its work as part of an integrated transport strategy. The whole purpose of the strategic roads review is to achieve the right balance.

Absolutely. The M80 and the M8—

No, thank you. I am trying to answer the question that I have just been asked. We will commission a multi-modal study. The challenge is not just to think about huge investment in roads; it is about the existing use of our road network, to work out better ways to get people off roads and to give them high-quality choices. As Ms Fabiani suggested, we need a holistic approach. We must make the best use of our infrastructure. We have no ideological objection to roads. Roads are a fundamental part of our transport investment and a key part of our transport infrastructure. The Executive wants to ensure that our roads are used effectively and that we invest in them. That means maintenance—a responsible approach. It is not just about investing in new roads; it is also about ensuring that we have sufficient investment in the existing infrastructure.

No, thank you. The last point that I want to make—

No, I am about to wind up. I want to talk about the issue of road user charging, which has been mentioned by many members. There has been an extensive consultation process. I have toured the length and breadth of the country, talking to a variety of interest groups, from the business community, to local authorities, to individuals. We have discussed the opportunities and I have made it clear that we will not introduce trunk road tolling or motorway tolling as part of our transport legislation. I will come back to the Parliament with our proposals for local road user charging—that will be taken forward by the local authorities—and on the issue of workplace parking levies. We have an approach that will give us new revenue to invest in transport. We will consider the issues of additionality, transparency and hypothecation, to ensure that people can see where the money is going. It will go back into our transport investment. A question was asked about the M74. We have taken a responsible approach. It is a key link and it is important that we get it right. In asking Glasgow City Council and South Lanarkshire Council to work with the neighbouring authorities, we are recognising the importance of the route. There are several options available to the councils. We have  not discussed existing roads legislation—the New Roads and Streetworks Act 1991, which enables tolling on new roads. There are a variety of options. The key thing is that the councils involved take the approach that they find to be the most relevant. We are committed to ensuring that the investment and the roads that are identified in the strategic roads review will take place. I commend the roads programme to Parliament. It is a credible programme, which will improve economic investment in Scotland. The points that have been made have been helpful and interesting and it has been a constructive debate. The business community has expressed concerns. We want to ensure that those concerns are fully reflected in what we do; hence the roads programme that we have announced today. It is a coherent programme that links into our integrated transport strategy. It is about getting the best out of our roads network, and it is about promoting public transport. Buses need motorways as much as cars need motorways. Our integrated approach must ensure that we look at all those options for transport. That is why we will take that programme forward over the next few years, with the money that we have identified in our budget.

May I respond to Mr Salmond's point?

I made it clear in my statement that it would be a matter for the local authorities in the area to progress. The issues that Mr Tosh has raised concern potential funding routes that would be available—and there are several potential funding routes. I am asking the authorities to consider them, to identify the right stretch of road and to develop that road. That is a realistic proposition.

I welcome the opportunity today to report on the occasion of the publication of the reports on the strategic roads review. Trunk roads make an important contribution to our integrated and sustainable transport strategy. They are a vital part of our transport network, but our integrated transport strategy is about much more than roads. Thirty-two projects are benefiting from the Executive's public transport fund, at a cost of £55 million. Those include bus priority and park-and-ride schemes, rail improvements combined with park-and-ride, improved rail and bus stations, better provision for cyclists and pedestrians and airfield and ferry improvements. Rail could make a substantially greater contribution in both the passenger and freight markets. We are supporting that development through our freight facilities grants. Four recent awards, totalling almost £14 million, will result in more than 100,000 lorry journeys a year being taken off our roads, with the goods being transported by rail. The trunk road network is a major national asset, built up on the basis of decades of public investment. The former Conservative Government was failing to protect that asset through its decisions on budgets and priorities. It irresponsibly built up major expectations of new schemes, but at the same time raided the maintenance programme. Apart from being wholly irresponsible, that could only lead to bigger bills in the longer term. We have begun to tackle that inheritance, and have increased spending on repair and maintenance substantially. This year such spending is a third more than the figure inherited from the former Conservative Government, and further increases are planned for the next two years. We can already see an impact on the condition of the network, for example, on the Edinburgh city bypass, and on the A90. A key task is to increase effective capacity by making better use of the existing network, rather than carrying out widespread new building. That means better driver information; improving flows at key pressure points; promoting integrated approaches such as park-and-ride initiatives; and  considering systems to give priority on the network to particular types of vehicles such as buses and heavy goods vehicles. Route action plans allow us to introduce measures to address congestion problems or accident black spots. Increasingly, route action plans will be used to determine investment priorities across the network and will examine the extent to which public transport as well as road improvements can meet transport needs. To illustrate that approach, I am pleased to confirm today additional junctions at Inchmichael and Inchture on the A90 between Perth and Dundee and two new junctions at Forfar. Those grade-separated junctions will proceed to construction as soon as is practicable, and will bring real safety benefits to local people. Road safety is one of our key priorities. We will continue to place emphasis on accident investigation and prevention and on route accident reduction plans, as major safety benefits can often be secured through relatively inexpensive, commonsense improvements. We are working with the UK Government on a review of speed policy and expect to publish later this year new targets for the reduction of road casualties in the period to 2010. We are committed to protecting the environment through sustainable transport policies. That is why we need traffic management to protect communities from the effects of heavy through traffic and the pollution that is caused by stop-go driving conditions. It is why we need to improve the appearances of roads and bridges and to minimise or avoid altogether any harmful impacts of maintenance activity. That is also why we must ensure that environmental considerations are at the heart of the design process and take mitigating measures to minimise or avoid altogether any harmful impacts arising from construction. Environmental considerations are why I am ruling out the Kelvin valley for any replacement of the A80. That was a difficult decision, but on the grounds of cost and environmental damage, I believe that it is right. Our integrated transport strategy is about much more than building new roads. However, in certain circumstances, major new road construction is necessary. That is why we have built the A75 the Glen and the A828 Creagan bridge, and why we will progress further schemes. The roads review took as its starting point the 15 inherited major trunk road proposals and two non-trunk road schemes: the A8000 and M74 northern extension. Those 17 schemes have a total capital cost in excess of £800 million. We have scrutinised those schemes rigorously  against the criteria of economy, safety, environmental impact, accessibility and integration. We did that through the appraisal method that was developed for the review. Work began under the Scottish Office and the method was the subject of public consultation last year. A number of significant changes have been introduced as a result of the many useful responses that were received. The report that I am publishing today contains full details of the appraisal method and of the results for each scheme that was reviewed. The analysis is comprehensive and thorough but stops short of addressing fully a major criticism that was levelled at the appraisal method during consultation. There was criticism that the method did not take a wider approach to allow trunk road proposals to be compared with other potential solutions such as public transport. The Scottish Executive is developing a new appraisal framework and, although some further effort is required to complete that work, I have concluded that we must apply that wider approach before building substantial new roads. The review included the M8 completion, the M80 from Stepps to Haggs and the M74 northern extension to the Kingston bridge. Those substantial proposals have a combined cost of well over £400 million. Our analysis shows that they would carry very considerable volumes of commuting traffic, which is a sector of the travel market in which public transport should be able to make a much more significant contribution. I am therefore commissioning a multi-modal study of the transport corridors that are covered by the M8 and M80. I will ensure that relevant local authorities, transport operators, the business community and others with an interest are given a full opportunity to participate. I shall appoint an independent panel of academics to oversee that work. Consistent with the approach that I announced on 23 June, the proposed M74 northern extension will be promoted by Glasgow City Council and South Lanarkshire Council and justified on the basis of the contribution it can make to the local transport strategies of those authorities. I will be urging the councils to address environmental concerns about the proposal and to undertake a multi-modal study to identify whether there are options to reduce the scale of the road. I would also wish them to involve neighbouring authorities and those with an interest in this scheme in the work.

No, thank you.

I will take questions after I have finished my statement. On the same basis, the replacement for the local road, the A8000, which provides a connection from the Forth road bridge to the central Scotland motorway network, will be promoted by the City of Edinburgh Council working closely with Fife Council and West Lothian Council. Last November, the UK Government announced the preferred line for a new crossing of the Forth at Kincardine and plans to refurbish the existing bridge. Today, I can announce that we are appointing the Baptie Group to study engineering of the existing bridge, design of remedial works and the new structure and ecological surveys. We will also carry out transport surveys and modelling, including the potential to increase the use of public transport over the crossings. Both studies will consider whether early progress can be made on the proposed eastern link road to relieve some of the congestion that is currently experienced in Kincardine village. As the operation of the Forth bridge crossing affects the Kincardine bridge and vice versa, I will also be meeting the relevant local authorities and the Forth road bridge joint board to discuss those interlinked issues. In reaching my conclusions about the remaining schemes I have considered affordability—a notable change from the Conservative approach—as well as the outcome of our appraisal. We believe there are more appropriate alternative measures that can be pursued in five schemes. Those are the A92 from Preston to Balfarg; the A9 from Helmsdale to Ord of Caithness; the A96 Keith bypass; the M80 Kelvin valley option; and the A1 draft order scheme. We have also concluded that there is no valid case for retaining the M8/M6 fastlink. Three schemes will be held in abeyance and considered alongside other emerging priorities for a future trunk road programme. Potential schemes for that programme will be appraised using a multi-modal approach. The schemes are the A68 Dalkeith northern bypass, the A90 Balmedie to Tipperty route and the A985 Rosyth bypass. Five schemes will proceed, including the A96 Fochabers and Mosstodloch bypass, to continue the upgrading of the A96 and to remove through traffic from these towns; the A78 Ardrossan to Saltcoats bypass, to relieve congestion in the towns of Ardrossan, Saltcoats and Stevenston; and the A830 from Arisaig to Kinsadel to replace a single-track section of the main road to Mallaig.  That is the last piece of single-track trunk road in Britain and, as Minister for Transport and the Environment, I am delighted to announce the scheme. Work will begin next year. We will also proceed with the A77 Fenwick to Malletsheugh scheme to provide a dual, two-lane motorway. I know that colleagues have been campaigning for action on that dangerous stretch of road for years. Finally, we will continue the dualling of the A1 Haddington to Dunbar expressway, an important, all-weather route to England. The route has been long awaited and the Executive has now delivered. I am sure each of the projects will be warmly welcomed in their localities. The A830, A96, A78 and A1 schemes will be funded in the conventional way from the motorway and trunk road programme, funding of which we have recently increased by £35 million. We are, however, prepared to use private funding when it clearly represents value for money and we will be investigating that approach for the A77 scheme. I emphasise that that will not involve the introduction of tolls on this new road. We will be having early discussions about co-operation and joint working with East Renfrewshire Council and South Lanarkshire Council, which are promoting the Glasgow southern orbital route. That scheme will relieve congestion and end environmental damage in Eaglesham village. It will also provide a modern alternative to the heavily trafficked B764 from East Kilbride to the A77. The extensive road building programme promised by the Conservatives was an unfunded wish list. It was also based on building new roads to meet the future rising tide of projected traffic increases. Current estimates are for a 38 per cent increase in traffic growth over the next 20 years and a 52 per cent increase over the next 30 years. We need a new approach, especially in our cities and in the more congested central belt. We must make public transport more attractive and seek ways of shifting freight off our roads. We must also recognise the important role that walking and cycling can play in an integrated strategy. We must ensure that they are safe options. Roads have an important role and we will maintain and restore the motorway and trunk road network after years of Tory neglect. We look to local authorities to do likewise in regard to the roads for which they are responsible. I have announced today a package of costed new roads that we can afford from the resources available—resources that were enhanced last year in the comprehensive spending review and that have been further increased in the Executive's first financial statement. Those have been tough choices, but this is a realistic programme. I believe it is the right way forward for Scotland. I commend  this statement to Parliament.

Fife Council, the City of Edinburgh Council, West Lothian Council and the other authorities in the area have already done a great deal of work. They have been considering options for improving public transport and traffic flow across the Forth estuary crossings. That work has included extensive surveys, which have been supported by the Scottish Executive. I am looking forward to taking forward the options that the local authorities and the Executive have been working on.

I am happy to answer that, and I note the points that the Presiding Officer made at the start of these questions. We have carried out extensive consultation with our paper on tackling congestion. The question that Mr MacAskill asked related to existing trunk roads and motorways.

Yes. It would not be my intention to include, in the legislation that I will bring to this Parliament for further discussion and  consultation, the issue of trunk road and motorway tolls as a power for this Parliament.

Clearly, the local authorities involved could pursue a number of options. Part of my intention in the programme that we will bring forward in our integrated transport bill will be to provide a number of powers for local authorities to consider, covering such options as workplace parking levies and local road user charging. There is a variety of funding options, which I will be looking to the local authorities to explore. It would be prescriptive of me, at this stage, to tell them how I think they should take those options forward. That has to be the product of future debate.

The Executive intends to begin consideration of the A77 project after today's debate. As for the Glasgow southern orbital route, I had initial talks when I visited Fenwick with Mr Neil and several other MSPs. I am very aware of the issues involved in the timing of the two routes and I intend to ensure that the co-ordination and progress of the projects will be undertaken with those concerns in mind.

I have already said that we have had to make difficult choices. As we do not have sufficient funds to implement every scheme, we have had to prioritise. Councils could take advantage of very realistic options for developing  schemes. I am confident that that would lead to full consideration of other road projects and the development of options.

The strategic roads review has covered the key issues of route action plans and measures to tackle safety problems. All the schemes that have not been approved today will go into the pot for consideration under the appropriate local mechanisms. There are options to improve route safety without implementing the initial schemes proposed in the strategic roads review.

As I announced today, we are taking further the proposal to develop the route. I will have to report back with a detailed time scale, which will depend on considering the options for funding the route. That will progress from today.

We are taking the project forward in the next financial year and will consider the best options for progress.

The scheme analysis includes alternative ways in which to analyse and deal with safety issues. The key point is that we seek to repair and maintain the roads. That is why the strategic roads review is significant—it is about maintaining as well as extending the network.

That section will cost around £12 million. I cannot say when it will be completed, but it will be started next year. We intend to make early progress on that route.

The timetable will follow later.

I will report further on that matter later.

One of the points that I made was that the local authorities involved in the scheme would have to give sufficient justification for it in their local transport strategies. I would expect them to include relevant information to that end.

The reviews will be started from today. I do not have dates for completion, but I am happy to report them to the member later.

Progress will commence as soon as possible. The expenditure is included in our costed programmes, so the scheme will go ahead.

A range of criteria was used. It is important to note that some improvement work has been carried out on that stretch of road, and that, as I understand it, other options may lead to improvements, such as alignment of the route and the possibility of crossings. Today's announcement does not mean that no work will take place in the future, only that the specific scheme will not be carried forward.

That is correct. The scheme that we have selected has to be given further consideration and approval through the planning process. We will commence that process swiftly.

I understand that some work on that has already been carried out. I am concerned that we examine the full range of options. Our priority will be consideration of the choices for the optimum improvement of transport in that area.

It will have to satisfy the relevant planning criteria.

Yes. The review is about the strategic roads programme and the use of our road network. I intend to take forward the issue of road user charging through legislation—that will be a different piece of work. The debate has been on-going for the past four months, and I have discussed with many people a number of issues, including additionality, hypothecation and transparency. I intend that debate to continue. My statement today was on the strategic roads review.

There is a long backlog of maintenance. The significance of the comprehensive spending review programme money is demonstrated by the additional £58 million over the next three years. That will enable us to catch up with some of that maintenance. We have to prioritise on the grounds of the efficiency of the road network and its safety. That catching up is what we are doing now.

There are no plans at present to review the guidance.

I acknowledge that there are concerns, particularly in areas where there are landfall sites. It is crucial that we ensure that those sites are managed effectively and that the appropriate licences are attached. That is an issue for the Scottish Environment Protection Agency.

No. The Scottish Executive has not yet received advice from its nature conservation advisers on the identification of marine special protection areas under the birds directive, so there are no plans at present to classify the seas around Fair isle as a marine SPA.

It would be helpful if I explained, as I said in my answer to Robin Harper last week, that the moderation process on special marine areas and special areas of conservation is still in progress. Until that process has finished, which is looking at land-based SPAs and SACs, we will not move on to look at marine-based areas. However,  I would be happy to talk to Tavish Scott about the other matters that he raised.

We are committed to adopting a national strategy for waste by the end of this year. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency is working on a strategy that will cover waste minimisation and recycling.

The scheme that we are working on at the moment is the national waste strategy that SEPA will publish before the end of the year. It will look primarily at the range of disposal and recycling options that will be available to the people of Scotland.

Each application must be treated on its merits. In assessing new proposals, planning authorities will take into account all relevant material considerations, including the policies set out in revised national planning policy guideline 8, on town centres and retailing, which was published last year.

I can guarantee that we will apply those policies consistently throughout Scotland and that we will consider the sequential test, which tries to give priority to developments in town centres and takes into account vitality and viability when any out-of-town proposals are being considered.

Our national planning policy guidelines do not impose traffic restrictions on rural economic development. They seek fully to exploit sustainable patterns of travel. Planning and road policy should be appropriate to the specific circumstances of rural areas.

I do not want to get into the specifics of an individual application, but the broad  approach that is pursued—through the national planning policy guideline on transport and the rural development national planning policy guideline—is to direct development to the most appropriate places. We recognise that in rural areas, the car is often the most easy and accessible form of transport for many people. The presumption—through the planning system—should be to identify appropriate sites that can promote business development, take most account of existing travel patterns and try to promote development in rural areas.

The Scottish Executive is fully implementing the birds and habitats directive and contributing to the network of Natura 2000 sites across the European Union.

We have suggested candidate special areas of conservation to the EU and are in the middle of a moderation process. The meeting to which Mr Harper referred took place in Kilkee last month. Several issues were raised about the principles of issues attached to sites. We will review our sites and will ask Scottish Natural Heritage to carry out scientific research on the issues that were raised at Kilkee. We will take that evidence into account when proposing a final list of special areas of conservation to the European Union at the next moderation meeting.

I am very grateful to Nick Johnston for initiating this debate and, given his success rate with members' business so far, I am tempted to take a tour of his area of the world to see what else is lying around there that he is likely to bring up in the future. The debate has been useful. Members' contributions have been informed and thoughtful and that has been useful to the debate. It is important that we discuss this issue, and I am grateful to the Transport and the Environment Committee for the fact that it is conducting an inquiry. It seems to me that that is a classic way for a committee to make a distinctive contribution to the work of our Parliament. It enables us to have a debate such as this in the open and to focus on the issue. I am also happy to be able to explain the Executive's position on the matters that have been raised as quite a few detailed questions asked about what we intend to do. I am happy to take the opportunity to outline what we will do regarding some of the issues. It is clear—and Nick Johnston was absolutely right in his opening remarks—that some of the issues that we are discussing are within the competence of our Parliament. Other issues—for example, those that are to do with health and safety, telecommunications and wireless telegraphy—are reserved to Westminster. We need to take that on board, but it should not prevent us discussing those issues. On the other hand, the planning system and health matters in Scotland are either wholly or partly devolved, so there are particular issues on which we can act. In Scotland we do not gather statistics about the level of growth that there has been in mobile  phone installations, but we are all aware that there has been a proliferation of them. That is not, in itself, a problem. The issue of health matters that Nick mentioned, the fact, which Elaine Thomson mentioned, that mobile phone masts seem to appear without notice in some circumstances, and the issue of people not being clear about the planning process are issues that I would like to address in my remarks. First, I will clarify what is meant by permitted development rights, which confuses many people. Permitted development rights were granted through the Telecommunications Act 1984. That meant that telecommunications operators did not need to get planning permission for relatively minor developments. Masts that did not exceed 15 m were allowed permitted development, which meant that in certain areas the developers were able to go ahead without the involvement of the planning authority. The purpose of that exemption was to enable the telecommunications industry to expand. It has certainly done that. Many of the comments made by members this afternoon have been about the balance that must be struck between the expansion of the industry and issues of amenity that must be taken on board. We know that there has been expansion and that the Westminster Government, through Calum Macdonald, conducted a consultation process last year. A range of measures resulted from that consultation and I am keen to introduce them as soon as possible. I do not want to go into the detail of the proposals, but direct questions have been asked today and clarification would be useful. For masts under 15 m, we intend to introduce a 42-day prior approval procedure, which would require telephone operators to notify local authorities that they intend to construct a ground-based mast that is under 15 m in height—masts higher than 15 m already require planning permission. Our proposal would extend the current 28-day procedure by 14 days, which would enable the local authority to consult on the development and inform people about it. Notification would be at the operator's expense and would be done through an advert in the local newspaper. For other equipment that is under 15 m in height—radio housing equipment and so on—a 28-day procedure is proposed. That would require the operator to apply to the planning authority for a decision on whether prior approval is needed for the siting of the development. That would let issues such as amenity to be considered and enable the planning authority to judge what it wanted to say to the operators. Sylvia Jackson suggested that there is a degree of ambiguity. It is important, however, that local authorities are given the opportunity to discuss with the operators what  is acceptable in their area. We intend to add sites of special scientific interest to the list of areas where permitted development rights are restricted. That list includes conservation areas and national scenic areas and I, like Keith Raffan, am keen that local authorities should be able to control planning issues in such areas. We want to ensure that the public has more information on the issues involved and that the local authorities can engage in constructive discussions with the operators. The majority of proposals are likely to be acceptable but the public should be able to do something about cases that cause particular concern locally. The onus is on the planning authority and the 28-day and 42-day periods are critical.

That is right. That is why I said that the onus is on the local authorities. We will issue local authorities with a proposed code that will clarify some of the matters that have been raised today. We need the local authorities to establish procedures whereby these things can be dealt with effectively. We want to enable mobile phone operations to go ahead, but we also want more control over the process and we want the process to be more transparent and accountable. I think that we will be able to deliver that. There have been a number of comments about the impact of mobile phone installations on health. One of the problems is that the planning system was not designed to deal with those matters specifically. We need to re-examine the planning process and health and safety legislation. We should consider the report of the House of Commons Science and Technology Select Committee and the independent research that was initiated by Tessa Jowell. The report stated:  "Validated scientific evidence supports the conclusion that neither mobile phones nor their associated base stations, if they comply with current maximum exposure guidelines—as they appear to do—present a health hazard." Those comments appeared at the end of that report. We must examine closely the results of the independent research that is being carried out. I understand that all members of the Scottish Parliament were notified that that was going to take place. We will follow those results with great interest. In the meantime, our new procedures will help the process. They will bring transparency and more clarity to the process, and will, I hope, allay  many of the concerns that members have expressed this afternoon.

With permission, Sir David, I will make a statement about the devolution of executive functions for railways to the Scottish ministers, for which provision has been made in the UK Railways Bill. Before I turn to the main purpose of my statement, I wish to register my own shock and horror regarding the appalling events outside Paddington on Tuesday. Yesterday, as a Parliament, we passed on our condolences to the families and friends of the people who were killed or injured in that terrible accident. As transport minister, I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate that the safety of everyone who travels on public transport is a primary concern of the Scottish Executive. Rail safety is an issue on which we need consistent standards across the whole UK. The Scottish Executive is, therefore, in regular contact with the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions, the Health and Safety Executive, Her Majesty's railway inspectorate, the Rail Regulator and the British Transport Police on matters relating to rail safety in Scotland. Earlier today, Gus Macdonald gave me clear assurances that any lessons learned from the public inquiry into Tuesday's accident will be applied in Scotland as uniformly as they will be throughout the rest of Britain. The rail industry in Scotland has already committed itself to investing in improved safety across the network, aimed at further reducing the chances of accidents. Although Scotland's recent rail safety record has been comparatively good, that should in no way be grounds for complacency. We will work with the industry in Scotland and UK transport safety agencies to ensure that rail safety standards continue to improve and passenger confidence in rail travel is restored. On 7  July, I wrote to all members of the Scottish Parliament outlining arrangements for transferring a number of executive functions to Scottish ministers through provisions made in the Railways Bill introduced at Westminster the same day. When the bill was introduced, the Scottish Parliament was in recess, so I made a commitment to make a statement on these matters to members once they reconvened this  autumn. Today, I am honouring that commitment. Members will recall that on 31 March last year—during the passage of the Scotland Bill—Henry McLeish announced in the House of Commons that a significant and extensive range of legislative competence and executive functions dealing with railways would be transferred to the Scottish Parliament and Executive. At the time, there was considerable debate about the future of the railways across Britain. The UK Government had already committed itself to reforming the structures that regulated and managed the privatised rail industry. It had stated that legislation would be introduced to give statutory weight to its commitment to secure a better deal for rail passengers. Our priorities are to ensure that the railways are operated safely, securely, efficiently and in the public interest. We believe that core standards need to be common in all parts of the UK. I also believe that a number of key functions that affect the type of service that is delivered to rail passengers in Scotland should be held by the Scottish ministers. Provision for those functions has been made in the UK Railways Bill. The bill is intended to deliver the devolution of executive powers over the issuing of directions and guidance to the strategic rail authority in relation to passenger rail services that start and end in Scotland and are provided under a franchise agreement; and over the issuing of directions and guidance to the SRA in relation to passenger rail sleeper services that start or end in Scotland and are provided under a franchise agreement by an operator who also provides passenger rail services that start and end in Scotland. Those functions are to be exercised within a Great Britain strategic policy framework for the railways. That will ensure that standards of performance management, operation, safety and security are applied consistently across the rail industry. In addition to directions and guidance to the SRA, the bill also reaffirms the authority of the Scottish ministers to make freight facilities grants and track access grants in Scotland within the new statutory arrangements and overall GB policy. In my letter to MSPs on 7 July, I explained why it had been decided to transfer those functions by making provision for them in the UK Railways Bill. Usually, the transfer of executive functions would be achieved through the use of orders under section 63 of the Scotland Act 1998. Such orders require the approval of both Parliaments. Indeed, a number of railway functions have already been transferred to the Scottish ministers in that way.  However, in the case of the executive functions dealing with directions and guidance and freight grants, Scottish ministers agreed with the UK Government that, in this instance, it would be more straightforward and transparent to provide in the bill for the transfer to the Scottish ministers. The normal route for transferring functions to the Scottish ministers remains orders under the Scotland Act 1998, over which this Parliament will have control. The transfer of executive functions that is provided for in the UK Railways Bill is one part of the agreed devolution package for railways. It may be helpful to members if I indicate the current position on the other components of the package. The Scotland Act 1998 already provides for the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament to give certain grants for passenger rail services. Further legislative competence for the rail responsibilities of Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive, and for the authorisation of proposals for the construction of new railways in Scotland, will be devolved to the Scottish Parliament by order under section 30 of the Scotland Act 1998, again subject to the approval of this Parliament. The executive devolution order made under section 63 of the Scotland Act 1998, which was approved by both Parliaments in June, devolved executive responsibility for the administration of rail freight grants. That order, with an order under section 89 of the Scotland Act 1998, which has also been approved by this Parliament, also transferred to the Scottish ministers the responsibility for appointing the chair of the Rail Users Consultative Committee for Scotland. The order also requires the Office of the Rail Regulator to consult the Scottish ministers on the appointment of new members to that committee. Furthermore, the order requires the Scottish ministers to lay the reports of the Rail Users Consultative Committee for Scotland, the Central Rail Users Consultative Committee, the franchising director and the Rail Regulator before the Scottish Parliament. Arrangements are also being put in place to transfer to the Scottish Executive the finances to pay for the passenger rail services that are currently provided by ScotRail under the terms of its franchise. The implementation of the first components of this package is already reaping dividends for Scotland's railways. The ministerial authority to make freight grants has enabled the Scottish Executive to make three major awards totalling more than £6.5 million since 1 July. Those awards have already made a major contribution to the "Partnership for Scotland" commitment, which was  reaffirmed in "Making it Work Together", to transfer freight from road to rail. Other challenges are emerging in the rail industry. The Scottish Executive will play a full part in a range of matters that directly impact on the quality of service that is delivered to rail passengers in Scotland. The transfer of executive functions and legislative competence to the Scottish Parliament and Executive will give us the means to do that. In the meantime, I have established solid working relationships with the shadow strategic rail authority and the Office of the Rail Regulator in advance of formal powers being conferred to the Scottish ministers. Both Sir Alastair Morton, chairman of the shadow authority, and Tom Winsor, the Rail Regulator, have stated publicly that they will take a very close interest in the development of railways in Scotland. Railways are a vital part of an integrated transport policy for Scotland. This year alone, more than £200 million of public money is being spent on Scottish rail passenger services. Without that level of support, the rail industry would be unable to invest in new trains, track and signalling. The recent introduction of the 15-minute interval Edinburgh to Glasgow Queen Street service is the latest example of how public money helps to generate improved services. The rail network can, and does, reduce road congestion, help to reduce the negative environmental impact of cars and lorries, and provides fast, increasingly comfortable, punctual and reliable links between most of the country's principal cities and towns. I know that there is much to be done. The measures in the Railways Bill give the Scottish Executive the powers to ensure that the rail industry works in partnership with Government to help to deliver a better deal for passengers.

I have to disagree with Mr MacAskill on his last point. The Scottish Parliament will have the opportunity to promote and improve rail services in Scotland. Providing passenger revenue subsidy is one method of doing that. The efficient operation of the ScotRail franchise should offer us—as it has in the last month—the opportunity to provide a new raft of services throughout the whole of Scotland. There will be other ways to invest in the railways network. We are already using money from the public transport fund to invest in the network. One of the ways in which I am keen to ensure that we maximise investment is through the investment that Railtrack makes. I have already spoken with Tom Winsor about that.

I believe that we will be able to make appreciable improvements to the railways network in Scotland. There have already been improvements in the Glasgow to Edinburgh service as a result of the ScotRail 2000 exercise. That will improve the quality of service across the central belt. Improvements have also been made between Glasgow and Edinburgh and Aberdeen, and between Glasgow and Edinburgh and the Fife network. There will be new investment in stock and increased provision of railway facilities throughout Scotland. I hope that the Scottish Parliament will be able to focus attention on the priorities for future railways investment. The Scottish public transport fund—we have already made the first allocation, the second is due shortly—presents the opportunity to consider the priorities suggested by local authorities. A good example of that is the £8 million we gave to Edinburgh for the cross-rail project.  The freight facilities grant presents another welcome opportunity. When I have visited local authorities over the past few months, I have encouraged them to consider what schemes they and the rail companies might suggest to the Scottish Executive so that we can work together to improve the transfer of freight from road to rail and invest in new facilities. We recognise that that transfer often involves substantial capital investment for the companies involved. That is the purpose of the freight facilities grant. The Transport Development Group Nexus development in Grangemouth, for example, will enable the development of sidings. At first, they will be used primarily by TDG Nexus, but other firms will be able to use them in future. I was glad that TDG Nexus was able to confirm that on the day we announced the award.

I am happy to report to Mr Muldoon that during the summer I met the zonal director of Railtrack Scotland, Janette Anderson, and the managing director of ScotRail, Alistair MacPherson. One of the issues that we discussed in those separate meetings was rail safety. A large number of accidents on the railway network of Great Britain are caused by vandalism, but in Scotland the proportion of accidents caused by vandalism is significantly higher than in the rest of the country. That is an important issue for us to focus on in Scotland. We need to take it seriously, and I hope to follow it up when I meet the British Transport Police next month. Safety is one of the key issues that is addressed in the ScotRail franchise. We need to consider safety in broad terms, not just in terms of track investment and the quality of investment by Railtrack, but in terms of the management of rail services. We also need to consider safety at individual stations. Strathclyde Passenger  Transport Executive and ScotRail have installed closed-circuit television in many stations in the west of Scotland. CCTV gives passengers at unstaffed stations the reassurance that somebody is watching. On a recent visit to Paisley, it was interesting to watch how it works in practice and to see the level of scrutiny in stations with CCTV. I hope that that such measures can be expanded throughout Scotland.

The Borders railway line survey is currently being carried out. We are part way through that process. A number of organisations have contributed to that study, including Midlothian Council, Scottish Borders Council and Railtrack. The survey is considering the various options and possibly reopening part of the Borders railway line—the Waverley line. I am keen to consider the recommendations when the report is concluded towards the end of November. I will take on board the issues raised in the report and see what is possible.

I congratulate Mr Jenkins on effectively expanding the focus of the discussion from rail to road. I entirely take Mr Jenkins's point. As we have a dense rail network across the most urban parts of Scotland, one of our challenges is to find out how we can improve the quality of services in rural areas. We have an opportunity to increase the frequency of rural rail services on, for example, commuter services into Aberdeen or Inverness. Trains might have to stop at an extra station. Although that would have an impact on the times of trains and the speed of service, it might bring benefits to areas where trains have rushed through without stopping.  Mr Jenkins is right to say that a strategic approach is required. I hope that we will be able to focus on those issues through the work of Scottish ministers and in discussions with the Transport and the Environment Committee to bring benefits to rural areas. We might, for example, be able to provide high-quality park-and-ride facilities in more remote areas where it would be extremely expensive to add track. That might encourage people to drive to those areas to access the main railway network.

I understand that a Railtrack study completed in 1993 estimated the cost of electrification of the Edinburgh to Glasgow route via Falkirk High at £45 million, which is quite a hefty price tag. The new every-15-minute train service between Glasgow and Edinburgh will, I hope, provide a dramatically improved service for constituents in Mr Canavan's area and I will be happy to talk to him about how that service will make an appreciable difference.

Improving travel times between Glasgow and Edinburgh is an important issue. However, the accessibility of the new service in places such as Falkirk High will markedly improve the railway network and transform people's perceptions of the accessibility of the railway network.

I thank Ms McNeill for her comments. She has raised the matter with me several times since the summer. Concerns have centred on overcrowding on certain trains, particularly between Glasgow and Edinburgh. I hope that a train every 15 minutes between those cities will make an appreciable difference to that service by spreading the load. As for passenger comfort, the number of people travelling on the railways in Scotland has increased by about 20 per cent over the past couple of years. The rail industry is growing, which requires a response from the rail companies as  well as from Government. I take on board Ms McNeill's point that passenger comfort is absolutely crucial for people to make the shift from road to rail. If people are going to use the railway network, the network has to be of a high quality. I am happy to raise those points in my discussions with ScotRail and the other train companies.

As discussions are still taking place between Scottish Executive officials and the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive, I have no news to give Mr Campbell at this time.

Increasing the number of stations that are accessible to people with physical disabilities is a major challenge. I have discussed that with ScotRail in the past. The requirements that have come from the Disabled Persons Transport Advisory Committee provide some useful targets for the rail industry to work towards. The Disability Discrimination Act 1995 is improving standards across the transport industry, and I would be happy to take forward with Helen Eadie our future discussion on the subject.

I would not like to make any comments about the next set of passenger rail franchises. We will deal with them later. I agree with Nora: attracting more passengers on to the rail network has to be one of our key priorities. The Executive needs to take forward the issues of safety, reliability, accessibility and ticketing as part of our overall approach to improving the quality of the railway network in Scotland.

I am sure that we will be able to take that on board as we examine the priorities for the whole of Scotland. The agenda is challenging and a significant amount of money is involved in improving the rail network. We must get better value from existing services. The rail network is expanding. We had decades of under-investment in the rail network and the industry was declining. I think that it is exciting and significant that we are now talking about our future priorities for expansion of the railway network in urban and rural parts of Scotland. It is not an agenda to be delivered overnight, but the Parliament should take this challenging objective forward.

I can reassure David Mundell that, in advance of the strategic rail authority being set up, the Scottish Executive is in discussions with the shadow strategic rail authority about a number of issues on the future of railways in Scotland. I take on board his representations on this subject, which he has made to me before.

I discussed the issue of trunk roads with the council in August, and I have suggested that there should be a fuller discussion later this year. The route action plans that have been agreed, or which are in preparation for most of the trunk roads in the area, will provide the framework for that discussion and for any future investment.

Priorities have been attached to the roads that Alasdair Morgan mentioned. The A75, for example, was the subject of a £7 million investment to the west of Dumfries, at the glen. It is one of the two routes that has been exempted from the moratorium on road building since the Government came to office in 1997. I would argue that there has been substantial investment in the area, and that the route action plans represent a tangible way of progressing.

No. We are, however, proposing to introduce soon measures to give planning authorities greater influence over the siting and design of telecommunications masts and related developments.

There will be a 28-day prior notification period, which will give local authorities greater control over the process. We also intend to issue a practice advice note to encourage telecommunications companies to work together on the siting of masts. I believe that, by giving local authorities more influence, we will be able to tackle the issue that Mr Johnston raised.

The purpose of this statement is to announce the appointment of the first water industry commissioner for Scotland, but I would also like to take this opportunity to set out the new regulatory arrangements for the Scottish water industry and the commissioner's vital place in the new framework. The new regulatory arrangements were announced by the Scottish Executive in July, but so far there has not been an opportunity for Parliament to discuss them. The water industry is a vital part of our lives, yet it is almost invisible to most of us, most of the time. Clean, safe drinking water, and efficient, environmentally friendly removal of waste are essential for our survival, yet we take those services for granted—we expect safe water to come from the tap whenever we need it, and waste to be removed with no apparent effort. However, much of the basic infrastructure on which we rely, both for drinking water and for sewage, was put in place in the Victorian era. It has served us well, but decades of under-investment mean that much of it needs to be replaced soon. That is the backdrop against which new challenges must be faced. The Scottish water industry faces twin challenges: to meet the aspirations of the Scottish people in terms of environmental standards and drinking water quality, and to do so at minimum cost to the customer. The water industry has a central role to play in our ambitions for sustainable development in Scotland. That is reflected in the Executive's programme of government, in which no less than three of the key environmental commitments will be delivered through the Scottish water authorities: improving standards of urban waste water treatment by the end of 2000; bringing Scotland's designated bathing beaches up to European standards; and investing to raise the quality of Scotland's drinking water. The challenge that is posed by those commitments should not be underestimated. It involves an unprecedented investment programme of around £1.7 billion over three years, and significant further investment will be needed beyond that. The industry has to work to long time  scales, a fact that increases the importance to the authorities of being able to plan for the medium term with some certainty. Investment is needed to meet our European obligations, which cannot and should not be evaded. Most prominent among them are the urban waste water treatment directive, the main provisions of which take effect at the end of next year, and the drinking water directive, for which the main deadline is 2003. More important, investment is needed to protect and improve the quality of our rivers, coasts and beaches, and to ensure that the water that we drink meets the highest public health standards. The second part of the challenge is to achieve those objectives and deliver the investment programme at the least cost to customers. The water industry's activities can be financed only from charges to customers and by borrowing, which has to be repaid. Scotland's water services are firmly in the public sector and that is where they will stay, because the people of Scotland have made it clear that that is what they want. Our three water authorities are accountable to the Executive, and through the Executive to the Parliament, for their performance. The coming of the Scottish Parliament strengthens the direct chain of accountability between the authorities, democratically elected representatives and customers. We must demonstrate that our Scottish approach can also deliver on efficiency and customer service. We need a regulatory regime for the Scottish water industry that provides the best framework for meeting this environmental and public health challenge at the minimum cost to the consumer. I am confident that the arrangements that will come into effect on 1 November provide such a framework. The Water Industry Act 1999, which became law in June this year, included provisions for reform of the regulatory system in Scotland, including the establishment of an independent water industry commissioner. Because devolution was about to take effect, our predecessors deliberately drafted the legislation in a way that left it to the new Scottish Executive to decide whether to implement the new system. Having considered carefully the present system, we had little hesitation in agreeing that there was an urgent need for change. Customers deserve a system that ensures that their interests will come first and that they will get the highest-quality services at the best price. The water authorities need a system that gives them clarity and certainty, so that they can plan and manage their operations as efficiently as possible.  The Scottish Executive's three roles in relation to the water industry are as owner, environmental and public health regulator, and efficiency regulator. In addition, the regime that we inherited involves a completely artificial division between the Scottish Executive—as efficiency regulator—and the customers council, which has primary responsibility for agreeing water charges, looking only one year ahead. It is difficult to carry out that function without a full appreciation of the scope for efficiency gains in the water authorities and the investment programmes that the authorities need to implement. Before devolution, ministers carried out a wide-ranging review of the water industry and concluded that it was essential to bring together the strands of economic regulation and price setting. The new regulatory regime will remove that artificial divide and, by bringing efficiency regulation under the responsibility of the new water industry commissioner, will distinguish more clearly between the roles played by the Scottish Executive. A crucial feature of the commissioner's remit will be his professional scrutiny of the water authorities' finances. The water industry commissioner is at the centre of the new approach. His overriding duty is to promote the interest of all water customers. There is no conflict between his two roles of economic regulation and customer protection—those are the functions that come under the term economic regulation. His role—to examine closely the authorities' finances, to question and challenge their costs, and to encourage them to be as efficient as possible—is at the heart of customers' interests. We believe that that role should be carried out with rigour, transparency and clear independence from Government. That will reassure customers that the water authorities' finances are subject to independent, expert scrutiny and will enable them to see that the charges they pay are being kept as low as possible. Alongside those new responsibilities, the commissioner will take over the Scottish water and sewerage customers council's current roles, including investigating unresolved customer complaints and approving the authorities' codes of practice. We are grateful to the members and staff of the council for their work and their commitment over the years to protect the interests of customers. I am confident that the commissioner will inherit firm foundations, which have been laid by the council. The commissioner also needs to know about customers' concerns on a regional or even local basis. That is why there will be three local consultative committees to support the commissioner and advise him on the interests of  customers. The commissioner will chair those committees, ensuring that their advice is at the heart of the regulatory process. The new regime will also change the way in which the Scottish Executive plays its role of environmental regulator. The commissioner's job will be to provide expert economic analysis and advice, but it is not his job to decide which areas of the water authorities' plans and operations are essential or optional. Those are issues for ministers, who are responsible for defining the standards of water quality and environmental protection that must be met by the water authorities. Most of those standards flow from European commitments, while others reflect the Government's own priorities for the industry. Therefore, the Scottish Executive will give the commissioner a statement defining the standards that must be met by the water authorities. The commissioner will still be able to challenge the cost of the work associated with those standards, but he will not be able to question the need for that work. We shall publish that statement at the same time as we send it to the commissioner. It will be an important new step. For the first time, Government will set out clearly in one place the standards that it requires the water authorities to meet. For the first version of the paper, we plan to bring together the standards that have already been set and the broad implications for the investment requirements of the water authorities. However, the document is not the end of the story. It marks the beginning of a continuous and transparent process in which, as we strive for improved environmental standards, we will be able to assess and provide for the resources needed to deliver those standards. It means that the commitments that we make will be achievable as well as challenging. The quality and standards paper and a broader guidance document on the conduct of the charging process will form the essential framework within which the commissioner and the water authorities will operate. Within that framework, the commissioner will advise ministers on the charge levels necessary to enable the authorities to meet the environmental and water quality standards that have been set. In effect, the commissioner will recommend to ministers the level of a charge cap, which normally will be for a period of several years. Ministers will consider the commissioner's expert advice and decide whether to endorse his recommendations. They will then finally set the charge cap. We are committed to ensuring that that process has maximum transparency. There will be no question of the commissioner's professional expertise being compromised or influenced by ministers. The legislation guarantees that all  stages of the process, including both the commissioner's advice and ministers' decisions, will be made public. That demonstrates our commitment to a process that is rigorous and open, and our commitment to avoiding short-termism. Once ministers have decided on the level of the charge cap each year, the commissioner and the water authorities will agree, or if necessary refer to ministers, the individual charges for services. The water authorities' annual charge schemes will have to fit within the charge cap that ministers have set. Our basic principles will be quality, efficiency, transparency and accountability. The water authorities have a key role in cleaning up our beaches and rivers, and in using water in a sustainable way. However, success in meeting those broader objectives will depend on partnership, not only between the Scottish Executive, the new commissioner and the water authorities, but with local authorities, industry and us as individuals. Local authorities have a key role in the planning and provision of amenities. Industry and the farming community can minimise waste and water pollution through improved practices. All of us can use water resources more responsibly. The Scottish Executive will work to encourage that partnership approach. I take this opportunity to give an example of the partnership approach in action. I have intervened to defer for a year the increases in water charges facing some charities and voluntary organisations. Last year, the water authorities and the customers council agreed to begin withdrawing relief from charges that is currently granted to a range of bodies. As a result, those bodies faced higher water bills this year. Soon after I took office, the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations made representations to me that the charitable and voluntary bodies facing higher bills had not been given enough warning about the increases. As those bodies typically operate on fixed, annual grants, it was becoming clear that the money to pay for the increased water bills might have to be found by reducing front-line services. Given the importance that the Executive places on the voluntary sector's contribution to Scottish life, I was concerned by that, and agreed to investigate. Although the average increase in bills is small and the water authorities were acting quite properly in trying to ensure fair treatment for all their charge payers, I agree with the SCVO that the organisations that were faced with higher bills needed more time to budget for them. Therefore, I have arranged with the water authorities that they will immediately restore in full relief for the current year. The SCVO will welcome that breathing  space for its members. It understands the argument that its members should pay for the services that they receive, but deferring the withdrawal of relief until 1 April 2000 satisfies its main concern. I am pleased to say that there is further protection for the sector, in that the full charges will not come on stream for five years. We had no doubt that it should be a priority to put the new regulatory regime in place as soon as possible. We have decided to implement the new regulatory arrangements from 1 November. That means that benefits can begin to feed through to customers and the water authorities from the water charges settlement for the next financial year. If we had not made that decision, the annual nature of the charging round means that the new regime would have had no impact until April 2001.  We announced that decision promptly, in July, because we needed to move quickly to identify and appoint a suitable person as the first water industry commissioner, in time for 1 November. We were determined to ensure that the appointment process complied fully with the rigorous principles that are required by the commissioner for public appointments. The demanding and important new position of water industry commissioner needs someone with the right blend of special skills, experience and personal qualities. I am delighted to announce to the Parliament that we have found such a person, and that we plan to appoint Alan Sutherland as water industry commissioner from 1 November. Mr Sutherland has relevant expertise and experience. He studied economics, and has wide experience in banking and in management consultancy. He also has direct experience of establishing and managing a customer-focused company in challenging circumstances. I am convinced that Mr Sutherland has a firm commitment to ensuring the highest levels of service and value for customers. He also understands clearly the business and economic issues that confront the water industry. I have no doubt that his experience and talents make him well suited to the post of water industry commissioner. Our new regime will involve a powerful new watchdog for customer interests, equipped to ensure that prices are no higher than required to meet our environmental and public health objectives. There will be a longer planning horizon, through a multi-year cap on charges, giving greater stability for customers and water authorities. The system will be much more transparent, with a clearer division between the Executive's roles as owner, economic regulator and setter of environmental standards. It will be a regulatory regime under which Scotland's public water industry can become a world leader in  customer service and efficiency. I am happy to take questions from members.

On the last point, the whole purpose of appointing an independent commissioner is that he will be able to take direct responses from consumers. We have ensured that he will chair local forums so that he will able to hear consumers' concerns directly. It is important to stress that all those meetings will be held in public; the meetings will be a matter of public record and people will be able to assess the independence of the water commissioner. I hope that the framework that we have established will provide accountability. Every part of the chain will be open and publicly accountable. It will be possible for the Transport and the Environment Committee, for example, to discuss the issue of the water industry and its regulation in the future. There will be an effective process of accountability, through the Scottish ministers' appointment of the water commissioner, who will report back to them. All that correspondence will be made public. People will be able to see how  decisions are being made. The purpose of the commissioner is to act in the interests of consumers and to ensure that they understand the key issues that the water authorities are addressing. At the moment, we do not think that that role is being carried out effectively.

That last comment was very helpful. Committees will appointed in the same way as before. Their membership will be made public so that everyone can know who is on them. Their purpose will be to feed through the interests of the customer, just as they do at the moment. The difference will be that the water industry commissioner will have direct access to the views of those people. That is a matter on which the Executive can report back to the Parliament. We will have to review the way in which the process operates. I acknowledge the concerns that Mr Lochhead and Miss Goldie have expressed. This is a new system and I hope that it will work effectively, but we will monitor the process.

I am happy to reassure Mr McNulty that the process that we have established today should ensure accountability and transparency in our public water authorities. The Scottish Executive will set the framework through its paper on quality and standards. The paper will inform the water authorities, via the water industry commissioner, of the standards that we hope they will meet. We want a dynamic public sector water industry that can learn from the private sector, because there are many ways in which the water industry will be able to develop over time. The critical thing is that it will be accountable through Parliament—I appoint the water industry commissioner—and through local forums to the customers. Their views will be heard through the water industry commissioner. Local water authorities will still be appointed by ministers and there will be opportunities for local involvement at that level as well, as there was in the most recent round of appointments.

The approach that we have taken acknowledges that the water authorities are in the public sector. They are not accountable to shareholders; they are accountable to their charge payers and their customers. We make that distinction. I hope that the system will be transparent and that people will be able to see the process by which the water industry commissioner regulates the three water authorities. The Parliament will be able to monitor that over time. I am confident that our system will deliver  transparency and accountability.

It is not possible to ensure that every area is represented on boards. Of the people who put themselves forward, we try to choose from the widest geographical spread possible, bearing in mind, of course, the talents they offer. On the Scottish utilities forum, we think that the system that we have established today will be effective and workable, and will meet our objective of achieving high-quality standards in our water industry, as set out in our programme for government.

I am happy to report that the West of Scotland Water Authority is implementing a significant investment programme to ensure that there are cleaner beaches on the Clyde coast. Earlier this summer, I visited the waterworks at Fairlie, where the new system is being introduced. It is important to take into account not only the work of the water authorities but the fact that there are wider industry and agricultural challenges to meet. A key long-term issue that we need to consider is partnership between the range of people involved. I want to pick out the farming community in particular, with whom we had some good discussions over the summer. In the coming years, we will have to address issues such as diffuse pollution, which can be done only in partnership. I am glad to say that the Scottish National Farmers Union's response was very positive, which bodes well for the future.

There were 20 applications for the post. As the appointment was made according to the Nolan requirements, I cannot tell Mr Harper how many people were shortlisted. However, if he is keen to know, I can provide that information in writing afterwards.

This model was chosen because we felt that it reflected the opportunities provided by the establishment of the Parliament to introduce an effective system that would be accountable to MSPs. It was important to separate off the issue of economic regulation, which we felt was not appropriate for the rural affairs department to operate. The job of ministers is to set overall environmental standards. The water industry commissioner will be able to review local water authorities to ensure that they are providing as efficient and as effective a service as possible. We feel that the chosen model will be economically efficient, will meet environmental standards and will be accountable to Parliament.

The water industry commissioner's starting salary will be £67,500 a year. The commissioner's staff costs will come to £1 million, which is broadly the same as existing arrangements.

The water industry commissioner's regime will ensure appropriate investment to meet environmental standards in each water authority area, that charges are reasonable and that water authorities carry out their job as efficiently as possible. However, we have not established a regime in the way that Mr Tosh suggests. I am sure we all accept that it is much more difficult to provide water and sewerage facilities in the northern part of Scotland. That reflects the point Mr Ewing made. I visited some of those areas in the summer. They are very spread out and provide a challenge for the water authorities. We must bear that in mind when setting standards for the authorities in the coming years.

Under the devolution settlement for railways, Scottish ministers will be able to give guidance to the authority on cross-border services. The Executive will be discussing with the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions and the franchising director the detailed arrangements for exercising that function.

We are exploring with the DETR and the shadow strategic rail authority how guidance issued by the Executive will be taken on board. We will also hold discussions with ScotRail.

I would like to make a quick point before I start. Mr Tosh asked me to correct a typographical error in my speech notes, and I am happy to do so: the Conservative party was in power for 18 years, not 20. There were times when it felt like a lifetime—was it really only 18 years? There is consensus in the Parliament. We all want a high-quality road network and a world-class public transport system. We all recognise that we need different approaches for the urban and rural parts of Scotland. That consensus is promising. The problem is that people will not address the issues of how we will pay for transport investment and how we can tackle traffic congestion.  I have spent all summer listening to Kenny MacAskill and Linda Fabiani avoid addressing the issues in our "Tackling Congestion" paper. Today, we finally had a ringing endorsement from them for congestion charges, even if it sounded a bit thin after the attacks during the summer. The SNP has always pretended to be all things to all voters. Linda Fabiani's support for the SNP joining the Green grouping in the European Parliament sounded hollow, particularly in the context of Kenny MacAskill's comments about opposing landfill tax. We have a problem with how we can meet our environmental commitments. We need a responsible debate on the problem. The SNP is in favour of road pricing; I am glad that SNP members have made a commitment to it today. The party supported city centre charging schemes in its 1999 manifesto.

I was talking about congestion charging. You said that you supported it in city centres. Is that correct?

So you support some form of road pricing, as long as it is congestion charging and is left to the local authorities. That is the approach that is suggested in our consultation paper. I look forward to your endorsement of that suggestion and any other helpful suggestions on how the proposal can be implemented. The SNP has dodged transport issues for months. You have historically argued for highly focused road pricing and your transport spokesperson—

I do. When I refer to the Opposition parties, I will do so explicitly. Thank you for that point of order, Mr Gallie. On 28 August, the SNP transport spokesperson Stewart Hosie said that there might be some arguments for motorway tolls. The SNP conference in September 1998 endorsed a motion that recognised that certain car pricing schemes might provide the revenue needed to develop alternatives—the conference supported focused road pricing to help develop public transport alternatives. Those comments were welcome, and  I welcome the SNP to the serious debate about congestion in our cities. Despite those policies, the SNP is also in favour of increasing income tax. We have one of the lowest rates of income tax in Europe and one of the lowest rates of corporation tax. Money for investment in transport has to come from somewhere. Earlier this year, Alasdair Morgan, during the 24 hours for which he was the SNP's transport spokesperson, said that he wanted an extra 1p on income tax to go towards investment in roads. That statement was withdrawn within 24 hours. The SNP has not had a consistent or coherent approach to transport investment in Scotland. I will be interested to find out whether the SNP will support the Conservative party's motion, which is a thoroughly confused one. It welcomes the Scottish Executive's commitment to reducing vehicle emissions, yet does not say how that could be achieved. John Young asked us to set the rest of the world an example. That is the point of the Executive's policy. The Tories recognise the importance to Scotland of our transport links by road, rail, sea and air, but abdicate all responsibility to the UK Government. The point of having a Scottish Parliament is that we should be able to make choices about where to invest the money that we receive in the block grant. As David McLetchie said, the Tories propose a unionist transport approach. Scotland deserves better. We need to set our transport policies in Scotland, while playing a full part in the UK. The Tories promise new investment without the slightest idea of how they will pay for it. They promised the M74 contract; we have committed £25 million a year to it for the next 30 years. We are paying for investment in the road system and in public transport. Our new public transport fund and our new rural transport fund are further evidence of our commitment to invest in transport. The Tories promise more money for maintenance, but cut maintenance spend to unprecedentedly low levels when they were in power. Roads are important for cars, buses and lorries and they should be a key part of any transport strategy for Scotland. We have embarked on a major consultation on road charging. I want an opportunity to reflect on all the views received when the consultation process ends in two weeks. I encourage both the Opposition parties to respond. I would like the detailed comments that they have made today to be on paper, so that they can be properly considered. I have set up a sub-committee of the national transport forum, which is not a group of yes-men. It is made up of people, some of whom  support our policies and some of whom have reservations, who will draw together the comments that have been submitted so that we can take forward a policy that people will support. This Government is determined to build an integrated transport system that meets Scotland's economic and social needs but does not threaten our health or our environment. That will require innovative solutions. During the summer, I talked to the Confederation of British Industry, the Road Haulage Association, the Automobile Association, the Royal Automobile Club and many local authorities to work out ways in which we can work in partnership and build consensus. I am happy to take on board Kenny Gibson's comments about social inclusion and buses. Our objective in bringing forward an integrated transport bill with legislation on buses is to address frequency, timetables, through-ticketing, access and the quality of buses. There are good examples of partnerships in action, but we must broaden them and give local authorities a statutory basis for working with transport operators. That is what is critical about our policy, and we hope to work with people to deliver it. It will require commitment from central and local government. We have to tackle our inherited transport problems of under-investment, a second-class public transport system and polluted cities. Those will be our priorities. We need to recognise the diversity of Scotland. I appreciated listening to the speeches by Jamie McGrigor, Euan Robson, David Mundell and John Munro. They are right to call for an integrated approach in rural areas. It is important that we acknowledge that most people in rural areas need to use their cars. That is why we have supported rural petrol stations and why I am anticipating the second Office of Fair Trading report on fuel pricing. We want to reflect on those matters. I have been talking with councils in the Highlands and Islands, Argyll and Bute and the Western Isles. We need to work together, using our rural transport fund, to deliver for people in rural areas. However, it must be an integrated approach, and I welcome the comments about coastal shipping and transporting timber. I have been working with John Home Robertson on our review of the freight facilities grant, to see whether it can be extended to shipping. Those are important issues that we will reflect on as the Executive. Scottish ministers, the Parliament, local authorities, regional partnerships, transport operators, voluntary groups and the UK Government must all work together in partnership. It is about balance, not about focusing on the needs of one group of transport users.  Mr McLetchie, we do not see motorists as being a separate group in society. Motorists use a whole range of public services. We need to take their views into account as much as those of anyone else. We want an integrated approach to our road, rail and bus networks, which tackles local problems, including local congestion. That is a broad approach. It is a transport policy that embraces rather than excludes, offers people choice where there is no choice at present, and seeks to protect our environment while ensuring economic prosperity and social inclusion. I move amendment S1M-151.2, to leave out from 'expresses concern' to end and insert: 'commends the efforts the Scottish Executive is making to tackle the consequences of eighteen years of Conservative transport policies and reverse the resulting legacy of under investment, rising congestion and environmental degradation, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to continue to work to deliver a sustainable, effective and integrated transport system through in particular the Programme of Government commitments on investing in public transport, promoting a national transport timetable and bringing forward a Transport Bill in early 2000 whilst reflecting the diverse transport needs of all Scotland's people, in particular those living in rural area, and by so doing to take the decisions required to deliver, working with others, an integrated transport system fit for the 21st century.'

With respect, I wish it to be clear that I made no such statement.

Ms Fabiani should not believe everything that she reads in the press. If it has quotation marks around it, it is my statement.

Does Mr MacAskill accept that the consultation paper specifies that, if any schemes are suggested—let me make it clear that the Executive has no such proposals for any stretch of our existing trunk roads or motorways—there would have to be extensive research into diversion, as there has been in other countries?

I am grateful to the Conservative Opposition for this opportunity to debate the future of transport in Scotland and to highlight the depth of confusion and doublethink to which Conservative transport policies have sunk. I commend the Conservatives for their bravery in raising this issue. Scotland's motorists and public transport users deserve a realistic and honest debate; we have seen little of that in recent months. We heard some fine words from our colleague Mr Tosh. He tried to portray himself as the motorist's friend and the defender of the car driver. But what do his words really add up to? From 1979 to 1997, the Conservatives had their chance to show their concern for Scotland's travelling public, and what did they do? They cut spending on motorways and trunk roads from £247 million in 1994-95 to £162 million in 1997-98. They pressed ahead with an over-ambitious road building programme without providing the money to back it up, leaving the roads network to deteriorate. Hardly the motorist's friend. What about public transport?

Does Mr Tosh wish to intervene on the issue of public transport?

The Conservative Government left us a legacy of an over-ambitious programme, in Scotland and in the United Kingdom as a whole. We are the Government that now has to work out how to fund that programme and how to prioritise the various schemes within it. Our answers will be clear when I present the strategic roads review to Parliament.

Not at this point, Kenny. What about public transport? We heard a little from Mr Tosh about how public transport cannot meet our balanced transport objectives. I will take no lectures from the Conservatives about public transport. In one memorable year, 1996-97, they reduced central Government grants to local authorities for transport investment to zero. Yes, zero. In other words, no money for local roads, no public transport fund, no rural transport fund and no community transport fund. What about the Conservatives' car-friendly policies? As Mr Tosh rightly anticipated, I would like to remind Parliament that the Conservative Government introduced the fuel duty escalator in 1993 and increased it from 3 to 5 per cent. According to a certain Ken Clarke:  "Any critic of the Government's tax plans who claims to also support the international agreement to curb carbon dioxide emissions will be sailing dangerously close to hypocrisy." Only yesterday, Michael Meacher reinforced that point when he said that we would need to review the programme in 2002. Who, I wonder, published "Paying for Better Motorways", as far back as May 1993? Whose Scottish transport policy statement in February 1997 canvassed the possibility of "a better use of price signals to influence the demand and supply of road space"? That is an interesting proposal. The prose is somewhat confused, but the meaning is clear—charge the motorist. Who said those things?

Perhaps Mr Tosh could enlighten us.

I quoted from "Paying for Better Motorways", which does not talk exclusively about new roads. The Conservatives think that it is important that we discuss this issue in what they call the right climate. When will we reach that right climate? We did not hear a lot from Mr Tosh about Tory plans for the future. We have to move further south for those—to John Redwood. People say a lot of things about John Redwood, but he is the Tory transport spokesman.

In the absence of any practical proposals from Mr Tosh, we have to look to the Tories' 10-point plan for the motorist. John Redwood's proposals are for minimum speed limits, whereas our discussions in constituencies tell us that local communities are calling for appropriate lower speeds, not higher speeds. Mr Redwood also proposes a mix of tax reductions and spending increases on roads, without any explanation of how the bill can be met. That is wholly implausible, and nothing has been added this morning to provide clarity. I want to be fair to Mr Tosh's motion. He recognises the importance of reducing vehicle emissions. However, why is there no meaningful mention of public transport? He dismissed it out of hand, saying that it would have virtually no useful role to play in tackling emissions and congestion.

No, I will not give way. I have taken a number of interventions already, and I would like to get on. The difference between the Government and our opponents is that we are prepared to look honestly and constructively at Scotland's transport problems, and to consider what needs to done to provide solutions. I would like to outline the Executive's agenda for action, explaining how we propose to tackle the Conservatives' legacy of inaction in transport. Our programme for government commits us to delivering an integrated transport policy that will provide genuine choice in meeting our transport,  social and economic needs, while protecting the environment as well.

No, I will not give way yet. The devolution settlement gives us powers in transport policy. We will also vigorously promote Scotland's interest in  reserved matters.

Yes, I will.

It is difficult to answer several questions when only one was expected. There has been a lot of cheap political posturing in recent days on the issues of fuel duty and reserved matters. I want to make it absolutely clear that, since the day that this Parliament was established, my colleagues and I have been second to none in standing up for Scotland's interests. We have ensured that our interests are placed firmly on the agenda in Whitehall, both through direct contacts with Treasury ministers and through the Secretary of State for Scotland. That is true on tax and on other matters, such as the one that Mr Gallie mentioned. However, it would hardly be in Scotland's interests for me to turn my private contacts with UK Government colleagues into public diplomacy by soundbite. Those who suggest otherwise are putting narrow party politics ahead of Scotland's interests. If anyone doubts this Executive's ability and willingness to defend and promote Scotland's interests, let them reflect on Lord Macdonald's August announcement on opening up Prestwick to freight carriers. That will give Scottish business easier access to world markets—a good outcome for Scottish business and a good outcome for Scottish jobs. That is the sort of negotiation that we are engaged in. At the local level, we are working with local authorities. They are absolutely critical in delivering local  solutions to local problems. Our first round of local transport strategies is in place. Our public transport fund will provide £90 million over three years. The first round awarded £29 million over three years to 13 local authorities, and  the second round of bids is currently being appraised. At the national level, we are committed to making travel easier for all by delivering an effective national public transport timetable.

Yes, I would be delighted.

We are indeed making representations to the UK Treasury through the correct channels. This year, we are introducing a voluntary scheme that will provide free travel for blind people on bus and rail services. We will spend £18 million over three years to encourage freight on to rail—I welcome Mr Tosh's support for that measure. Only last week, we allocated money to LAW Mining in New Cumnock for that purpose and, on Monday, I was in Grangemouth with Lord Macdonald to announce our largest-ever award for freight road-to-rail transfer. We are also addressing distinct issues in Scotland's rural areas. We are committed to £14 million of new investment over the next three years. Following representations from rural communities, this year we have added more to the pot for rural petrol stations to make sure that people have access to petrol in those areas. Yesterday, I announced 21 community transport awards totalling almost £500,000. From Orkney and Shetland to the Borders, rural Scotland will benefit from the development of new, innovative local transport projects that will be delivered by communities to meet their own needs. That is not all. We will investigate what can be done to bring together aspects of rural transport,  rural development and social inclusion to provide the maximum support for accessible rural services. We are also helping lifeline services by providing the largest-ever financial support for Caledonian MacBrayne, northern isles ferries and Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd. We are building two new ferry vessels for CalMac at a cost of £20 million. Furthermore, next year we will introduce our integrated transport bill, which will contain a balanced package of measures to improve Scotland's transport services, as Mr Tosh suggested should be done. Our proposals on charging have recently provoked a fair amount of argument. However, I hope that the debate is now coming back to earth and that we can have a serious and realistic discussion about tackling the growing problems of congestion and air quality in our cities and in our vital transport arteries. We are not doctrinaire; we will listen and take the consultation seriously.

That is the best intervention we have had all morning. We are not doctrinaire. The whole point of our transport strategy is to consult people. We have asked a number of questions in the transport consultation document and I await views with interest. I find ridiculous the Conservative proposal to cut short the debate and wait for a better climate before we consider the crucial issues before us. We have made it absolutely clear that, should we proceed on the back of our consultative paper, the money that we would receive from road user charging would be entirely additional; it would be new money that would be directly channelled into transport. There would be consultation and motorists would expect—and receive—value for money.

I am not giving way. We will also introduce legislation to place bus  quality partnerships on a statutory footing to allow local authorities to introduce quality contracts where appropriate. I recognise many local authorities' concern about recent service withdrawals and tender price increases. We have therefore commissioned a research study to examine trends in the bus market. Although there can be no return to old-style public control, bus operators cannot ignore the wider social context of their activities. I submit that those measures represent a comprehensive and balanced programme for the future. We should be under no illusions about the extent of the challenge. Existing unsustainable transport trends are the product of decades of neglect. However, we have started a process that will deliver a transport system fit for the 21 st century. I move, as an amendment to S1M-151 in the name of Mr Murray Tosh, to leave out 'expresses concern' to the end and insert 'commends the efforts the Scottish Executive is making to tackle the consequences of 20 years of Conservative transport policies and reverse the resulting legacy of under-investment, rising congestion and environmental degradation, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to continue to work to deliver a sustainable, effective and integrated transport system through in particular the programme of government commitments on investing in public transport, promoting a national transport timetable and bringing forward a transport bill in early 2000 whilst reflecting the diverse transport needs of all Scotland's people, in particular those living in rural areas, and by so doing to take the decisions required to deliver, working with others, an integrated transport system fit for the 21st century.'

Landraising is an acceptable form of controlled waste disposal, provided such development receives the planning permission and waste management licence required from the appropriate authorities.

There are no special rules governing landraise. Each planning application must be considered on its own merits and in the light of the development plan. The management of licences for those sites is carried out by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency.

Investment in the development of rail infrastructure is principally a commercial matter for Railtrack. If local authorities wish to work with the rail industry on enhancing the rail network, their proposals may be eligible for support from the public transport fund.

If Mr MacAskill likes, I can provide him with a written answer on that detailed matter.

This financial year, more than £208 million of public money will be spent to secure passenger train services in Scotland. An additional £6.1 million will be available for Scottish rail freight schemes.

As I said to Mr MacAskill earlier, I am happy to address that matter and will provide a detailed answer in due course.

We are not aware of any firm proposals for improvement of the frequency and quality of services on this railway line and the development of railway services is primarily a matter for the rail industry. However, should they so choose, local authorities on the route of the line could apply to the Government's public transport fund if they believed that proposals for improving rail services on the line were eligible for support.

Not directly as the Scottish Executive. However, the introduction of a four-times-an-hour train service on the Glasgow-Linlithgow-Edinburgh line will lead to a cascade of ScotRail trains throughout the network. Then there will be the possibility of higher quality trains on the Glasgow-Shotts-Edinburgh line.

An application to the public transport fund has been lodged by North Lanarkshire Council for the opening of a new station at Gartcosh. I await the outcome of the application with interest.

We have plans for £18.3 million for this year and the next two years under the Freight Facilities Grant; £90 million will be available over the next three years for the Public Transport Fund, while £14 million will be available from the Rural Transport Fund.  In addition, there are payments to Strathclyde Passenger Transport from the Scottish Executive for rail passenger services provided by ScotRail, which will amount to £88.3 million for 1999-2000. Under devolution, the Scottish Executive will secure responsibility for funding the rest of the ScotRail franchise; this year this is worth £120.4 million.

We propose to introduce legislation later this session. Our aim is to improve bus quality and frequency by giving a statutory basis to quality partnerships, by setting new standards for timetabling, through ticketing and enforcement, and by making arrangements for quality contracts where appropriate.

In a deregulated market, it is for the bus companies to set fares. Through quality partnerships, we will encourage bus companies to introduce simpler and fairer ticketing schemes and to try to reduce costs. The hope is that generating greater bus use will bring the price of bus services down and the system will be made more straightforward and provide a wider range of good tickets.

This has been an intelligent and useful debate and I thank Mr  Davidson for making the most of this early opportunity to get the issue on our agenda paper. We are extremely aware of the serious concerns of fish processors in the north-east and we are concerned about their difficulties. I acknowledge the point made by several members about the industry's importance to the local economy and to the thousands of people who work in the industry. I understand that the figure is around 6,000, although other estimates have put it higher.  The charges set by NOSWA for dealing with waste water containing trade effluent will rise very substantially if we do not take action and resolve the issue. I want to put on record the two main factors behind the increase in charges. First, NOSWA is now fully implementing the Mogden approach to setting waste water charges. Secondly, as several members have said, the implementation of the European directive on urban waste water treatment requires NOSWA to provide secondary treatment for significant discharges by the end of 2000. That means that those who discharge trade effluent into the urban sewerage system will have to pay for secondary treatment.  That is where we have to begin this debate. I appreciate Elaine Thomson's comments about environmental issues. I suspect that most people would be alarmed by the amount of raw sewage that we pump into our rivers and seas with all the resulting problems for bathing waters and public health.  In NOSWA, 65 per cent of sewage is dispersed into our waters with minimal treatment. I am sure that we would all agree in principle that we cannot tolerate that in this day and age. Investing in necessary treatment will mean higher charges for us, but I believe-and I hope that the whole Parliament will agree-that this is a price that we have to pay if we really care about looking after our environment.  On setting charges, NOSWA inherited various approaches from the previous regional authorities. The idea of moving to the Mogden formula is that it is the fairest approach. It has been endorsed by the Confederation of British Industry. Under the Mogden formula, the level of the charge depends on the volume and strength of the liquid that is discharged. Essentially, the greater the pollution, the higher the charge. It is now a standard throughout the water industry and in Scotland people are already paying charges using this formula. The cost of treating waste water has to be paid either by those who discharge the effluent or through cross-subsidy from other customers. The Mogden formula ensures that the polluter pays and there is no cross-subsidy between customers of the water authorities. We welcome NOSWA's efforts to move towards a proper and fairer cost recovery system.  At the same time we have to address the issue of the European urban waste water treatment directive to ensure that specified levels of treatment are provided to meet specified deadlines. In many coastal areas, this means introducing sewage treatment for the first time. In Fraserburgh, Peterhead and Aberdeen, where most of the fish processors are based, there is a requirement for secondary treatment by the end of 2000. That backdrop means that we do not have a long time to debate this issue. Conservative members have suggested that we delay the implementation of this directive to allow consideration of a technical review now being undertaken. I do not believe that a delay would be a sensible option for us to pursue. Failure to implement the directive in time would mean that the UK ran a serious risk of infraction proceedings from the European Commission in the European Court of Justice. We are aware that the European Commission is keen to pursue this issue.  On the point made by Richard Lochhead about trying to receive derogation on this issue, the previous Administration under Lord Sewel attempted to get derogation for Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire to prevent us from having to address this issue. It was given the clear understanding by other European states that this would not be acceptable, so we have attempted to get derogation.

No, I will not take an interruption.  If we were taken to infraction by the European Commission, the money would be taken from the Scottish block. There are already two examples where countries are being taken to the European Court of Justice on the issue of dealing with waste water treatment-Italy and Belgium are both being taken to court-so there is an imperative to implement the directive on time.  I am sure that members who have talked to the food processing industry will know of the lengthy history of this issue. Some firms have begun to address it and NOSWA has attempted to encourage the fish industry to prepare in advance. There has been an extensive information programme, advice packs, consultation documents and there have been hundreds of meetings. NOSWA is sympathetic to the position of the fish processors and has for some time been advising industrial dischargers to attempt to reduce their future charge increases by investing in cleaner technology or minimising the use of water. I understand that some firms have been able to do that. NOSWA has also agreed to phase in the increased charges over a number of years.

I will not give way.

In my speech I am dealing with the specific points that members have raised. If a member would like to make a new point that has not been made already, I am quite happy to accept an intervention in my speech as long as I get time added on at the end of my speech.

If it is a new point that has not been raised already, I have to take it. I know that Mr Lochhead has already made a speech.

That is a flattering point but that is not the situation. We have attempted to address this issue through the route suggested by Mr Lochhead and we have not been successful.  I will now talk about the solutions that are available. The difficulty of this debate is that we do not have a long window of opportunity. There has been a lot of joint work among NOSWA, local councils, enterprise companies, trade associations and others to try to address the issues of waste minimisation and to offer advice on best practice. NOSWA has contributed £25,000 to a waste minimisation programme for fish processors, and it continues to offer them advice.  Some fish processors have been able to reduce the charges that they will face, but I accept that for many of the smaller ones it has been extremely difficult to do so. I appreciate the anxiety that the increases in the estimated charges has caused to fish processors, and I am concerned about their potential impact on the fish processing sector as a whole.  A number of suggestions have been made on practical ways of taking the debate forward. One suggestion was the development of a separate plant specifically to treat trade effluent. I understand from NOSWA that Mr Davidson's point about its having developed a giant scheme under PFI is inaccurate. The scheme has been developed to deal with the situation in Aberdeen. Storm water, and not just trade effluent, is the key  issue in determining the capacity of the plant.

No, I will not.

If traders do not need to use the plant, the PFI scheme will operate in such a way that the charges can be accommodated. That is the risk that the PFI bidder takes on in accepting this project.  Mr Brian Adam made a point about the PFI project as well. The scheme is one potential way to proceed and it would be dealt with by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency under its regulation and control schemes. However, we urge caution. In the immediate future, I want to have a detailed discussion with people in the fish processing industry and with my colleague John Home Robertson to find a possible way forward.

Yes, Mr Davidson, if the point has not been made before.

I hope that it is in order for members to prepare their thoughts in advance of coming into the chamber and to amend them while speaking, as I am doing.  Mr Davidson's motion asks us to delay dealing with the urban waste water treatment directive. That option is not available to us: we have to address the directive. It was enacted in 1991, so there is a long history to this debate. We have to get our treatment schemes in place by the end of 2000. I am keen to have discussions with the fish processing industry. There is going to be a consultation paper on the new criteria for giving financial aid, which will be put in place from next year. We can examine and discuss a number of issues. However, delaying is out of the question. We need to work out effective solutions.

No, I am winding up. The strategic review study will offer us a number of opportunities to examine this issue. Time is short; but in my ministerial position and with my other ministerial colleagues, I am keen that we talk to people to discover what we can do. As everybody has made plain, it is a complex issue with no easy solution. Had there been an easy solution, I am sure that the Conservative Government would have solved it when in power. We need to comply with European directives; we cannot ignore them. We have to work out strategies to help the industries and communities, which will be difficult.  I suggest to Mr Lochhead that, if we are trying to bring a fresh view to the debate, we have to consider the long-term strategic implications of any initiatives. We should not ignore the implications and pretend that they are not going to happen, but we should address them in Parliament and in our committees to ensure that we meet our obligations under the European directives, and that we meet them in a way that is sensible and will benefit our whole community.

The four bridges were procured under different statutes, and have different toll levels, maintenance costs and capital debts. We will freeze the tolls on the Skye bridge at 1999 levels. Tolling at the other bridges will be considered nearer the dates when the respective rights to collect tolls expire, as set out in the relevant statutes.

We are still paying tolls because we are still paying for the costs of the bridges. The partnership agreement commits us to freezing tolls at 1999 levels and to examine the impact of the discounted schemes that are in operation. At the moment, discounted tickets are used for one journey in two and by nine out of 10 buses and lorries. During the winter, discounted tickets are used for seven out of 10 passenger journeys in cars.

We are taking stock of this major review and considering the role of such roads in our integrated and sustainable approach to transport. We expect to report to Parliament after the summer recess.

I acknowledge the importance of the strategic trunk roads network to businesses and communities. It is important that trunk roads are used effectively and that goods can be transported around the country in good time. We need to consider ways in which to improve the effectiveness of that network. The Government has put in money, through the comprehensive spending review, to ensure that we can maintain the roads network effectively and to the proper standard, and to examine a range of measures such as taking freight off roads and encouraging it on to rail. That will ensure that we make the most  use of our strategic trunk roads network and that it works for business as well as it does for individuals.

I am happy to agree. We need to take a broad look at the role of the roads network and how it fits into our integrated transport strategy. Safety issues, environmental issues, access issues, integration with the rest of the network and economic development are all important. The strategic roads review will consider those key things to ensure that we do not have a wish list of roads, but a sensible approach so that we can prioritise effectively for the good of the country.

It would be premature for me to announce an individual option from the strategic roads review before we have conducted that review. As I mentioned to Malcolm Chisholm, the key issues are to do with access, integration, safety and economy. We are investigating those things in the roads review. When Parliament returns in the autumn, we can consider those issues and decide on our priorities.

I thank Brian Adam for raising this issue and thank all members for the level and quality of the contributions that they have made to the debate.  I hope to travel to Aberdeen on 6 July. The comments made today will be useful when I visit the city and look at its transport problems. As members have said, this proposal has been around for a long time and has widespread  implications, some of which members have picked up on today. The proposal has potential benefits for the economy and for congestion, by relieving traffic through the city, but an 18 km road through a green belt location also has potential costs and will potentially have an impact on local communities, as Irene McGugan mentioned.  The route would cost a very large sum, as Brian Adam correctly identified. Early estimates suggest that the cost would be in the region of £85 million, which is far in excess of the sums that would be possible for such schemes with conventional funding. I will come back to that point later, because I think that it is a key issue.  I want to address also the wider context of this proposal, because it cannot be examined in isolation from the overall transport strategy for Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire.  I am delighted to put on record the extent to which Aberdeen City Council has promoted innovative and radical transport strategies. We have already heard about the sustainable transport strategy implemented in Aberdeen last year. It was funded in partnership, which is extremely important, as it set the context for an overall transport strategy.  Improvements are taking place. Key examples are the park-and-ride site at Bridge of Don, the bus priority measures along the A944 from the previous transport challenge fund, this year's public transport fund approval for bus priority measures, park-and-ride sites on other important corridors into the city, and other proposals being developed by the council for bus priority measures in other parts of the city.  Progress has also been made on rail issues. Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council have worked effectively with ScotRail to develop rail services in and around the Aberdeen area. There is also the possibility of a feasibility study into a half-hourly service between Stonehaven, Aberdeen and Inverurie. Those are important developments.  Key service improvements have been introduced by ScotRail in the past two years. There are seven additional services through Stonehaven and five additional services through Dyce.

No, thank you. My speech is too long for the time available.  Two additional services from Edinburgh now also stop in Inverurie. Improvements are coming into place. ScotRail has also made proposals to redevelop the former Guild Street rail freight depot. That is important, because it will provide  the opportunity for a major transport interchange, fully integrating rail, bus and coach services, a taxi halt and a car park, all connected by covered walkways.  Things are happening in Aberdeen that are important in the context of this debate. We look forward, through the local transport strategy and the bids that will be submitted in the next round of the public transport fund, to further ideas for developing the strategy in Aberdeen.

It is my intention to travel through the city and to see the different transport problems that are being experienced.  As well as the local transport strategy, there is a new joint structure plan for the area covered by the Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire authorities. The combination of those two documents presents the councils in the area with the opportunity for a full discussion with the communities about the opportunities that are available.  We need fully developed transport and land use strategies. All the speakers today have mentioned that. We need to ensure that we have an integrated approach, which will require a lot of effort from the councils.  I want to flag up two key issues that I expect Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council to address: the importance of the western peripheral route relative to sustainable transport measures in the city centre, such as walking, cycling, increased bus priority and improved bus frequencies; and the extent to which bus priority and other measures in the city centre are dependent on early progress of the bypass. I understand that the Oscar Faber study drew at best a modest link between the two.  The land use implications of the bypass and the possible knock-on effect on transport demand also need to be addressed, especially the effect of any future greenfield developments on car-based demand, as speakers today have mentioned.  Finally, we need to consider how best to integrate the proposed western peripheral route into a comprehensive transport strategy for the city and its hinterland.

The key point that I am trying to get across concerns the relationship between Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire, the city and its hinterland. We must have a transport strategy that meets the objectives of those different areas.

No, I will not give way, because I want to get on to funding, which is a key issue that several members have talked about. To avoid any doubt, I have to make it clear that the western peripheral road is not under consideration in the trunk roads review, nor has any Government made any commitment to incorporate such a road into the trunk road network.  Members might ask why the Scottish Executive cannot, nevertheless, trunk this route and fund its construction. That question deserves a straight answer and I want to be as open as possible. The severe pressures on the trunk road budget mean that trunking would be an empty gesture-in the foreseeable future there is no realistic prospect of funding the western peripheral road from the trunk road programme.  Many members have approached me over the past few weeks about road schemes in their localities. There is nothing wrong with their doing that: it is their job to represent the views of their constituents and local businesses. However, if I were to accede to every request, I could spend the trunk road budget several times over. Even if persuaded of the case for doing so, the Government could not build all those roads while meeting its priorities in education, health and housing. Somebody has to be disappointed. I therefore urge those from the north-east to consider alternative means of progressing this scheme, along the lines that I am about to suggest.  Members will be aware that last week the Government announced its intention to introduce a transport bill in the next session. Among other things, the bill will permit local authorities to introduce charges for the use of existing local roads in a designated area, and will give them powers to levy workplace parking charges. We intend to consult widely on those issues, and to publish details of our charging proposals very shortly. I note Mr Adam's suggestions, and I encourage him to make them again during the consultation process.  Any proposal by a local authority to introduce charging would require the consent of the Scottish Executive. In considering such a proposal, ministers will be mindful both of the extent to which the authority has won the support of its local  communities for its integrated transport policy, and of the thoroughness with which the authority has established plans for spending money on all modes of transport.  The new western peripheral road could be promoted using existing powers in the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991 for tolling new roads. Those powers are being used by the promoters of the Birmingham northern relief road, although that particular project has attracted a fair degree of controversy on other grounds and may not be the best of models. However, the 1991 act is worth considering.  Inevitably, it will take time for people in Aberdeenshire and Aberdeen to develop and refine their thinking on strategy, including plans for the western peripheral. That will have been time well spent if the end result is a more integrated and sustainable set of proposals that address the transport problems of the north-east in the round.  Officials met the councils last year and stand ready to do so again. I intend to be fully involved in the development of strategies and in the consultation on charging. I look forward to the development of today's debate, and to informed and balanced debate about how we might meet the needs of road users and public transport passengers alike. However, members must be under no illusions: there is no piggy bank sitting at Victoria Quay waiting to be raided. If the western peripheral is to have a place at the heart of Aberdeen's integrated transport strategy, it will require innovative funding sources and brave decisions by Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire councils working in partnership with their local communities. There is no ducking that hard reality. To say otherwise would be to raise unrealistic hopes in the minds of members and their constituents.   Meeting closed at 17:34.

Our strategy is to ensure that CalMac has a forward capital investment programme in vessels and shore infrastructure that is both affordable and sufficient to secure the future of lifeline ferry services off the west coast of Scotland.

The Deloitte & Touche report was commissioned by the previous Conservative Administration. When the Labour Government came to power, it examined the recommendations in the report and requested that further work be carried out. I understand that that work has recently been received. The Scottish Executive intends shortly to make the reports available for consultation. I hope that all those with an interest will comment at that stage.

The western peripheral route around Aberdeen is a proposal that is being promoted by Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council. They will have the opportunity, in submitting their local transport strategies to the Scottish Executive next month, to explain how that route would contribute to an integrated transport strategy for the area.

We have no plans for the trunk road programme that would directly affect the western peripheral route around Aberdeen. The transport bill will provide the opportunity for local authorities, with the approval of the Scottish Executive, to bring forward road-user charging schemes where appropriate and where they would fit in with their local transport strategies.

I thank Sylvia Jackson for initiating this debate. Every speech earlier this afternoon was prefaced by the phrase, "I wish we could have been talking about something else." Well, here is an important subject with practical significance for the future of Scotland.  There is widespread agreement about the need for a national park, but I will respond to some of the specific questions that have been raised. This is not a new issue; it has been with us for a long time. It is not a mark of haste to suggest that it should be one of the priorities for an incoming Scottish Parliament.  For centuries, Loch Lomond and the Trossachs have been celebrated for their outstanding scenic qualities. The area supports a rich mix of water, wild land, forest, woodland, farmland and people. It is an exceptional landscape throughout the year and is of the highest importance, both nationally and internationally, in terms of natural heritage.  To those who suggest that a national park would create pressures, I say that there are already pressures. The real question that we must address is how to manage existing problems in an integrated and effective way. Somewhere in the region of 5 million people visit Loch Lomond and the Trossachs each summer. Many of them are stopping locally, but many are staying for a longer period. Many of them arrive by car: about 93 per cent of visitors travel privately, the vast majority by car. Mr Monteith's comments about parking and infrastructure are absolutely critical and must be addressed.  The west Highland way, which was mentioned by Fergus Ewing, attracts more than 50,000 walkers per year. There are already problems in Loch Lomond and the Trossachs. Robin Harper was absolutely correct with his comments on managing the critical and carrying capacities of the area, but we need a mechanism to do that. Although we do not currently have such a mechanism, the national park may provide us with one.  I offer one last snapshot of the issue's importance. Around 70 per cent of Scotland's population can travel to Loch Lomond and the Trossachs in less than an hour. That is an awful lot of us for a day trip, and does not include visitors from abroad.  Since the election of the Labour Government in 1997, we have made substantial progress. Scottish Natural Heritage has carried out a huge amount of research, in two phases. Initially, people were asked to give their views; those consulted included local authorities, community councils, public agencies and everyone in the area who was interested. Reviews of national park structures elsewhere were commissioned, and the experience-which Mr Raffan mentioned-both nationally within the UK and internationally, was considered. A huge number of meetings were also held. In the second phase of the consultation, more than 10,000 copies of Scottish Natural Heritage's proposals and consultation paper were issued.  A great deal of consultation has been carried out. That does not mean that everybody is happy, but in the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs area there is substantial support for our moving ahead with this measure.  There is less support overall for such a measure in the Cairngorms, as was mentioned by other members. I acknowledge that there is less enthusiasm in the Cairngorms, but we need to consider bringing people together to discuss the issues. The national park legislation must contain enabling legislation that is appropriate to different areas.

I will not. I should emphasise to Mr Ewing that we do not want one blueprint for the whole of Scotland. We need national parks proposals that are appropriate to individual areas. We as a Parliament need to steer a consultation process, initiated by the Executive and the Parliament, and covering the whole of Scotland-

I can see that Mr Ewing is absolutely desperate, so I will let him make a brief intervention.

Funding depends on the kind of national park that we in this Parliament collectively agree on. We can speculate-SNH predicted how much particular kinds of national park would cost-but until we know what kind of park there will be, it is impossible to answer Mr Ewing's question.  I want to emphasise the crucial point made by Jackie Baillie and Sylvia Jackson about balancing social and economic objectives with long-term environmental objectives. We need to get the balance right. That is the challenge and that is why establishing national parks is an exciting idea-it is an exciting issue for the Parliament to take up. We have had a lot of consultation and there is a lot of enthusiasm for a national park at Loch Lomond and the Trossachs. Our challenge is to take the debate forward and to continue to involve people in that process.  I know from Linda Fabiani's comments that she has an aversion to quangos. It is important to note that the mix of people who are involved in running the national park will be crucial. Local people need to be involved-both those who run businesses and those who live in the area-as do local councillors and people at the national level. By  setting up a national park, we give national priority to the issue of national parks as a whole. How we strike the right balance is one of the key matters that we need to discuss during consultation.  Work is well under way to establish national parks in Scotland. The issue is one that the Parliament needs to examine and one in which we all need to be involved. There is not just one approach for the whole of Scotland; we need enabling legislation to select the appropriate models for different parts of Scotland.  The partnership Government's commitment to establishing national parks in Scotland is clear and unequivocal. It was in the "Partnership for Scotland" agreement and is one of the key matters that we want to debate during this session.