In “Scotland’s Future: Your Guide to an Independent Scotland”, the Government set out its ambition to establish after independence a universal system of high-quality early learning and childcare for children from the age of one to when they start school. We have also published two papers on the Scottish Government website setting out our assessment of childcare provision in an independent Scotland.

Independence will mean that we have access to tax and revenues generated by increased female participation in the workplace to fund childcare. It also means that we do not need to invest in immoral weapons of mass destruction or rely for further expansion on handbacks of our own money through consequentials. Only with independence do we have the chance to create the fairer and more equitable country that we seek.

I thank David Stewart and all the members of the Public Petitions Committee for their comprehensive work on child sexual exploitation. This is a debate that stretches beyond the chamber and I welcome the important contribution that their report makes to that wider debate as well as Barnardo’s determination to bring that public debate before Parliament. Almost exactly a year ago, I spoke at a Holyrood child protection conference at a time when stories of abuse and exploitation of the most vulnerable members of our society were starting to be heard—stories of children and young people being exploited for their simple need for love and affection; and stories of those who could not speak to anyone about what they were suffering too often denying what was being done to them and rejecting the very support and protection that could end their misery. As every member will have felt the first time they heard about what happened in Rotherham or Rochdale, or about what Jimmy Savile did, I felt a mixture of horror, anger and sadness and, above all, the overwhelming need to act and to act quickly. That is why I set up the ministerial working group on child sexual exploitation, with the aim of harnessing rapidly the collective need to address the issue, using the expertise of the services that work most closely with the victims of child sexual exploitation: local authorities, the Crown Office and the police, inspection bodies and key children’s organisations such as Children in Scotland, Aberlour and Barnardo’s. The group reported to ministers in December, and I have asked it to continue monitoring the work in Scotland on child sexual exploitation. The group endorsed much of the work that is already under way in Scotland but, like the Public Petitions Committee’s report, it saw that more could be done and that there was absolutely no room for complacency. Perhaps most important, the group recognised that child sexual exploitation is not a stand-alone issue that can be fixed through a series of eye-catching initiatives. Sexual exploitation is one of the most vile forms of child abuse and one of the most pernicious attacks on a child’s or young person’s wellbeing. For those reasons, we need to ensure that we have in place the strongest approach to child protection and to supporting our children’s wellbeing. Over the past few years, that has been our ambition on child protection. We have modernised our unique children’s hearings system through new legislation. We undertook a major review of our child protection procedures and produced new child protection guidance, which we are further refreshing with a dedicated section on child sexual exploitation. We developed Scotland’s first comprehensive risk assessment toolkit to help professionals to identify signs of abuse and neglect. We are working with Barnardo’s on dedicated tools to better identify sexual exploitation. At the same time, we are putting in place a unique and internationally lauded approach to placing children’s and young people’s wellbeing at the centre of service design, planning and delivery. I am sure that I do not need to tell members about getting it right for every child, nor about how, under the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, all children and young people up to the age of 18 will have access to a named person, who will be able to pick up and act on the signs of potential abuse. For children and young people with particular needs and vulnerabilities, services will now have to plan and work together to support them through a child’s plan.

I thank Margaret Mitchell for the clear interest that she takes in working to ensure that some of the issues that we are discussing are dealt with adequately. I mentioned that we have done a number of pieces of work to refresh guidance. In November 2012, we published the “National Framework for Child Protection learning and development in Scotland 2012” and the risk assessment framework. More specifically on the point about health professionals, in December 2012 we updated the pink book, which is for health professionals, on child protection issues. I hope that many of the issues that the member refers to about how we can empower and help health professionals are captured in that pink book, which was published just over a year ago. We need to keep under review the services that directly support those who experience child sexual exploitation. We need to know which services have the best impact and how they can be sustained within a service framework that must address a wide range of child protection issues. We also need to understand why some services, not least refuges for runaways, have struggled to remain sustainable. I will therefore ask the ministerial working group on child sexual exploitation to explore how we can better understand and promote the most effective services to support children and young people. I hope that that will give some comfort to the committee and its convener, given his remarks about investigating further issues to do with refuges. Against that background of how we are addressing the needs of children and young people overall, we have also taken a range of actions across Government to address child sexual exploitation. We have committed to understanding the issue better because, like the committee, we recognise the gaps in our knowledge of such abuse. We commissioned the University of Bedfordshire to examine the scale and nature of child sexual exploitation in Scotland. We have also supported work, which is currently being piloted in Forth valley, to improve ways of identifying and collating information on child sexual exploitation cases at a local level. Other areas might require more research, and we will continue to review such research needs. We are working to ensure that all local areas have procedures and protocols in place to address child sexual exploitation. In the national child protection guidance, we will set out our expectations that every local area has such a protocol and will develop a national good practice model. Schools also have a particularly important role in identifying and preventing child sexual exploitation. National work is helping to support that. Children and young people receive education on topics such as developing appropriate relationships, protection from abuse and keeping themselves safe from harm from early on in their education right up until they leave school. In that context, the work on improving internet safety among children and young people is critical. In early December, the Minister for Learning, Science and Scotland’s Languages and I chaired a summit on internet safety, which drew in experts from education, the third sector, the private sector and law-enforcement bodies. The members of that summit also included Jackie Brock, who is involved with the ministerial working group, to ensure that there is a sequencing of knowledge about what action we need to take. They made a set of recommendations that I have asked the Scottish stakeholder group on internet safety to develop into a series of practical actions that will be reported back to ministers before the end of the year.

There are many different issues around internet safety—not least some of the particularly tragic incidents that happened last summer—which is why we held and hosted the summit last year. We clearly need to ensure that young people and parents are empowered to use the internet safely, which is why we brought a number of stakeholders around the table to discuss what we need to do to ensure that safety is maintained. There are issues with the reserved nature of some of the regulation of internet use but, where we have a responsibility, we are trying to do what we can to allow young people to use the internet safely. It is a great tool—it is a wonderful thing to have access to—but we need to ensure that safety is paramount for young people and that parents know a wee bit more about what their children and young people are doing. Child sexual exploitation is also a crime—one that cannot be tolerated—and it is important that we do all that we can to ensure that the perpetrators of these terrible crimes are brought to justice and that the risk is properly managed in custody and in the community. A critical element of that is our new single police force. Protecting the public—in particular, the most vulnerable in Scotland’s communities—is a key priority for Police Scotland. Another essential element is having the right legal framework to pursue the crimes. We have strengthened the law on sex crimes by introducing the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2009. That modernised the law and replaced a confusing and complex patchwork of common-law and statutory offences that had developed over many decades with the single statutory framework. We have also improved Scotland’s sexual offences prevention order and risk of sexual harm order regimes by expanding the range of conditions that a court may attach to an order. Such orders are available to assist with the management of sex offenders and individuals without a relevant conviction who are assessed as posing a risk of sexual harm. In addition, the Crown Office has developed a team of expert prosecutors in the national sexual crimes unit specialising in the investigation and prosecution of serious sexual crimes. We understand the frustration of those who want to do more on that difficult area of crime detection and prosecution. A single, dedicated police force and a Crown Office with specialist expertise can build on our robust legal framework and make important strides in disrupting such crimes in the future, but we will continue to review how the laws are being used and how practice can be improved. I turn to whether we need a national child sexual exploitation strategy. If that means yet another time-consuming review of what we have done, I do not think that we do need one. We have had a review of what we are doing and I believe that we know what needs to be done. What we must do is act upon that knowledge. I will ask the ministerial working group to corral that collective effort within a national action plan—a document that will be focused on the real and practical things that we are doing and must continue to do in this area. Once again, I thank David Stewart and the Public Petitions Committee for their work. Hopefully, we can work together as we try to ensure young people’s safety in Scotland.

I have said that we want to take all the learning that we have and to have an action plan, so that we can take action, as opposed to having another prolonged review. The briefing from the Aberlour Child Care Trust agrees with that position: the trust believes that there is now a need to take action, as opposed to having yet another prolonged review and only then acting. That point was made by both Aberlour and Barnardo’s.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am sorry for intervening at this stage; I had not quite realised how far into his allotted time the member was. I point out that, last year, we hosted a summit on the internet to ensure that the momentum that we built up on safe internet use for children and young people continues and that parents are empowered by having knowledge about what their children may face when they use chat rooms and social media sites.

We have heard some powerful speeches in a very constructive debate and I thank the members for their positive contributions. A number of valuable points have been raised and there is agreement that child sexual exploitation is an issue that needs to be tackled, as Clare Adamson and many other members have stated. There should be absolutely no complacency about child sexual exploitation. Indeed, that is recognised in our 2010 child protection guidance, which has been revised to cover key areas of child sexual exploitation, including online grooming and child trafficking. We had already decided to refresh our national guidance further, but I thank the committee for its work and contributions on the issue. Members have raised a number of points and I hope to cover most of those mentioned. David Stewart spoke about the need to have a better definition of child sexual exploitation to aid understanding of what that is. Liam McArthur and others also made that point. We have worked with Barnado’s to update the definition. That will feature in the new section on child sexual exploitation, which will be published in the coming months in the newly refreshed national child protection guidance. I hope that that gives some comfort to those who have sought that better and much more widely understood definition. Another theme was the need for a new national strategy. As I said in my opening speech, we need action. However, I am glad that Jackson Carlaw shares my concerns that a further review could risk delaying action to tackle what is a pernicious, vile but also highly complex crime. Barnardo’s briefing states that a national action plan would set out the actions that we need and bring together the good work done. Many members have spoken about the good work and practices that are under way. A plan could also include the recommendations from the ministerial working group and the committee’s report. Aberlour’s briefing highlighted that a national strategy might also necessitate a prolonged period of further consultation and delay measures that need to be taken. Jamie Hepburn made that point. Nevertheless, the good recommendations that came from the report will be considered thoroughly by me and the rest of the Government. Many members mentioned Aberlour’s decision to close its young runaway refuge. We need to bottom out and better understand why services have struggled to remain sustainable. Indeed, Jayne Baxter made the point that we must understand properly why such services have not been as widely used as we would perhaps have liked or hoped that they would be. On the Parliament’s behalf, I will ask the expert group that has just reviewed child sexual exploitation to review the committee’s recommendations. I will also ensure that the review includes a better understanding of what services are needed and works with local areas on their own provision. Jackson Carlaw talked about risk of sexual harm orders. I said in my opening remarks that the Scottish Government has strengthened the laws around sex crimes. I am confident that Police Scotland shares our commitment to protecting our most vulnerable citizens and that it will consider carefully the committee’s recommendations around risk of sexual harm orders, including any improvements that can be made. We are also considering whether there is scope more generally to extend the protection that is offered by such orders. As others have mentioned, Graeme Pearson’s comments and expertise on the issue were very useful in the debate. I agree that Mr Gwynne’s role in CEOP offers us opportunities in Scotland. Education has been a substantial theme in the debate. Graeme Pearson raised the issue of online safety, and Angus MacDonald and Jamie Hepburn mentioned concerns about that in their speeches. The recent summit on internet safety that I mentioned in an intervention on Graeme Pearson identified that better information sharing between professionals, parents and young people is key to improving online safety, and the Scottish stakeholder group on child internet safety will take forward the recommendations of the summit this year. Respectme and ChildLine are Government funded and are working hard with others to help people to tackle bullying behaviour in all forms and to deal with its consequences, while our schools will talk to children and young people about broader online risks. In relation to looked-after children, respectme is working with local authorities and residential care establishments to build the capacity and confidence to deal with all bullying. That is aligned to our much broader national approach. Advice has been given to schools on how to encourage safe and responsible use of personal mobile technology in school and beyond, which is designed to protect staff, children and young people from harassment and abuse. That includes advice on the dangers of uploading indecent images, which can arise from the misuse of such technology. Nevertheless, an important balance needs to be struck. We must not overdramatise the safe use of the internet and push young people into being more secretive about their internet use. If we are to get the action absolutely right, young people’s voices must be heard, and a key point that has come through is that we should not overdramatise internet safety and risk more young people being pushed into unsafe practices.

That point relates to the need to hear young people’s voices on the types of things that they would like to engage with. It is why we had young people present at the summit that we hosted, and they made a number of very good points. We will always be playing catch-up with how the internet develops, so we must always be on the front foot with the issue. Liam McArthur’s point is valid. Aside from education’s role in ensuring online safety, curriculum for excellence provides opportunities for education on appropriate relationships and health and wellbeing. Education Scotland supports that work by showcasing good practice via stakeholder networks and glow, the intranet. George Adam, Jackson Carlaw, Anne McTaggart and Jamie Hepburn made some important points about parenting. It is right to broaden the interest in child sexual exploitation beyond the Government, as society has a role and families and parents have an important part to play. However, it is not easy for parents to talk about the issues, so we need to support them. The guidance on relationships, sexual health and parenthood education has been revised and we are currently reviewing the responses to a recent consultation with a view to issuing revised guidance in the spring.

The national parenting strategy is for all parents. There is a danger that we assume that the strategy is for only the parents of young people, but we have held a number of meetings and conferences on the parenting of teenagers. Some important and valid points were made about data collection. We have the University of Bedfordshire work and the Forth valley pilot. Once we know the outcomes of that, we will be able to consider whether they could be appropriately used across Scotland. The Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill gives us further opportunities to talk about the issue, but we need to ensure that children are safe. This is a good debate, but there is more work to be done. I again thank the committee for its work in ensuring that we cannot lose sight of the vile nature of child sexual exploitation and the importance of keeping children and young people safe.

From August 2014, through the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, the Scottish Government is increasing and improving early learning and childcare provision for three-year-olds and four-year-olds and the most vulnerable two-year-olds throughout Scotland. Two-year-olds who are looked after or are under a kinship care order are specified on the face of the bill. Any further expansion will be specified through secondary legislation. As the First Minister announced in the chamber yesterday, from August 2014 we will increase the number of two-year-olds who will benefit from 600 hours of funded early learning and childcare. We will begin by focusing on the families who are most in need. From this August, the entitlement will cover two-year-olds in families that are seeking work—which is approximately 15 per cent of the total population of two-year-olds. In August 2015, we will further expand provision to families who are claiming certain benefits, under criteria that are currently used to determine eligibility for free school meals. That means that, from August next year, about 27 per cent of two-year-olds will receive funded provision. The Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill will introduce a requirement that all local authorities consult representative local populations of parents on the patterns of early learning and childcare provision that would best meet their needs. It will be the statutory duty of local authorities to implement the provisions in the bill on early learning and childcare.

I absolutely agree that childcare for children who are beyond the pre-school years is important. That is why I have asked the task force to consider the matter. It is no surprise that Paul Martin wants to dodge the issues that were announced yesterday, given that he voted against the childcare extension that we have proposed. That is a real pity. Perhaps he would also like to explain to his constituents in Provan why yesterday he voted against free school meals. The policy stands to benefit an additional 11,200 pupils in Glasgow—the city in which he resides.

I absolutely agree with Clare Adamson’s point. [Laughter.] Labour members may laugh; I do not think that talking about the future of our children is a laughing matter. Again, I go back to the fact that Labour voted against the progressive move that was announced yesterday. The proposals that were announced yesterday—which I have outlined to Paul Martin—and the proposals in legislation are first steps towards our wider work to enhance childcare, but the transformation that we seek can be achieved only through independence. With independence, we will have the powers that will give us access to the revenue that will be generated by increased numbers of women in the labour market, which is what will pay for that increased provision. Our ambitions for childcare cannot be funded by consequential handouts of our own money from Westminster. We are talking about transforming the structure of our economy and the nature of our society. Plus, we will be able to divert the money that is wasted on immoral Trident weapons to spend it instead on the long-term wellbeing of our children. That is the kind of country that I want to live in.

I am glad that Kezia Dugdale has decided to take part in this little exchange, because I would like to know whether she has consulted any of the small businesses in the Lothian region, which she represents, because on television last night she suggested that she would use money from them to pay for 50 per cent of the childcare. I would also like to point out that we are focusing on families that are most in need, so we regret that the Labour Party decided to vote against the motion yesterday. We would also like to know what the Labour Party wants to cut from the Scottish budget in order to fund its proposals, and how it would deliver them in the timescale that it is setting out. Those are the questions that Labour members failed to discuss yesterday.

I wonder whether the member has read the article that Bronwen Cohen wrote for The Scotsman. Considering the ambition that we set out in the white paper for 1,140 hours of childcare from age one to five, she said: “So could more be done now? And if Scotland’s votes No next year could it happen? My examination this year of Scotland’s post-devolution experience in ECEC suggests it would be hard. Problems arise from split responsibilities and policies. So it is pertinent to ask Better Together how these issues might be overcome, short of independence”. She understands the difficulties in expanding childcare that we have under devolution. Will the member take on board what she says?

As this is the first debate that I have been involved in this year, I wish everyone a happy new year. I also thank David Torrance for bringing the debate to the chamber and congratulate him on doing so. Like Liz Smith, I remember his celebration debate that welcomed 25 years of Fife Gingerbread. I thank the other members who have shown their support for this excellent organisation. I had the pleasure of meeting some of the families who are supported by Fife Gingerbread when I launched its gateway project back in May 2013. I am delighted that the organisation is extending its reach even further and is developing its innovative approach. I congratulate the group on its award. Our aspiration is to make Scotland the best place in the world to grow up in and to make Scotland a fairer country for all children to thrive in. We want a child-friendly country that possesses a culture that is supportive of all parents and carers and that values their crucial and important role. Fife Gingerbread is helping us to achieve that vision. I think that everyone agrees that families need to feel supported, not only by our public services but by their families and communities. Organisations such as Gingerbread play a crucial role in supporting our parents, carers and families right across Scotland. As I have said, I have heard about and seen at first hand the good work that Fife Gingerbread is doing. I remain impressed by the passion and dedication of Fife Gingerbread’s team. David Torrance described how they go above and beyond to help the families they work with. The quotes that Annabelle Ewing gave about the caring staff, the great activities that go on and the teen parent project being the highlight of the week speak volumes about the high regard in which the project and Fife Gingerbread are held. Liz Smith, Rod Campbell and Claire Baker rightly praised the group. They talked about the help that it has provided to the 340 families who have received the one-to-one service and the important preventative work that the talented Gingerbread staff do. Claire Baker also referred to the fact that the teen project is an age-appropriate group. I know from speaking to many teenage parents that they sometimes feel intimidated about going to groups, so it is great that Gingerbread has an age-appropriate group where people can get the support that they need. The fact that so many Fife politicians have talked passionately about the project shows how important it is right across the region. I welcome the investment in the teen parent project by the Big Lottery Fund. Claire Baker and others have noted how big an achievement that award has been. Although parenting can be a wonderful life-enhancing experience for many young people, it can be a real struggle for others. As the mother of a very lively wee three-year-old who had his first day at nursery school today, I know that being a parent is a great privilege but can also be a real challenge. The Government recognises without question the importance of ensuring that parents, whatever their age, feel empowered, valued, supported and confident in their ability to care for their children. That is why, in October 2012, we published the national parenting strategy, with more than 80 commitments to strengthen, help and support parents throughout Scotland. We want parents, carers and families to know that, whatever their needs and wherever they live, practical support is available. That parenting strategy was backed up with £18 million-worth of investment to better co-ordinate information and access to advice and support wherever they are needed. Good parenting is every child’s right and every parent’s responsibility. We want to embed those rights and responsibilities in everyday life. All parents and carers can feel vulnerable and unsure at times but our teenage parents, who sometimes lack the confidence to seek support, often feel that vulnerability most. Sometimes, those feelings of uncertainty can be resolved easily by good advice. However, for others, the challenges are more complex and longer term. Either way, we want to support all parents, families and communities to build better lives for themselves and their children to ensure that every child has the best start in life. That is why our parenting strategy is important, as is investment in family support. The Fife Gingerbread teen parent project shares the same goals as us. Its work focuses on giving teenage mothers and fathers the support that they need to establish their parenting skills, and it works closely with other services that are already available within communities to complement and promote their use. Such informal but personal support is one of the things that teen parents need most in their lives and it can really help them to adjust to their new roles. David Torrance spoke about how the project works in collaboration with the other services that I mentioned and across the third sector. That collaborative work is paying dividends for families throughout Fife. However, unfortunately, many young mums and dads face additional stresses and strains in their lives. David Torrance and Mary Fee described poverty, deprivation and the low self-esteem that it is necessary for us to try to tackle. Annabelle Ewing described the impact of welfare reform. Stigma, isolation and the lack of age-appropriate information have the potential to disenfranchise many teenage parents. Projects such as the Fife Gingerbread teen parent project ensure that they are not left alone to face the challenges of caring for their children and help them to be the best that they can be. I am pleased to hear from David Torrance about the evaluation of the project, which has enhanced the ability of parents to parent well. The project will also complement the good work of the family nurse partnerships in Fife. I have also visited those partnerships and heard about the benefits that they are providing for new young parents. I very much welcome the recent announcement from the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, Alex Neil, that that programme will be rolled out across Scotland to help many more young parents who need a bit of support and advice. In addition to that support for families, our vision for childcare is ambitious. It includes the expansion of childcare to a minimum of 600 flexible hours a year for all three and four-year-olds and for two-year-olds who are looked after or are under a kinship care order. Those proposals are set out in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill that Liz Smith rightly points out is going through stage 2. I am also delighted that the debate follows the one in which the First Minister announced a further expansion in childcare provision for our most vulnerable two-year-olds. Coupled with the proposals that are already in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, that means that we will provide childcare for around 15 per cent of two-year-olds from 2014 and 27 per cent from 2015. We are also committed to extending the offer of 600 hours of funded early learning and childcare further in the long term. As we set out in “Scotland’s Future: Your Guide to an Independent Scotland”, we plan to provide 1,140 hours to all children from age one to starting school. That is our commitment to build a high-quality, universal system for all children. All those commitments will build on the legacy that we have and the good work to help to support families that our partners throughout Scotland, including Fife Gingerbread, are already doing to help us to move towards making Scotland the best place in the world to grow up in. I thank David Torrance and others who have contributed to tonight’s debate. I am only sorry that he did not manage to sing tonight, although he has the offer of a duet and I look forward to any YouTube evidence that might come from that. I wish Fife Gingerbread teen parent project all the very best for the future and thank David Torrance again for raising the matter in the Parliament. Meeting closed at 17:44.

Like Alex Johnstone and Graeme Dey, I welcome the Arbroath CAFE members to Parliament this evening. Yesterday we had the opportunity to discuss the invaluable work that is done by YouthLink Scotland and the youth work sector as a whole. All those who contributed yesterday recognised how important it is to give time, commitment and care to helping our young people to live the most fulfilled lives that they can, and to reach their full potential. That is the essence of good youth work: the focused and passionate commitment to giving young people the chance to make the most of their lives. I am therefore grateful that Alex Johnstone has brought the example of the Arbroath CAFE project to the attention of Parliament. In his opening speech, he gave us a vivid picture of the project’s work and its impact on the young people who benefit from the project, and on the wider community. It is also good to learn about a Scottish football success in a world cup, which is unusual and something that we should celebrate. The breadth of activities that the CAFE provides is impressive. It provides that all-important drop-in centre that gives young people a safe and welcoming environment in the community, and is the basis for a number of projects that provide real development opportunities, particularly for those youngsters who face some difficulties or serious challenges in their lives. As Graeme Dey said, it is clear that the project is very dear to Arbroath’s heart. The number of people that it helps is impressive. It also provides the basis for connections into the wider community by hosting other projects such as the mother and toddler group, and an employability drop-in service in conjunction with the local jobcentre. Those connections are considerable. According to the local Evening Telegraph, the project works with health visitors, social workers, criminal justice offender services, nurses, police, firefighters, parents, carers, teachers, Angus Council community learning and development, Angus Council recreational team for people with disability, the jobcentre, local businesses, the Round Table, the Rotary clubs, the Royal British Legion, and churches, to name just a few. In that way, projects such as the Arbroath CAFE project embody many of the principles that we talk about in abstract terms here in the chamber and in wider political discourse. We often talk about prevention and early intervention. Projects such as the Arbroath CAFE project are perfect examples of prevention and early intervention in practice. As Anne McTaggart said, by providing positive channels for the energy and enthusiasm of young people, such projects divert them from finding less constructive activities, even where the temptations and opportunities to do so are strong. Richard Baker, Alex Johnstone and Graeme Dey described the passion and leadership of the founder of the project, former sheriff Norrie Stein. Judging by their comments, he has clearly left a mark on all of them. Norrie Stein said: “The CAFÉ Project has changed people’s lives, there’s no question about that. It was very rare to see anybody with a connection to the CAFÉ Project appear in court—thereby breaking a family tradition in some cases.” We know that early intervention and diversion works. The whole-systems approach to youth justice has played a major contribution in the significant decline in youth offending in the past few years. It appears that the Arbroath CAFE project is well and truly doing that in practice. We talk about the idea of wellbeing. I know that Angus Council has developed the wellbeing web, which is being used throughout Scotland. It is a good time for us to stop and reflect on how many of the safe, healthy, achieving, nurtured, active, respected, responsible and included—or SHANARRI—wellbeing indicators a project such as the Arbroath CAFE project achieves. It provides a safe environment, free from some of the more corrupting and destructive influences that can bear on young people as they reach their teenage years. It promotes healthy and active living, seeking to harness young people’s energy through sports-related activities. By providing services for the more disadvantaged youngsters and promoting volunteering, it is all about nurture, responsibility and inclusion. Such projects thrive on the respect that they afford young people and the respect that they get in return. We often talk in the chamber about an assets-based approach. We know that the best way to secure the long-term improvements in life chances that we want to see is through the building up and strengthening of people and their local communities. In the long run, it is not about treating young people’s needs but about giving them and their families the strength, resilience and opportunity to tackle life’s challenges. That is true of communities, too. Locally-based initiatives designed to meet local needs and drawing on the inspiration and commitment of local people are at the core of that approach. We often talk about multi-agency collaboration. The list of those with whom the project works is clear evidence that all the agencies involved in helping and supporting young people work best when they are brought together and work together. I understand that there are issues of funding uncertainty. That has been clear in reports in the local press. I am aware that the project has just secured funding of £3,000 from the Bank of Scotland community fund, which should secure the project’s continuation until July next year. However, I am told that Angus Council has since been offering the project financial and other sorts of advice to help it to become more sustainable and look for funding from a range of sources. I know that a number of potential funding organisations are willing to discuss the future with the organisation and also that the project has launched a public appeal. I wish the project well in its efforts and hope that Graeme Dey takes part in the bag pack that he described. As a Government, we are keen to see that projects that contribute to the wellbeing of young people and to local communities can be sustained as far as possible. In yesterday’s members’ business debate, I referred to the range of support that the Government provides to youth work organisations and to the range of funding mechanisms by which they can seek support. That includes cashback for communities, which is an example of a funding opportunity that the Arbroath CAFE project should definitely pursue. Again, I am sincerely grateful to Alex Johnstone for bringing to the chamber the Arbroath CAFE project, both as an example of the huge range and wealth of youth work projects across the country, and as a reminder of the challenges that we face in difficult times in maintaining the support that our young people need and deserve. It has been clear from the passionate contributions from Richard Baker, Graeme Dey and Anne McTaggart that we need to sing loudly about the contribution of youth workers to our country, their talent and commitment, and the support that they give to our young people to enable them to go on to lead fulfilling lives. The Arbroath CAFE project is undoubtedly a good example of such work. The respect that it has gathered from right across the political spectrum is testament to the work that it puts in to ensure that young people in Arbroath are given all the opportunities that they need and deserve in life. Thank you. Meeting closed at 18:00.

I am delighted that we have had the opportunity to debate the exceptional achievements of YouthLink Scotland and the youth work sector more widely, and I add my congratulations to George Adam on securing the debate and on securing such agreement across the chamber. As Mary Scanlon noted, the motion rightly highlights YouthLink’s absolutely glowing recent inspection report and points to the huge and wide range of activity that YouthLink and its many members undertake to help to improve the lives of young people. I am very pleased to see that some members of YouthLink Scotland are in the gallery. I cannot emphasise enough the strength and significance of the contribution that youth work and community learning and development have to play in making Scotland the best place in the world to grow up. YouthLink Scotland and its 100-plus members are crucial partners in helping us to realise that ambition and vision, and in enabling our young people to be the successful, confident, effective and responsible individuals that our nation needs. Its members use their skills as youth workers to help young people to realise their own talents in many ways, including through music, as Kezia Dugdale pointed out when she talked about her experience of working with the Canongate Youth Project. YouthLink’s most recent survey highlighted that national voluntary youth work organisations work with a phenomenal 390,000 young people approximately at any one time. When we add the wider voluntary youth work sector and local authorities, the numbers are even greater. Youth work represents great value and embodies the ethos of preventative spending and early intervention that is a hallmark of this Government. It helps young people to make positive choices in their transition to adulthood and it builds capacity and skills for further learning and employability. It also enriches childhood and adolescence. The young-at-heart Stewart Stevenson talked about burning baked potatoes at the scouts instead of chasing girls. My experience of youth work includes being a member of the Girls Brigade. My mum and others ran the local club, supported by Youth Scotland, which was then Youth Club Scotland. I also attended a couple of young farmers club meetings, so while Stewart Stevenson burns the baked tatties, I can help with the stock judging, if he wants me to. It is important that we recognise the importance of the uniformed groups that were mentioned by Stewart Stevenson and Kezia Dugdale, who highlighted the phenomenal work of the girl guides. Members have enjoyed talking about youth work in their own constituencies. Youth work and community learning and development happen in almost every city, town, village and community in Scotland. I am grateful to George Adam for highlighting excellent practice in his constituency. Despite being a St Johnstone fan, I am happy to endorse the work that St Mirren Football Club carries out in his area. I am delighted that we have been able to support in some way the three groups that George Adam’s motion refers to. We are supporting Renfrew YMCA, which is creating an exciting social enterprise project that is being developed and led by young people. We are supporting the 20th and 74th Renfrewshire scout groups to provide activity weekends for about 30 young people, who will learn new skills and gain qualifications in various outdoor challenges. The play the game initiative in Paisley has also received funding to develop the skills of vulnerable young people through a range of theatre-related activities. That is just the tip of the iceberg in terms of the innovation, creativity and passion in the youth work and CLD sector, as supported by YouthLink. During my time in my ministerial role, I have never ceased to be amazed by the talent of the sector and its ability to enhance young people’s outcomes. In my constituency, I have seen first hand the excellent work of the universal connections programme, the uniformed groups, the Duke of Edinburgh’s award scheme, Covey Befriending and Biggar Youth Project, which deliver services that contribute to young people’s wellbeing, confidence and life chances. Let us not forget—from the comments that members have made this evening, I do not think that we will—that such opportunities for Scotland’s young people are often delivered by a talented army of volunteers, who give up their precious time to support and nurture our young people. Some of those volunteers are young people who are supporting their peers and giving back to their communities. Mary Scanlon noted the importance of highlighting such work through our yearly celebration at the youth work awards. The Scottish Government is committed to helping youth work and CLD to thrive. Over the next two years, we are providing grants that total about £6.9 million to national youth work organisations. That will support them to build capacity and improve outcomes for young people. Since 2007, the cashback for communities programme has invested more than £74 million in projects and facilities for young people and the communities that they live in. More than £10.9 million of that has been channelled to youth work through YouthLink Scotland and Youth Scotland. This year, the young start fund has allocated more than £3 million to youth projects from an indicative budget of £5.5 million. We continue to work with the youth work sector to deliver programmes such as active girls, stand up to sectarianism, the no knives, better lives campaign and activity agreements. Education Scotland also distributes small grants for implementation of the CLD strategic guidance for community planning partnerships to a range of organisations, including those that deliver youth work. At the heart of the draft youth work strategy, which will be published this week, is a desire to empower young people—such as those in Maud who were engaging in the planning process and whom Stewart Stevenson mentioned—as well as to respect, recognise and promote children’s rights and to get things right for every child and young person. The launch will mark the beginning of a national discussion on the strategy’s implementation with the youth work and CLD sector and—importantly—with young people. The strategy will determine how best to realise our ambitions to maximise young people’s life chances, to harness the value of youth work and to demonstrate how it contributes to the national outcomes and many policies across the Government. The strategy recognises youth work as a key and distinctive component of our present and future agendas for young people. The Government recognises that universal youth work and more targeted specific programmes have equal validity and importance. We recognise that—in line with the Christie commission recommendations—more and more youth services are being delivered through partnership. As George Adam pointed out, in recognition of YouthLink’s national role, I have asked it to lead the national discussion, in partnership with Education Scotland and the Government, and to work with us to develop an implementation plan. Scotland’s future and the future of its young people are bright. We are introducing new legislation to strengthen services for children and young people. We have a raft of exciting events next year to inspire and engage young people, such as the homecoming, the Commonwealth games, the Ryder cup and, of course, the referendum on our future, in which young people who are aged 16 and 17 will for the first time be able to vote. We have a strong and imaginative youth work and CLD sector that supports and empowers young people. One of its leaders is YouthLink, and I congratulate Jim Sweeney and the entire YouthLink team on their recent Education Scotland review. It gives me great pleasure to lend my whole-hearted support to the motion and, in doing so, to recognise the invaluable contribution that YouthLink Scotland and youth work more generally make to the wellbeing and prosperity of Scotland’s young people. I thank everyone for their comments. Meeting closed at 18:49.

I welcome this afternoon’s debate, which the Education and Culture Committee has brought to the chamber following its recent inquiry. I congratulate the committee on its work; I know that we all share a passion for doing the very best that we can for the young people whom we are tasked with looking after. I will touch on the themes in the committee’s report and comment on the action that we are taking. The Scottish Government believes that every child has the right to expect the very best start in life, the right to be safe, happy and nurtured in their own family, and the right to be in a loving and stable home with parents who have ambition and aspirations for their child—to have all the things that any parent would seek to provide for their child. Unfortunately, however, there will always be children whose wellbeing depends on alternative care, and for those children we need to make early and effective decisions to promote stability. We need to plan for and make decisions about their long-term futures as soon as they come into the looked-after system. The Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, among other things, aims to make public services more responsive to needs and more sensitive to working with families in order that they better support our most vulnerable children and young people. The committee’s work is useful and timely because it sets the scene on looked-after children ahead of stage 2 of the bill.

We have made clear within our bill our commitment to supporting children in their earliest years and we have set out our aspiration with the 600 hours of childcare for looked-after two-year-olds. We have also clearly set out our wider aspirations for childcare, which Neil Findlay can read in the white paper, if he would like to read it. The importance of improving—

Neil Findlay needs to consider his tone during this debate, which is about trying to work constructively together on this important issue. Improvement of corporate parenting is a crucial element of the bill because it encompasses all areas of our work, demanding that we get things right for those who are in our care. Our putting getting it right for every child on a statutory footing will provide a mechanism for early and effective intervention. GIRFEC’s principles underpin everything that we do and they place children at the heart of the design and delivery of services, aid improvement in permanence planning and delivery and, importantly, value the voice of the child. There are encouraging signs that outcomes are improving gradually across almost all indicators. The main findings in the most recent publication on Scotland’s looked-after children show that looked-after young people who leave school are increasingly entering positive destinations. Some 75 per cent of looked-after young people who left school during 2011-12 were in a positive destination three months after they left school. The children’s social work statistics show that the rate of increase in the total number of looked-after children continues to slow, but that earlier and more frequent interventions can result in more children coming into care and, in particular, to their becoming looked after at home. The challenges around improving outcomes for that group are well known. Therefore, the partner policy aim here is early permanence. Both early intervention and early permanence are needed if we are to meet our aims of reducing the number of children on long-term supervision requirements and increasing the numbers who find secure legal permanence. A focus on those two areas in the years ahead will enable us to achieve an effective, affordable and swift system of intervention and substitute care that wraps around the child. The benefits of investing in early intervention are fully realised when quality services are provided. We know all about the positive societal, emotional, educational and health impacts of early intervention, and there is economic evidence that every £1 that is invested in cause can save £9 in cure. We are seeing a trend of children becoming looked after younger, which shows that social workers are acting more quickly to assess and intervene. We believe that social workers are right to take early decisions about children becoming looked after. We know from our work with the sector, including through the practice exchange workshops that the centre for excellence for looked-after children in Scotland has held, that social workers are feeling increasingly confident about using relevant evidence from previous interventions with families to hasten timescales for subsequent children. We support that approach; we want families to thrive, not just survive. We are also making progress on permanence, with the number of children who are adopted from care increasing and the number of permanence orders rising year on year since their introduction. However, too many children still remain on supervision for far too long, with all the uncertainty and distress that goes with that. To reflect our commitment to permanence, we will in the coming months publish a care and permanence strategy that will set out the strategic framework for our work. It will recognise that far-reaching improvements in delivering early permanence for children can be made only by taking a whole-system approach that involves all those who contribute to the permanence process, including social work, wider community planning partnerships, children’s hearings and the courts. It will also include the voice of the child. In addition, we will launch a permanence and care excellence—PACE—programme, which will work in two geographical areas and will use improvement science to develop improvement projects that look at all aspects of a child’s journey to permanence. It will focus on the child’s experience and will bring together local authorities, children’s hearings and the courts to identify barriers and delays, and to develop and test solutions. Those programmes will provide a powerful opportunity to deliver real improvement on the ground. By bringing the relevant partners together, the projects will address the interactions between systems in delivering permanence and will enable us to share learning across Scotland. I turn my focus to the workforce. The Scottish Government’s approach to improving the quality of children’s social services centres on the needs of the child and the support that is given to professionals to make good judgments, and on continuously learning from what works. The Scottish Government fully realises the importance of developing a competent, confident and valued workforce, as is evidenced through the work of the Scottish Social Services Council and the investment that we make in other organisations, such as the Institute for Research and Innovation in Social Services and CELCIS. The SSSC provides various means of support to the sector and is, in partnership with a range of stakeholders, taking forward two further strands of activity to progress and support workforce development. That work will see the development of a national learning strategy for all practitioners, which will provide a framework for learning at qualifying and post-qualifying levels, and a career development pathway to support learning and skills throughout a career. In addition, a review will be carried out of the social work degree to ensure that it continues to meet the needs of students and employers now and in the future. Furthermore, along with the chief social work adviser, I have established a social work strategic forum, which brings together partners from academia, the unions, the regulators and the Association of Directors of Social Work. It will allow us to move the sector forward strategically, and its work will include workforce support and continued engagement with front-line practitioners, among other things. The inquiry also highlighted the need for more detailed information to be collected in order to provide a fuller picture of looked-after children’s outcomes, and to allow judgments to be made on whether interventions have been successful. The Scottish Government is currently working to review CLAS—children looked after statistics—data so that we can ensure that the data that we collect can be analysed to inform practitioners and policy making. The review is to be completed by the end of the year and should contribute to our understanding of service delivery and help us to articulate and anticipate financial implications for service providers. The committee’s attention and report have been incredibly useful in ensuring that we do not take the foot off the gas when it comes to ensuring the very best for our looked-after children and young people. The committee has indicated—as the convener has done—that the systems and policies that we have should not be abolished. However, I believe that we must allow our approaches time to gain ground and to achieve the desired culture change and associated improvements. The challenge is about mobilising our combined efforts and resources more effectively, and directing more of them at families earlier to make it easier for practitioners to deliver involved family support. GIRFEC is the policy and strategic framework that overlays our approach to all children who are in need or at risk. A range of interactions take place between concerned agencies, but what should unite them is the fundamental belief that every child has the right to expect the best start in life. This is a difficult and complex subject area, but I do not doubt the passion and commitment of everyone in the chamber and across the relevant sectors to do our utmost to inculcate change and demand improvement. The issue is too important to get wrong, and we cannot be content with mediocrity. I look forward to the debate and to continuing to work with the committee on the journey to do our very best for our looked-after children.

It is all out there.

Liz Smith has characterised some of the Government’s responses in a wholly negative way. What she has described is not the sum total of our response. I noted in my speech that we have established a strategic forum that brings together all the parts of the social work force so that we can move the sector forward strategically and draw on the expertise that is out there. Liz Smith is being a bit unfair in her characterisation of some of our replies, which we had hoped would be met with some of the spirit of consensus and co-operation that should exist between Government and the committee in carrying out its work.

This has been a thoroughly constructive debate. The committee’s report and work have highlighted many areas that require further attention. The debate has shown that, regardless of political party or ideology, each of us here shares the dedication, commitment and passion to get things right for our looked-after children and young people. I hope that I have never tried to portray a situation that is all okay. We understand that we are on a journey to try to make things right for children and young people, particularly those who need our care. I hope that in that spirit we can work together to ensure that the policies and opportunities that lie ahead allow us to work together to ensure that we can get things right. I will break down my closing remarks into themes, hopefully to capture much of what has been said, to demonstrate real and tangible actions that the Government has taken and of course to recognise the progress that previous Administrations have made, because I do not think that this issue is owned by any one party. That has been clear from the passion that members have shown this afternoon. In my opening remarks, I said that early intervention and early permanence are crucial in securing the best possible outcomes for children who need us to look after them, as is finding a way to intervene with care that wraps around children and is effective and swift. I welcome Liz Smith’s acknowledgement of the need for early intervention and early permanence. I understand what she said about making sure that our language is clear. Of course we will always make sure that that is the case. We are clear that early years is different from early intervention. To pick up on the points that Liam McArthur made, we can intervene effectively in a child or young person’s life at any time. If there are other areas in which we can improve clarity, I am happy to embrace that.

I understand. I am sure that some of that will come through in the further debate that we will need to have on the bill. It will also be clarified further in any guidance that accompanies the bill. There is always the opportunity to ensure that we consult fully on guidance to ensure that things are absolutely clear in the minds of the people whom we are trusting to deliver the services that benefit the children we care so much about. Some members suggested that there was a degree of complacency in our approach. I absolutely refute that. Our priority since the SCRA report in 2011 has been to inject pace into reform. PACE is specifically designed to change practice sustainably across different systems. The whole-systems approach needs to bring together councils, children’s hearings and the courts to identify barriers and delays and to test solutions. That approach, which I think has been universally welcomed by members across the chamber, will be a good step forward. I am very grateful to Aberdeen and Renfrewshire for agreeing to bare all and to show all local authorities how it can be done and where there is room for change. In response to Ken Macintosh, I agree absolutely that we need to intervene earlier, support families and make quick decisions, but it is not just about quicker or firmer decisions. In many cases of low-level need, providing low-level, long-term parenting support could be better for that child as opposed to rehoming them permanently. That is important because of the understanding that we have of the importance of attachment. Our efforts on the strategic commissioning of resources within community planning partnerships for children’s services will help to deal with some of the issues around resourcing. The bill contains an explicit commitment to family counselling to help families and help children’s services to avoid having children taken into care.

I am always happy to take interventions from members who have contributed to the debate. John Pentland asked about the resources, and the bill has an accompanying financial memorandum that sets out that information clearly. If the member wants to refer to that, I am sure that he can get a copy of it. GIRFEC is our overarching approach for delivering children’s services and ensuring that they are at the centre of design and delivery. I do not need to remind anyone that the letters “EC” in GIRFEC stand for “every child”, including our looked-after children. GIRFEC is about co-ordination of approach and the evidence of its positive effect is bearing fruit. I do not know why Fiona McLeod started her speech by saying that she had no expertise, because she went on to say that she was the chair of a children’s panel advisory committee. That is a very good qualification for today’s debate. Fiona McLeod spoke about GIRFEC and the named person issue. I do not wish to rehearse previous debates about the named person, but I want to correct some members’ misunderstanding of the issue. It is not a scheme for a social worker for every child and it will not dilute the role of the parent. It is about a support network for parents that will have a light touch, and will knit together information about a child to ensure that appropriate interventions can be made. As has been proven in the Highlands, the results have shown a reduction in inappropriate referrals to reporters, a greater ability to target resources at the most vulnerable, and the ability to redeploy saved resource into bolstering services. If that holistic approach is delivered throughout Scotland, it will have a hugely positive impact for children, particularly those whom we are talking about today. That leads me on to talk about the voice of the child, which has been a strong theme. Colin Beattie, Jayne Baxter, Clare Adamson, the committee convener, Joan McAlpine and George Adam all mentioned the importance of hearing the voice of the child, and it has had a profound impact on members who have had the privilege of listening to our looked-after young people. Those real-life stories add poignancy to the crude statistics and remind us of the impact of our decisions on young people. It is always impressive to hear from young people who have been through the care system about how keen they are to put something back into the system that will make improvements so that other young people do not have to suffer the same problems that they have had to deal with. I want to mention two young people to whom I listened at a recent LACSIG event at which we launched the staying put guidance for young looked-after people who are going through aftercare. I heard about two different experiences of the care journey, one of which was less positive and one of which was very positive indeed. That shows that we can get things right for people. We need that good practice to become the norm as opposed to the exception. Joan McAlpine talked about the children’s hearings system, and I agree that the new national system gives an opportunity—

I am sorry, Presiding Officer, I thought that I had eight minutes.

The new system allows us to ensure a consistent approach. We should remember that next year is the 50th anniversary of the Kilbrandon report, which set Scotland apart because of the way that we dealt with children who need additional help. I want to mention one final issue.

I want to mention the voluntary mentoring scheme, because the committee said that we should make use of volunteers. The mentoring scheme that I launched the other day will take us further towards embracing the contribution that volunteers can make to providing a stable relationship for young people who have lacked that in their lives. There are opportunities to make things better for young people, and the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill is one of them. I appreciate the committee’s work and look forward to working further with committee members as we create improvements for young people who are looked after.

Does the member agree that we need to ensure that we watch our language around young people? Rather than talking about them failing, we must ensure that, where we can, we talk positively about young looked-after people. Does the member support our investment in Who Cares? Scotland and our collaborative approach with it on the anti-stigmatisation campaign?

Will the member give way?

I am grateful for the opportunity to open the debate on the general principles of the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. I welcome Forrester high school and St Augustine’s high school, who have a beautiful photographic display in the Parliament to mark yesterday’s universal children’s day. It is apt to note that, given the topic of the debate. I thank everyone who has contributed to developing the bill so far, not least the members of the Education and Culture Committee for their work and their comprehensive stage 1 report. I also thank the Local Government and Regeneration Committee and the Finance Committee for their consideration of aspects of the bill. I thank everyone who commented on the bill, especially the 2,400 children and young people and the 1,500 parents who provided their views. A range of opinions have been expressed. Many have been constructive and probing. That can only ensure that such a landmark bill will be examined, be improved and, ultimately, have the profound positive impact on children and young people that we all want it to have. Today is an opportunity to take an overview of what the Parliament wishes the bill to achieve. I will start by discussing the principles that lie at the heart of not only the bill but our approach to improving the lives of children and young people. The bill rests on five simple principles. First, it declares our collective commitment to making Scotland the best place in the world in which to grow up. It will establish in statute our shared responsibility for ensuring that our children have the best start in life and access to what they need to succeed as they grow and develop. Through its focus on what has been tried and on what we know works in our getting it right for every child approach, the bill builds on our renowned Scottish tradition of putting children at the centre of services and ensuring that their rights are upheld. Next year is the 50th anniversary of the Kilbrandon report, which set the foundation for our children’s hearings system. I can think of no more fitting way of commemorating that than by passing a bill that so thoroughly embodies the principles of Kilbrandon. The second principle is that shared responsibility should be achieved by working with parents and carers to provide the caring and supportive environments that our children should have. The bill aims to make public services more responsive to needs and sensitive to working with families. Our children deserve nothing less. That will require a change in culture, systems and practice. The framework for that change is GIRFEC, which has been repeatedly endorsed by the Parliament, most recently in September. GIRFEC has been tested; it works. As the committee found in its evidence, the benefits to children and families are clear in those parts of Scotland that are furthest along with its implementation. As Barnardo’s Scotland said in its submission to the committee: “We ... welcome the proposals to put elements of GIRFEC into law. GIRFEC has been a great success where it has been fully implemented and it is right that the Bill should seek to secure its wider adoption.” The third principle in the bill is acknowledgement that we must continue to improve how we support our most vulnerable children and young people. The challenge that the Education and Culture Committee’s report of its inquiry into taking children into care has set is one that none of us takes lightly. The bill rises to that challenge by making it easier for children who need to be looked after to stay in their families through the kinship care order; by extending the support that is available to care leavers; and by ensuring that the wider public sector understands our shared corporate duty in relation to those who have been in care. Moreover, the bill recognises that, for some children, we need to respond more quickly to the terrible risk of abuse and neglect. We are all familiar with the tragic stories in the media of children who were below the radar, the signals on whom were not picked up or acted on, and in relation to whom the need to act would have been apparent only to someone who had access to all the relevant information, which was spread among a number of different organisations. As I said on 25 September, the recent tragic case of Daniel Pelka highlights the importance of professionals putting the child’s interests at the heart of what they do and communicating their concerns. We can never prevent every case of abuse and neglect, but our bill will ensure that our services are better placed to identify and act on any concerns before those cases, too, become tragedies. The fourth principle is the very simple idea that services to support our children and young people are better when they are planned jointly. That idea underpins our proposals for joint planning of services by local authorities and health boards, and it is equally well planted in the planning that we expect to be done for individual children who need additional support from services. We do not need scores of unco-ordinated plans across different services and professionals. Children need services that work together with one another and with their families.

Absolutely. They need to be fully involved in the planning. That is the underlying ethos of GIRFEC—it is about ensuring that children and families are respected. Lastly, the bill is watermarked with the principle of early intervention. Early intervention has been a mantra for years. We all know about the benefits to children and families of providing support as soon as problems arise, and to services whose resources are increasingly stretched. The bill will make real that recognition of the value of early intervention to our aspirations for early learning and childcare. The benefits of investing in the early years are known when quality services are provided. We must ensure that those services meet the needs and wishes of families. With the resources and powers that we have now, we have made a start on transforming childcare. We want to match the very best in Europe and, as a step towards that, the bill will give three and four-year-olds 600 hours of free nursery education. That represents an increase of almost half on the figure of 412.5 hours that we inherited, and we are extending that provision to the most vulnerable two-year-olds. In total, around 120,000 children will receive more childcare, more nursery education and a better start in life. Families will be saved the equivalent of £707 per year per child.

I will touch on that later in my remarks, but the increase in free nursery education that I have set out represents a huge step forward for children and families. In delivering a tangible increase in the number of hours of early learning and childcare, we will benefit families by protecting their budgets, as they will be able to save the equivalent of £707 per year per child. That first step should be recognised. We can look at what Reform Scotland has said, which will contribute to the wider debate that we must have in this country about how we transform childcare. Those are the principles that steer our proposals. I am pleased that in its report the committee agreed that the bill’s principles are sound, and I am pleased that the bill will set our country on a path towards becoming the best place in the world in which to grow up—a Scotland that takes active and shared responsibility for the wellbeing of our children and young people and that recognises the continuing challenges and is never complacent. That is an ambition that I think members share. We have listened carefully to everything that has been said during the bill process, taking full account of all interests in and perspectives on how to improve the delivery of services for all children and young people and ensure that their rights are respected across the public sector. Of course, there has not been agreement about all the detail of the bill. Throughout the process, we have welcomed constructive discussion, and in that spirit of positive debate I will address some of the issues that have been raised. On the children’s rights provisions, I note the committee’s view that incorporation of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child into Scots law does not represent the best way to progress the rights agenda at this time. That is our view. The whole premise of the bill is to make a practical difference in children’s lives, and we think that the balance that we have struck in the bill achieves that. We agree with Ken Norrie, who said: “to incorporate the convention into the domestic legal system of Scotland would be bad policy, bad practice and bad law.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 3 September 2013; c 2682.] We recognise that the committee feels that there is scope for the current ministerial duties to be strengthened. Our view is that the proposed package of legal measures represents a major and significant step forward, but we remain open to suggestions on strengthening the provisions. On the new powers available to Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People, we welcome the committee’s comments on the proposed changes. We recognise that the new investigatory function will undoubtedly have resource implications for the commissioner. The financial memorandum suggests a staffing structure to support the new functions. However, staffing and governance issues are entirely a matter for the Parliament. Indeed, the commissioner’s ability to operate entirely independently of Government is a key strength. Nevertheless, we remain willing to support the commissioner and the Parliament in considering some of the practicalities associated with the proposed changes. On the role of the named person, I am pleased that the committee endorsed the value of the role and shares my determination that GIRFEC should be implemented consistently and effectively throughout Scotland. I note the committee’s comments about areas in which the practical implementation of GIRFEC needs further clarification and support from the Scottish Government. We will seek to clarify, through guidance in many cases, many of the issues that are raised in the report. On resources, we have set out our estimate of costs in the financial memorandum, but we recognise that costs will need to be monitored as implementation goes forward. We will reflect further on how best such monitoring can take place.

We recognise very strongly the important role that health visitors have in the early years of a child’s life. Our ratio of health visitors to the people with whom they work is healthy compared with that in other parts of the United Kingdom. I have given a commitment to monitor implementation. We note what the committee and some stakeholders said about information sharing. I think that all members understand why information sharing is such a critical and difficult area. Every inquiry into a child’s death in the UK over past decades has echoed the same crucial finding: that effective sharing of information within and between agencies is fundamental to improving the protection of children and young people. We have seen that too often to risk the same happening again. Proportionate, appropriate and timely information sharing is essential to ensuring that our children are kept safe from harm. On our early learning and childcare proposals, we are delighted that many of the organisations that were invited to the Education and Culture Committee welcomed our focus on quality alongside the increased hours and flexibility. This is the first time that flexibility and choice have been put on a statutory footing and the first time that local authorities will be required to consult local parents to identify their needs. The bill also introduces a new concept of early learning and childcare to replace the traditional concept of pre-school education. It recognises that the learning journey begins from birth, and sets the stage for our longer-term aim to develop high-quality and flexible early learning and childcare that is accessible and affordable for all children, parents and families. We know that a number of organisations would like us to go further, especially in relation to additional vulnerable two-year-olds. Research shows that high-quality provision makes a difference to those children. We will not compromise on quality in ensuring that we improve the outcomes for our children. I have, of course, dealt with some of the issues that Liz Smith raised in relation to Reform Scotland’s publication today. I look forward to continuing the debate with it. I want to discuss the bill’s provisions for looked-after children and young people.

The kinship care order recognises that the extended family has a responsibility to help when children are at risk and ensures that when kinship carers step into a parenting role, they will receive the support that they need. That is a huge step forward. Previously, any support that was provided to that group of carers was provided by local authorities on a discretionary basis only. The kinship care order will empower families to provide each child with a safe, stable, loving and nurturing home and will help some children to avoid formal care, if that is not in their best interests. We also have strong commitments to ensure that we get things right for our looked-after children who are moving on to independent living. Our engagement on that with Who Cares? Scotland and others can ensure that we get things right in the final draft of the bill and that the bill works for our looked-after children. I have set out the principles of the bill. Those principles represent the highest level of ambition for our children and young people, so it is not surprising that the bill covers a lot of ground. I sincerely look forward to hearing the views of other members and the rest of the committee as we work together to ensure that the bill works for Scotland’s children. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill.

I reiterate that the bill will put flexibility on a statutory footing, to ensure that the provision works for the parents and carers whom Jayne Baxter refers to.

In evidence to the committee, Barnardo’s Scotland spoke about how the SHANARRI indicators that go along with wellbeing give professionals who work with children a much greater understanding of what they are all talking about and enable them to work more purposefully with the child to ensure that their wellbeing needs are met and they achieve positive outcomes in later life.

I agree entirely that we must change the myths that surround looked-after children and ensure that they are given the support and nurture that they need. Does the member welcome our support for Who Cares? Scotland’s time to listen campaign? Has she signed that pledge? If not, how can we work together so that more people sign the pledge? We need to listen to looked-after children. They are our responsibility and we must ensure, in our corporate parenting duties, that they have no less fulfilling a life than their non-looked-after peers.

Will the member give way?

I just want to put on record—

The kinship care order—

The kinship care order will enhance support for kinship carers by giving more kinship carers the help and support that they need. Whether financially or otherwise, support will be provided to them to ensure that they are the best possible family for the child to have a long and lasting and nurturing life.

Gavin Brown said that he had read the submissions to the committee. I wonder whether he read the one from City of Edinburgh Council, which said: “The Council believes that the costs and any savings for Children’s Rights, GIRFEC, Early Learning/Childcare and Other Proposals are accurately reflected based on our understanding of the requirements of the legislation.” Given what he has just said, how does he respond to that? Did he read the submission?

I am curious to know when Ken Macintosh will get to the bit when he is consensual in the way that he described at the start of his speech. We are still waiting. It is perhaps not the tone that we would expect from Ken Macintosh.

Maria Montessori said that play is the work of the child. If we are a country that truly wants to become the best place to grow up in, we need to become a nation that values play as a life-enhancing daily experience for all our children and young people in their homes, nurseries, schools and communities. Despite our political differences across the chamber, I know that we all share that ambition. Our aims for our children and young people in Scotland are stretching and aspirational but, as I have said, when it comes to our nation’s future, we should never shy away from ambition. I say that as the Minister for Children and Young People and as a parent to my wee boy, Angus. Play is the universal language of childhood. The activity exists for its own sake but it also has a fundamental role. All children and young people should have the opportunity to play every day, which is why we published Scotland’s first national play strategy in June and the action plan, which sets out how we will achieve that vision, on Monday. I was particularly pleased to launch the action plan at the Yard—Edinburgh’s fantastic and inspirational purpose-built indoor and outdoor play centre for children with additional needs. I want that to send a strong signal that the strategy is for each and every child across Scotland; I appreciate the Conservative amendment, which highlights the need to focus on children with additional needs. The strategy articulates the critical importance of play, as well as our obligation to protect our children’s ability to play. It sets Scotland on the right course for achieving the best for all our children and it draws together many strands of work that are happening across the Government, such as the work that planning colleagues are doing to highlight best practice in recognising the importance of play spaces when designing places and the work that my colleague Shona Robison is doing in her sport portfolio and her development of a youth sport strategy. The perfect illustration of the links between play and sport is Judy Murray’s set4sport initiative, in which she outlines the games that she played with Andy and Jamie Murray. That shows the importance of laying firm foundations with play in the earliest years to the pursuit of success in elite sport later. We in Scotland are lucky to have a play ambassador in Judy Murray. The action plan sets out specific actions and timescales and it gives details on who is responsible for delivering elements of the plan, which include: the provision of information to parents on how to access cost-effective materials for play; building and showcasing examples of effective play practices in schools; publishing a resource on children’s rights for the education sector; delivering the strategic planning for play award; and supporting innovative projects. Work is under way to develop an implementation plan to take forward the action plan. The motion congratulates the play sector on its work—we could never have developed the strategy without it. I take the opportunity to thank all those who worked tirelessly to develop the strategy and the plan and those who will have a key role in implementation. Many of the people involved are in the public gallery, and I thank them for their on-going passion for and commitment to play. The word “play” belies the topic’s seriousness and its crucial importance to the fabric of society. It is not airy-fairy or frivolous—it is a fundamental part of childhood and it is crucial for the positive outcomes of our nation’s future. Play helps children to make sense of the world and helps their cognitive development. It helps them to develop problem-solving skills and to express their thoughts and feelings, and it helps with literacy and numeracy. We must never forget that play is also about fun. Play is an essential part of childhood. It takes place in the home from birth, through formal and informal learning and in community settings through the use of public spaces and services. Our role as parents, carers and service providers is to enable and facilitate play. As politicians, policy makers, planners and practitioners, our role is to embed play at the heart of decision making throughout our society and to provide the catalyst for cultural change. Play comes in many forms. It can be active, passive, solitary, independent, assisted, social, exploratory, educational or just fun. It can happen indoors and outdoors; it can be structured, creative and messy; and it can be entirely facilitated by the imagination or involve using the latest gadget. What is important is that children and young people have the freedom to choose how and when they play and that it does not always have to be led by adults. Play remains important for all ages and stages and abilities. It is important throughout infancy, childhood, the teenage years through adolescence, and beyond into adulthood. As George Bernard Shaw said: “We don’t stop playing because we grow old; we grow old because we stop playing.” The importance of play in children’s and young people’s daily lives and to healthy development has become increasingly recognised in recent years. A growing body of evidence supports the view that playing throughout childhood is more than an innate behaviour; it also contributes to quality of life and a sense of wellbeing. Children’s play is also crucial to Scotland’s wellbeing—socially, economically and environmentally. Our people are our greatest resource, and the early years of life set the pattern for children’s future development. Research tells us that early childhood experiences shape developing brain architecture and whether our children grow into healthy and productive members of society. Our early experiences have a much greater lasting effect than most of us would assume, and play, as a first step in learning, delivers economic benefits by helping children to develop the skills that they need for learning. The potential for savings of up to £9 per £1 invested shows that our commitment to play is right for children and our economy. Scotland’s chief medical officer has also made very clear the importance of play, stating: “Investing in children’s play is one of the most important things we can do to improve children’s health and wellbeing in Scotland.” Play is also important in forming healthy attachments in the earliest years. One of the best ways to connect emotionally and physically with children is through play. For all those reasons, we have developed and continue to develop our award-winning play, talk, read campaign, which articulates the importance of people playing, talking and reading with their wee one from day 1, and empowers parents with hints and tips of things to do with their bairns. Seeing the difference that play can make in a child’s development is delightful and wonderful, and it benefits the whole family through supporting bonding and building relationships. I am the mother of a lively and active two-year-old, and it is a sheer joy to watch his development though playing. Numerous studies, including the growing up in Scotland study, show that play is a crucial factor in a child’s educational achievement. The benefits from playing and having fun should not be underestimated. The play, talk, read campaign is in full flow, and we could not let a debate pass in the Parliament about play on 31 October without mentioning Hallowe’en. The “30 things to do at Halloween before you’re 3” list is proving as popular as ever, with tips on how to get messy, read spooky books with mum or dad, carve turnip lanterns and, of course, go dooking for apples. On a more serious note, I have seen play being used to great effect in prisons. For example, the Scottish Pre-School Play Association’s work in Dumfries prison enables and strengthens relationships and builds attachments and bonds beyond the prison walls between parents and their children. The fathers who I saw appreciated the chance that they got to be with their child and to interact with them in a positive way. They are being given skills in parenting that they possibly never experienced when they were growing up. That builds up their confidence and self-esteem, and the children get the benefit of being with their parent in a normal setting, which means that they are not unnecessarily punished for their parent’s wrongdoing. Play is a simple tool, but it has a profound and long-lasting impact when used in that way. I have described how play is a child’s job, but it is also a child’s absolute right. Article 31 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child states that every child has the right “to rest and leisure, to engage in play and recreational activities appropriate to the age of the child and to participate freely in cultural life and the arts.” Scotland warmly welcomes the UN general comment on article 31, which was adopted by the UN committee in 2013. The general comment provides interpretation of the article in detail, and it aims to raise awareness of its importance, to promote a richer understanding of the content and to provide guidance for its implementation. The general comment also provides a really useful and tangible example of the importance of the UNCRC and making rights real. The general comments act to stimulate debate, and they help to identify some of the key aspects of policy and practice that must be considered when working to improve the lives of our children and young people.

The Education and Culture Committee has taken a lot of evidence on that, and the process will be on-going through the stages of the bill. We are certainly very firm in the way in which we have laid out our commitments to the UNCRC, which is the most appropriate way to recognise rights and make them real. We should also recognise that play as a concept is not a static entity. As generations pass and the years roll by, play evolves and changes. I am sure that many of us remember playing outside around our homes and communities, and I am sure that many of us also recognise that children play outdoors less and less. Children’s natural range has shrunk over the past few generations, with many venturing no further than their back gardens unsupervised. Moreover, we live in a digital age. TV, computers, tablets and a range of other technological advances increasingly see children playing inside on their own. That is not wholly bad, but we need to be alert to the consequences. Through the play strategy and action plan, I want to see children play outside more often. We need to encourage our children to get outside and to start exploring the often wild open spaces that Scotland has in abundance. We must change the culture of the perception of children as a problem in public spaces, characterised by the “No ball games” signs we still see in communities, and we must reinforce the message that children have the same right to use public spaces as every other member of society. We must also recognise play within the built environment. The quality of our surroundings has a fundamental influence on how we behave, and we must work to create places that provide the opportunities for active and healthy lifestyles—places that are safe, welcoming, attractive and pleasant; places where we respond positively to our surroundings and to each other. That is encapsulated in our policy statement on architecture and play, “Creating Places”, which was published in June. The Government also places significant emphasis on the importance of the quality of our streets and spaces. “Designing Streets” is the Scottish Government’s policy on street design, which is aimed at refocusing the role of our streets and places to serve people first and allow children to have access to safe and vibrant streets where there is ample opportunity and incentive to play and engage with their surroundings, whether in structured or informal situations. The play strategy brings together developments in planning and architecture and shows that play is not just about the play sector, but part and parcel of what many different portfolios, departments, agencies and professions need to consider as part of their work. It is also important that we dispel some of the myths around outdoor play and promote the long-term benefits of exposure to risk, both to physical health and to developing resilience and mental wellbeing. Parents’ perception of risks is often higher than the reality, and that should be weighed against the benefits of outdoor play. In my role as minister I have seen some of the very real benefits of outdoor play. That includes schools that have greened up their playing spaces, such as Rigside primary in my constituency and many other schools, and have witnessed a subsequent improvement in pupil behaviour, and organisations that have got children climbing trees, digging for beasties and jumping in puddles, such as the Jeely Piece Club in Castlemilk and many others across Scotland.

Absolutely. As I said, people should view open spaces as being equally for the benefit of children across the country and should allow children to access them as adults can. I return to outdoor learning. I was pleased that Scotland’s eight to 12-year-olds were outperforming those in other parts of the United Kingdom in a recent research project by RSPB in terms of connection with nature, although we have a way to go to match our Nordic neighbours. Our play strategy should be an incentive to grow that appreciation of nature. Many members will have seen a recent BBC report on the latest findings on physical inactivity rates of children. The study states that half of all UK seven-year-olds do not get enough exercise and that girls are far less active than boys. Play should also be seen through a preventative and early intervention lens. By getting more children out to play, we can reduce and reverse negative health impacts. It is important to remember that we are not starting from scratch; we have a professional and vibrant play sector that supports and delivers quality play to children every day. As I said, it has contributed to our national strategy. The previous £4 million go play fund developed an outcome evaluation framework to allow play providers to clearly articulate the benefits of play. The framework is now widely used and recognised, and it has been successful in securing significant additional funding for the delivery of play projects. We have further supported play through our £3 million go2play fund, which supports community-based free play, development of innovative projects and the transformation of 30 school playgrounds into natural play spaces. That investment has enabled projects around Scotland to ensure that play is advanced by a dedicated and professional workforce. During national play day at the beginning of August, I joined play rangers from the PEEK—possibilities east end kids—project, which operates in the east end of Glasgow. They were doing their bit to allow children to access the areas around them and to reclaim those spaces for positive use. I have made clear the importance of play and the Government’s commitment to supporting children to play every day. I recognise the passion and commitment from all MSPs and from the play profession—it is an exciting time for play, and we have the opportunity to build on the strategy. I look forward to hearing the comments from members on all sides of the chamber as we seek to develop the play strategy in the years ahead. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the action plan, Play Strategy for Scotland: Our Vision, which sets out specific actions, timescales and responsibilities for delivering support for play; agrees that play helps to ensure that children have the best possible start in life and are ready to succeed and that it can make them successful learners, confident individuals, effective contributors and responsible citizens; further agrees that play is absolutely vital to a child’s wellbeing, that it contributes to the development of physical, cognitive, emotional and social skills and is an important tool in tackling poverty and health inequalities; believes that it is therefore vital that all children and young people should have the opportunity to play every day; supports the collaborative multiagency approach to improving the life chances of all children as the right way forward, and congratulates the work of the play sector in helping to improve support for play.

I take on board Liz Smith’s points. I know that we have an ideological difference when it comes to the approaches in the bill, but she is keen on culture change and there has been an emphasis on that, too. She should remember that the strategy provides us with a platform for bringing about that culture change across the whole country. The play sector values the play strategy because it gives the sector another tool in its armoury to help it to explain the importance of the role of play within wider society and the benefits that she described that play can bring to the lives of children and adolescents.

I made it clear in my opening speech that the strategy was not just about the play sector but about bringing lots of different departments together. For example, “Designing Streets: A Policy Statement for Scotland” is about a commitment from architects around Scotland to ensure that they all understand their role in creating spaces that children can play in and enjoy. The strategy is therefore about a much more holistic approach to play that includes more than just the play sector.

I have a constructive point to make. I hope that Mary Fee would welcome the early years task force, which is the group that administers the change fund. Families Outside is a very active member of that group. I have a personal connection with Families Outside, given my involvement in some of its work during the previous parliamentary session. I take on board the point that Mary Fee makes.

I am genuinely pleased that we have had this opportunity to debate play and its contribution to childhood and the wellbeing of Scotland. Ken Macintosh made a nice point when he recognised that we launched the play strategy during the longest play day back in the summer and that we managed to capture the playful activities that are going on around Scotland today when we talked about what children are doing to celebrate Hallowe’en. I am also pleased that members support the action that we are taking to invest in Scotland’s greatest resource, which is our children. We all want Scotland to be the best place to grow up and we all want our children to have the best start in life. We have debated today the fundamental role that play has in contributing to that vision. Jayne Baxter outlined the multiple hats that she wears as a spokesperson for Labour, an MSP and, more important, as granny to her grandchildren, who enjoy the muddy puddles. She outlined the importance that play has in ensuring that we give all our children the very best start in life. We also got an image of a young George Adam playing on the Gleniffer braes getting a skint knee but growing into the strong and resilient MSP we know today. I thank him for that image. Mary Scanlon revealed a hidden talent for tying knots. Many members raised the issue of funding and the challenges that exist across the country. I will outline some of the Scottish Government’s investment in play. We have invested over £7 million in play over the past five years through our go play and go2play programmes. That investment has built capacity in the play sector and given it tools to evaluate and articulate the benefits of play. That is about leaving a sustainable legacy. At the halfway point of the current go2play programme, 12,500 children have experienced quality play supported by play rangers and 150 volunteers—mostly parents—who have been involved in building community links and taking individual steps on the pathway to employment. That programme has also attracted an additional quarter of a million pounds to support play. This is an important statistic on which to reflect, given some of the comments that have been made. Of the children supported through go2play, 60 per cent live in the 15 per cent most deprived areas; 17 per cent have additional support needs; and 12 per cent are from black and minority ethnic groups. Go2play opportunities delivered by many other practitioners show that the approach is inclusive. By building on that we can ensure that many more children can participate in and benefit from play. On that note, as I said in my opening remarks, I appreciate the Conservative amendment and the comments from Mark McDonald, who talked about the innovative approaches of Kool Kidz, SensationALL and other facilities that host special requirements sessions. Those interesting ideas and innovative approaches can be shared. He also described eloquently the very real challenges facing families who have a child with additional support needs. We need to work hard to deliver on that strategy for those families. Stewart Maxwell was correct to point out the excellent work that goes on in the Isobel Mair school, which I have visited. I visited it just before it opened and I know that it is a truly fantastic and phenomenal facility. The debate allows us to talk about such good practice much more openly. A big theme today has been that play often does not need significant resources, but rather what is needed is a change in culture. Ken Macintosh used the example of the Wendy house and the tree house to show that children do not necessarily need expensive toys and that we should never just assume that we know what children want. We need to engage with children and understand what their needs are. During my time as planning minister, I was impressed by the charrette process that took place throughout different communities in Scotland. That process, which included children, involved engaging deeply and meaningfully with communities to get them to imagine what their communities could and should look like. Others such as Planning Aid for Scotland are also important partners in changing culture to ensure that our places have spaces for children to use and enjoy. I really liked what Fiona McLeod said about her son coming home. If he was dirty, she knew that he had had a good time—the dirtier the better, she said. Other members have spoken about jumping in puddles, and Christian Allard spoke about his time in rural France. Free outdoor play has been mentioned. James Dornan spoke about the social inequalities that exist in some of our most deprived communities. The message that play does not need to be expensive is important and highlights the significance of our play talk read campaign. James Dornan mentioned the Jeely Piece Club and we have other partners across Scotland—including the Scottish Out of School Care Network, the Scottish Pre-school Play Association and PEEK—who are doing fantastic things to support families and build up parents’ self-esteem. What matters is not how much money a parent has but what they do with their children. Fiona McLeod talked about intergenerational mixing, and other members have spoken about their own childhood experiences. During the time that I spent at the youth club that my mum ran, we had to perform pantomimes for the local residential group. That was a valuable and enriching experience not only for us, as young people, but for the older residents who watched our performances—even though they might have been a bit ropey at times. George Adam and Richard Lyle spoke about the power of play to bring families together. Whether it involves the games in the picture from 1560—I think that that is what Stewart Maxwell said—or a Nintendo Wii, as suggested by George Adam, play is never static. Mary Fee and Richard Lyle also talked about the positive impacts of play on our communities. Clare Adamson made some interesting points about the work that she carries out in connection with ROSPA and the fantastic work that is going on in Wishaw and throughout her constituency. Mary Scanlon mentioned the good work that is carried out in hospital in relation to play. In response to some of the points that she made about the Care Inspectorate, I advise her that we intend to include the Care Inspectorate in the implementation of our strategy. A helpful development in changing the culture across Scotland is the new professional development award in strategic planning for play, which aims to start that process. The Scottish Qualifications Authority is aiming it at wider communities and policy makers who have an impact on children’s play, including architects, planners, health workers and local authorities. That professional development opportunity can help to make play a reality for more children, families and communities and is a helpful response to people who want the play strategy to be about more than just the play sector. As part of the go2play investment, a play strategy implementation fund of £90,000 will be available to charities and play projects between January 2014 and April 2015 to support implementation of the action plan through practical and innovative approaches to play. In addition, the Big Lottery Fund is a key investor in and supporter of play through a number of its programmes. Liz Smith said that we should not forget Scotland’s fantastic older young people in the strategy. I absolutely agree with that. Youth work and community learning and development organisations and services are making a huge contribution to young people’s access to play and leisure activities.

Absolutely. The strategy is about pulling together all the different themes that are already in existence. As I said in my opening remarks, we are not starting from scratch on the issue; an enormous amount of good work is going on. On Saturday, I will attend Youth Scotland’s 80th anniversary celebrations. I know from the volunteers that it helps to empower about the advice that it offers on insurance and other risks such as those that Liz Smith described in her opening remarks. Such organisations are doing great work on which we will build the outcomes of our play strategy. My colleague Shona Robison is developing our forthcoming youth sport strategy, which will set out what children and young people have told us will get them involved and keep them engaged in sport and physical activity, helping to provide a lasting legacy from the Commonwealth games. When earlier today I met children from St Athanasius primary school in my constituency, I asked them what they would like from the play strategy and what they like to do in their spare time and I was pleased that some of the girls said that they like playing football. As a former centre-half, I am disappointed that Neil Bibby and Mark McDonald have never asked me to dust down my football boots and to join them in a game of football—

Many members also raised the issue of child poverty. I absolutely agree that child poverty is an abomination in a country as resource rich as Scotland. Next year, the Scottish Government will publish a revised child poverty strategy with the aim of improving children’s wellbeing and life chances. As a Government, we remain as committed as ever to that aim. We do not want to see any child being born into, or condemned to, a life of poverty. We understand that poverty undermines our best efforts to support parents. Our work in the play strategy should be seen as an important way in which we can tackle social inequalities. I also absolutely agree that the strategy needs to complement the national parenting strategy in terms of its benefits for parents, carers and practitioners. In conclusion, it has been a pleasure to lead the debate on the national play strategy, which I am glad has cross-party support. We want to make Scotland the best place in the world to grow up, and the play strategy will firmly help us to go down that route towards achieving that ambitious aim for children and young people in Scotland.

As every other member in the debate has done today, I congratulate Jim Hume on securing this debate. We have heard some well-deserved praise for Roxburgh and Berwickshire Citizens Advice Bureau’s project to support young people. I would like to add to that chorus of appreciation my voice and the voices of members of the Scottish Youth Parliament from the Borders, whom I met earlier: Nicola Pringle, Finlay Duff and Scott Redmond all spoke positively about the work that the CAB does in the Borders and about the effective collaborative work that is happening in that area. I also reiterate the welcome that we have all given to the people from the CAB who are in the gallery. The Scottish Government is behind Scotland’s young people, and fantastic initiatives such as the one that we are discussing show what can be done in communities to boost young people’s chances as they begin adulthood and find their way in the world. We are clear that the future of our nation rests in our young people’s hands, which is why we are doing everything in our power to give them the chance to flourish and to have positive and successful futures. We make no apologies for having high aspirations for young Scots; we want them to aim high and we know that with the right opportunities and openings there is no limit to what they can go on to achieve. Projects such as the one in the Scottish Borders that Jim Hume has highlighted make a valuable contribution to that drive. By showing young people that they are not alone, by giving them help and support and by involving them in such community projects we can make a real and meaningful difference to their lives. The project is another example of the sterling work that citizens advice bureaux carry out in communities across Scotland. We have heard today about many wonderful local initiatives from members, and I want to plug the Clydesdale Citizens Advice Bureau in my constituency, which gives valuable advice that I have seen first-hand. Such advice centres help families and people in need—often some of the most vulnerable people in our society—to address complex and difficult issues every day. Whether it is on debt, housing problems or benefits issues, the support that is given often prevents situations from spiralling into crises. That is part and parcel of CAS’s work over the decades, which Jim Hume outlined. He mentioned that that work has evolved from ration book advice to embrace social media and all the other modern technologies that can be used to get the right messages through to people who are in need. As Alison Johnstone, Jackie Baillie and Christine Grahame correctly noted, we know that more and more people are going to bureaux for help all the time; it would be remiss of me not to point out that much of that is down to the harsh UK Government’s welfare reform measures, including the widely condemned bedroom tax. The Scottish Government has made abundantly clear its opposition to those measures, which are being imposed on hard-pressed families across Scotland. Such drastic welfare cuts can only exacerbate problems including child poverty and disadvantage, which afflict the lives of too many young Scots, as Malcolm Chisholm pointed out. We are doing what we can to mitigate those problems’ impact, which is why we have committed £7.9 million of additional funding for advice and support services to help address the effects of welfare reform. That includes £2.5 million that is being channelled directly to Citizens Advice Scotland to fund a range of services to help people on the ground, while bureaux across the country are receiving additional allocations from the wider funding pot. By strengthening those vital services in that way, we can allow them to expand and undertake new and innovative projects; the youth initiative in Roxburgh and Berwickshire CAB shows us that there is no shortage of ideas. People in the age group that the venture focuses on—16 to 25-year-olds—face a period of huge transition in their lives, which can often lead to feelings of isolation and uncertainty, which Christine Grahame mentioned as a theme in her speech. I understand that the project gives advice on a range of issues, such as study, work, health, money management and housing—areas in which many young people will require a helping hand to steer them in the right direction. The project has two members of staff and has successfully recruited 31 young volunteers. As Jim Hume said, to date 3,806 students have taken part in its workshops. That is a phenomenal result, which shows the excellent impact that volunteers can have in our communities. The fruitful links that the project has built up with high schools in Roxburgh and Berwickshire, as well as with Borders College, are very much in keeping with the kind of local collaboration that the Government is promoting between our education establishments and organisations in the wider community. It was great to hear this morning from members of the Scottish Youth Parliament about how that collaborative approach is bearing fruit. Under curriculum for excellence, which is transforming learning for Scotland’s children and young people in an effort to improve their life chances, community learning and development has a key role to play. I have seen some fantastic examples of that across the Borders. Scotland’s national youth information and citizenship organisation, Young Scot, is also undertaking excellent work to support young people through key transitions in their lives. Young Scot’s vision is for young people to take responsibility for changing our world and tackling social issues, so that they can grow up in a Scotland that promotes aspiration, enterprise, opportunity, inclusion and wellbeing. I think that all members who are present will share Young Scot’s inspiring vision. This year, the Scottish Government has committed more than £1 million to the organisation to support its work. As well as helping young people to become informed and active citizens who are engaged with their communities, Young Scot delivers its hugely successful national entitlement card, which is now held by more than half a million young people in Scotland. The card is the result of a hugely positive partnership between Young Scot, the Scottish Government, the Improvement Service, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and all 32 local authorities. Just as Young Scot and the citizens advice project that brings us here today are, the Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that our young people are at the heart of everything we do. We want Scotland to be the best place in the world for children and young people to grow up. That is why we are breaking down the barriers that hold them back, including poverty, disadvantage and lack of opportunity. Through our getting it right for every child approach and key social policy frameworks such as the child poverty strategy, achieving our potential, equally well and the early years framework, we are driving a focus on early intervention and prevention to give our young people the best start in life. As Alison Johnstone noted, curriculum for excellence is helping to ensure that all young folk can be successful learners, confident individuals, effective contributors and responsible citizens, and their needs are, of course, at the very core of our Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. Moreover, we invest more than £2.5 billion a year in post-16 education, training and student support. We have retained the education maintenance allowance, which has been scrapped for students in England. We have invested about £5 billion in colleges since 2007. Our opportunities for all programme guarantees an offer of an education or training opportunity for all 16 to 19-year-olds across Scotland who are not already in work, education or training. Youth employment is at its highest rate since the end of 2010 and, for the second year running, the Scottish Government has surpassed its target to provide 25,000 modern apprenticeships. That record shows our commitment to the young people of Scotland. That commitment and ethos are shared by many organisations across the country that strive to do crucial work to support young people, including the Roxburgh and Berwickshire Citizens Advice Bureau. However, we recognise the challenges that exist. Partnership working is key; we must continue to work together to ensure that our focus never wanes, because Scotland’s young people deserve no less from us. I thank Jim Hume and all the members who have participated in the debate. 13:08 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

Although regulation of the internet is a reserved matter, we have established a stakeholder group on child internet safety that includes representation from a wide range of sectors. The group is a means of identifying emerging new concerns and is a way of highlighting and taking forward any necessary national action to address those concerns. We will continue to work within our powers with partners such as Police Scotland and the child exploitation and online protection centre to improve the online safety of Scotland’s children. We will announce further steps in this area shortly.

Absolutely. I am very well aware of Christina McKelvie’s parliamentary debate last month. In her response to that debate, my colleague Shona Robison outlined the strategies that she is taking forward to end violence against women. I also endorse what Christina McKelvie said about the CEOP advice and I recognise that Police Scotland has issued advice to child victims of online sexual exploitation, to potential victims and to parents and carers on how to keep safe online. That is a message that we cannot afford not to reiterate time and again. As I said in my original answer to Ms McKelvie, we will announce more steps in this area very shortly.

Online safety in Scotland is monitored by a stakeholder group on child internet safety, which is looking at the issue of cyberbullying. As Christina McKelvie mentioned—and as I think Christina McKelvie is trying to bring to our attention—we cannot do enough on this issue, which is growing and growing. We owe it to all children across Scotland that they should be kept free and safe from harm. As I said in my original answer to Christina McKelvie, we intend to announce more work on this area very shortly.

The Scottish Government will continue to make sure that the needs of looked-after children, young people and care leavers who have experienced multiple placements are embedded in its wider work to improve outcomes, such as getting it right for every child, curriculum for excellence, additional support for learning and more choices, more chances. The Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill will improve the way in which services work to support children, young people and families by ensuring that there is a single planning approach for children who need additional support from services; creating a single point of contact around every child or young person; ensuring co-ordinated planning and delivery of services with a focus on outcomes; and providing a holistic and shared understanding of a child or young person’s wellbeing. The bill also places a duty on corporate parents to collaborate with each other when exercising their duties in relation to looked-after children, young people and care leavers.

We are doing an enormous amount of work to support children who are looked after. I could list a number of things that we are doing on that. We have created the centre for excellence for looked after children in Scotland, or CELCIS, we have strengthened additional support for learning legislation and we are doing much to ensure that practitioners are empowered and given the appropriate training materials. However, the issue persists that the attainment of looked-after children needs to be supported more fully and they need to be given the opportunities that every other child in the country has. We will absolutely ensure that the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill helps us to move the agenda forward. I know that not just in my portfolio but across the education brief and the Government, we intend to ensure that we take our corporate parenting responsibilities seriously to ensure that these children go on to succeed.

The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that fast and effective protection is in place for children at risk of abuse and neglect. To that end, we have introduced new and strengthened guidance to ensure that all practitioners working with children are equipped to protect children who are at risk. We have also twice overseen the inspection of child protection services in every part of Scotland. The second round showed significant improvements overall, with 94 per cent receiving a positive report. Also, on 17 April 2012, we introduced the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill to Parliament. The bill is central to our aim of making Scotland the best place in the world to grow up in.

I respect the way in which Paul Martin has raised the matter. The death of Daniel Pelka is an absolute tragedy. A significant amount of work has been done on the issue over the past couple of years, particularly in the past seven or eight months. In November last year, we published the “National Risk Framework to Support the Assessment of Children and Young People”. On 28 November last year, we published the “National Framework for Child Protection learning and development in Scotland 2012”. We have refreshed and revised the pink book for health professionals, and we republished “Getting Our Priorities Right” in April this year for professionals specifically working with children and families for whom substance misuse is a factor. As I said, we have also published the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, which will strengthen the support that is available for vulnerable families. It is worth reminding ourselves that, in the words of Tam Baillie, the Commissioner for Children and Young People in Scotland, “no place in the world can give a 100 per cent guarantee on the safety of all its children.” Nevertheless, the Scottish Government is very much committed to ensuring that every child is protected and safe from harm. Of course, we will never be complacent but will learn the lessons from what has happened in England in relation to the case that the member mentioned.

Liz Smith is hugely misrepresenting the intention behind the bill, and I will certainly be making some remarks about our intentions in my opening speech. However, I want to point out that, through our early years and parents strategies, we have always engaged with and listened to parents. This is not about telling people what they should do or about the other things that Liz Smith is describing; it is about creating a structure to help parents and provide a place where they can access support if needed.

The Scottish Government believes that action must be taken to put in place a proportionate system of protection, nurture and support to give all our children the best chance of flourishing, and that is what we have done with the proposals in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. I believe that a universal approach that looks to identify issues and concerns at an early stage, and which steps in appropriately to help children and their families to tackle problems, is essential. That is the getting it right for every child—GIRFEC—approach, which was started by the predecessor Administrations and has been supported over the years by all parties. A named person is central to that approach; a named person is as vital to GIRFEC as general practitioners and nurses are to the health service. In developing the proposals for the bill, we did not start from scratch. The previous Administration started GIRFEC with the Highland Council pathfinder in 2006. As Bill Alexander said in his evidence to the Education and Culture Committee yesterday, he did not come before the committee with “an untested product”. He also said that practitioners already “passionately” believe that the approach works. When the pathfinder project began, parents in Highland said that they wanted a person with whom they could identify. They wanted to avoid repeating their stories over and over again, and they wanted help and support when they needed them. That is when the named person concept became an essential element of the getting it right for every child approach, which was developed with parents, and not as the bottom-up approach that Liz Smith described.

I will go on to talk about some more parental input to the process as I make progress in my opening remarks. As the evidence from Highland Council eloquently put it, “Critically, the Named Person is a point of contact for families, where they can seek advice or support about issues relating to their child’s wellbeing. She will usually be someone that the family already knows, and who they feel able to approach.” As Liz Smith said in 2009 of the experience of Highland, “I ... welcome the report on the results of the Highland pathfinder GIRFEC project, especially the progress that has been made on ... making improvements in professional practice with better multi-agency working, and developing a more holistic approach to the needs of the child—something that we all agree is one of the most important issues.”—[Official Report, 3 December 2009; c 21897.] The named person role was the foundation for that more holistic approach in Highland and was central to providing a more helpful response and better co-ordination of support, which we all recognise is absolutely vital to the wellbeing of our children. A lot was said about the policy this summer, and about the practice and facts as the named person relates to family life. The Scottish Government knows that the most important influence on a child’s life is its parents. Our early years work and parenting strategy are evidence that we place the absolute highest value on the role of parents as the principal carers for their children, and on listening to and engaging with them. That engagement with parents will continue as we take the bill forward. As every parent—myself included—and carer knows, there are often challenges or concerns in bringing up children. That is quite normal, and helping children and families to cope with the challenges that life presents is part and parcel of everyday good practice by midwives, health visitors and school staff.

Absolutely. As the bill progresses through Parliament, we will be able to ensure that our narrative deals with some of the issues that parents raise. As I said earlier, we want to engage with parents as much as we can throughout the bill’s progress.

No. That is why I believe that the named person service should be based in the universal services of health and education. We are not changing what they do; we are changing how their roles are seen. An authority on the matter said that she remembered that a GP “eloquently described how a health visitor could both gain the confidence of and enter a household into which that GP might not be invited. The GP was clear about the twin benefits of the health visitor, first, in being seen as a help to the household ... and, secondly, in being able to identify at an early stage any possible cause for concern in the household ... health visiting ... is a vital preventative service in the early years.”—[Official Report, 14 March 2013; c 17841.] I could not agree more. I am grateful for that succinct summary by Annabel Goldie, who is in the chamber, of the named person role for very young children.

Perhaps there is a bit of inconsistency from the Conservatives. Last session, they seemed to agree with all that we are trying to achieve with GIRFEC, but in this instance they do not seem to be reflecting that previous position. The concerns that parents or children raise sometimes need the attention of one or more professionals from different organisations or disciplines, and they need help in navigating their way through the various services that are available. As one Edinburgh parent put it: “For me, the concept of the Named Person works because I will have a named and known professional with whom I can communicate any concerns or share information. Parents are often frustrated and confused by not knowing who to contact, or by frequently-changing professional teams. At times of pressure or concern, clarity will be a real benefit.” We cannot forget the rare occasions when parents and families do not provide the right support and loving environment for their children. The recent tragic case of Daniel Pelka, which Liz Smith mentioned, highlighted the importance of professionals putting the child’s interest at the heart of what they do, and of their communicating their concerns. Anne Houston of Children 1st said: “Deaths like Daniel’s remind us why the principle behind the named person ... is a sound one as it aims to prevent children slipping through the net.” I am not claiming that the existence of a named person would necessarily prevent such tragedies, but as Ruth Wishart said in her excellent article in The Herald: “It’s unrealistic to suppose we can stop every incident of child abuse, identify every perpetrator, always intervene in time to prevent tragedy. But we can make a big difference.” Issues have been raised around information sharing, and such cases highlight the importance of sharing information where it is required in order to protect a child’s wellbeing. Any sharing of information under the bill must take place fully within the framework that is set by the Data Protection Act 1998 and the European convention on human rights. A preventative approach means that action should be taken before things get serious, and the named person provides a structure for doing that. Issues have been raised around the cost of GIRFEC, but of course it is not always just about costs; we know that the GIRFEC approach is making savings. We know from the Highland pilot the kind of savings that have been made: reductions in social work case loads of 50 per cent, reductions in referrals to the children’s reporter of 70 per cent and reductions in the number of children who have been accommodated. We know that the areas that are the furthest advanced in implementing GIRFEC have had similar findings. Over the years, Parliament has repeatedly endorsed the GIRFEC approach and I hope that at the end of today’s business we will be able to do so again. I move amendment S4M-07783.2, to leave out from “notes” to end and insert: “reaffirms its ambition that Scotland should be the best place in the world for children and young people to grow up; considers that the protection of children from harm and the promotion of their wellbeing is of paramount importance; recognises the critical role in achieving that of the Getting It Right for Every Child approach, which has been successfully developed in Scotland ever since its inception during the first administration after devolution; understands that the named person has been developed and implemented as an essential element of that approach, as a means of making appropriate and proportionate support available to children and families in a coordinated and collaborative way, reducing bureaucracy and making the best use of public resources, and welcomes the opportunity provided by the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill to secure the protection, nurture and support that children and their families need to flourish”.

Ken Macintosh grossly misrepresents what the named person is. There are many times and instances in which the child—like his children and my children—will not need the named person, but the named person can be proactively sought to give comfort if someone ever has a concern or a point to make. It is not that everyone has to use the named person.

I welcome Jayne Baxter to her new role and wish her all the best in that role. The tone of some of what Kezia Dugdale just said was a bit unfortunate, because the whole process of a bill going through Parliament is about listening to views and ensuring that we take those views on board. When people such as Anne McTaggart and Jayne Baxter have a real interest and a real expertise, we will absolutely ensure that we engage with them. I am due to meet Jayne Baxter in the next week or so to talk to her about her views on the bill. Recently, it became clear that there were widespread misconceptions about what the named person service really meant, some of which were stoked up by the unfortunate tone of the reporting by certain parts of the press. The evidence that the Education and Culture Committee has heard so far has helped greatly to dispel some of those misconceptions about what the named person role is and it has been good to be able to receive some of the fantastic briefings from many of the children’s charities, which have looked to ensure that everyone is aware just how much behind the proposal they are. I look forward to being able to discuss the bill, including the named person provisions, in the light of all the evidence that has been presented and the committee’s assessment of the bill’s merit. We can also then place the issue of the named person more properly in the context of all the improvements that the bill seeks to make. I think that we are all agreed that we should do absolutely everything that we can to improve the life chances of our children and young people. The benefits to be gained from investing in the early years and in providing all our children with the protection, nurture and support that they need are immense. We did our own bespoke economic modelling and every pound that we invest in the early years saves us £9 in cure. Perhaps Gavin Brown would be interested in that, given the points that he raised regarding the financial memorandum.

With the early years collaborative we are already seeing good examples of where that return is being made. In response to Gavin Brown’s assertions that no one agrees with the savings for GIRFEC, that is not the case. Edinburgh City Council, Fife Council and South Ayrshire Council have very real experience of GIRFEC and it is through consultation with them and others that we developed the financial memorandum. It is therefore unfortunate that Gavin Brown has raised such assertions.

We are talking about GIRFEC being an approach that saves the public purse an awful lot of money. We have heard from the Highland Council and we have done an awful lot of work to ensure that our financial memorandum is as robust as it can be. I know that Gavin Brown took evidence on that in his role as deputy convener of the Finance Committee. As I said earlier, early intervention is by far the most effective way to secure sustainable improvements in the life chances of our children, so I am genuinely confused by some of the statements that have been made by certain members. They say that they welcome the renewed focus on GIRFEC and that the philosophy underpinning it is admirable. They cite the benefits of early intervention and they agree that there should be more joined-up working between all agencies that are involved in supporting children, yet at the same time they do not want to put in place the tried and tested mechanisms for achieving those benefits. If we want to get it right for every child, there must surely be a role for the universal services of health and education in providing the safety net that is needed. If services for a child must be co-ordinated, someone needs to take responsibility for ensuring that the co-ordination takes place.

I ask the member to wait one moment. If success depends on people spotting issues early and taking appropriate and proportionate action, we must put in place clear responsibilities and processes for doing that. If we are to get better at helping parents and carers to navigate their way through the different services that are available, we need to ensure that there is a readily identifiable professional there to help them to do that. If, in the most troubling cases, someone has a real concern that a child’s wellbeing is under threat, they need to know with whom to raise that concern. The named person approach grew out of the experience of parents and carers, who sought the certainty of contact, the helping hand and the professional friend that the named person is able to provide. As the evaluation of the Highland pathfinder shows, families have greatly valued that role.

I thank Liam McArthur for his intervention, but we have already heard from the Information Commissioner’s Office that a letter has gone out to ensure that information should be shared only when it is proportionate. We must ensure that people can spot signs that may arise to enable them to act early, because the worst thing to happen would be for someone to respond far too late. The named person approach means that people can deal with a problem before it escalates into a crisis. Many members have made good contributions today. Stewart Maxwell quoted Children in Scotland, and reiterated that the named person is part and parcel of GIRFEC. Clare Adamson and George Adam spoke passionately about the critical importance of GIRFEC and of the named person approach as part of that, and about putting in place robust structures to support the strategy. Anne McTaggart talked about ensuring that we engage with parents as well.

We are working with the national parent forum to help to provide that advice. We want to work and engage with everyone to ensure that the bill is a success, as that is in the best interests of the children. We have done so through the consultation process, and we will continue to engage and listen, and make the case for the named person approach as part of making Scotland the best place in the world in which to grow up.

Will the member give way? [Interruption.]

I will not mention Alex Johnstone, who is scurrying about trying to sort out his phone. As Liz Smith will know, the GIRFEC approach has been around since the previous Administration, but its application is inconsistent throughout the country. We have heard about the fantastic things that are going on in Highland Council, but we need consistency for children across the 32 local authorities. Does Liz Smith agree that, by underpinning that in legislation, we will help to up the pace of change and improve the consistency?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I take on board Liz Smith’s real and passionate concerns over the policies that we have in ensuring that we get it right for children. In the same spirit as the cabinet secretary, I point her to some of the work of the getting it right for every child pathfinder in Highland, which shows that there have been savings, a cutting of bureaucracy and a real benefit to the end user, the child, in having a named person. She is painting a picture that is wholly negative when, in fact, there are many positives about the named person. However, I appreciate her views and offer to talk the matter through with her as the bill progresses through Parliament.

We welcome the report of the Equal Opportunities Committee. I am pleased to see that its recommendations are consistent with those identified at the women’s employment summit last year, which was held in partnership with the Scottish Trades Union Congress. Our long-term ambition is to improve and increase early learning and childcare to match the best in Europe, ensuring that it offers the greatest benefit to our most vulnerable children. As a first step, we will legislate, through the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, to increase free and more flexible early learning and childcare provision from 475 to 600 hours. That will remove some of the barriers that parents and carers can face in taking up education, training and employment, as well as saving families the equivalent of around £700 per child per year.

I recently met Jayne Baxter at the Gingerbread celebrations in Fife, in the region that she represents. I appreciate the input to the on-going debate on childcare from the parents that she has spoken to in Methil. We absolutely recognise that flexibility is a key thing that we need to get right, which is why flexibility will be enshrined in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. We recognise that, to meet the needs of parents who want to access education and training, we need to provide the hours flexibly. The member raises the issue of out-of-school care and the childcare needs of parents of children who are older than the early years sector. That is why we are pleased that the Scottish Out of School Care Network is on the early years task force in a sub-group that is looking at out-of-school care. We have just announced £1.7 million for our third sector strategic partners, which include SOSCN, the Care and Learning Alliance, the National Day Nurseries Association and the Scottish Childminding Association, in order to influence the way in which we provide more opportunities for families with children who are older but who nonetheless need childcare facilities to be available to them.

Today’s debate about the Scottish guardianship service for unaccompanied asylum-seeking children and young people, which is leading in its model of guardianship in the United Kingdom and across large parts of Europe, is timely for three reasons. First, next week is refugee week. This year’s theme celebrates the diverse cultures and heritage that make Scotland the place that it is today—I will touch on that theme later. Secondly, today’s Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations awards ceremony has the Scottish guardianship service shortlisted for a partnership award. Thirdly, yesterday the Joint Committee on Human Rights recognised the lessons that can be learned, across the UK, from this Scottish service unique to these islands. I am proud to lead a debate that I know will gain the support of us all, across the chamber, on a service that shows Scotland at its best, leading the way, and our ambition for Scotland to be the best place to grow up extends to those who make Scotland their home. I want to put on record my thanks to all those who have worked tirelessly for unaccompanied asylum-seeking children: the Refugee Council; Aberlour, which manages the guardianship project; Barnardo’s; the Mungo Foundation; and many others across Scotland, including Glasgow City Council’s social work department. So, what is the system all about? The service allocates guardians to unaccompanied asylum-seeking children who find themselves in Scotland. Let us pause for a moment to reflect on how scary, frightening and daunting it is for someone to arrive in a country that they probably know nothing about and whose language they may not even speak, where all the while they are on their own. On top of that, they then need to embrace the policies and laws governing asylum and immigration. The guardians help children and young people to make sense of the complex and often overwhelming systems and processes around asylum and welfare that they have to face immediately upon arrival in this country. They form a single point of contact where information can be pulled together; the roles of the different agencies working with the child can be explained; and all that can be repeated until the child fully understands what is going on. The guardians do that in a way that gains the child’s trust, gratitude and friendship. They provide a voice for the young person until they are empowered enough to speak for themselves. That is in sharp contrast to the situation that was highlighted in 2005 by Kathleen Marshall, who was Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People at the time. She noted that there was a lack of support or of robust systems in place to cope with the emerging presence of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children in Glasgow, alongside the emotive issues around the detention of children for immigration purposes and dawn raids. I have had the pleasure of meeting and listening to some of the young people who have been helped by the guardians. Although they have now made Scotland their home, it is still painful to learn about what some people have had to endure during their young lives. Through one of the therapeutic art projects that they had participated in, they conveyed to me their aspirations to become a mechanic, a professional football player—even a politician, of all things—as well as many other dreams and aspirations that had been made possible because of the guardianship service. I want to take a wee moment to share with members Paul’s story. He came to this country when he was 16 and was allocated a guardian. Initially, Paul was very confused and scared and found it difficult to speak about his experiences. It took a long time to build trust with people, and that was not helped by a difficult age assessment. Paul now has a great relationship with his guardian and continues to come for advice on a vast range of different subjects. He has become a good role model for other young people in the service, and is clearly a very popular young man. The change that the guardians have observed in Paul is striking: he is now confident, articulate and very motivated to make something of his life. To illustrate that point, he co-hosted a recent Scottish guardianship service conference that I attended and spoke incredibly well. He has now got a place at the University of Strathclyde to study product design and will have much to offer to Scotland. What a talent and what an asset for Scotland. Such stories about the help that young people receive from the SGS are robustly backed up by the very positive and independent evaluation by Professors Ravi Kohli and Heaven Crawley of the model of guardianship that the service has used. The evaluation finds that the Scottish model of guardianship is well established, as “reflected in good communication and information sharing” between the service and referral agencies. The guardians are described as knowledgeable and competent. Most important, the guardians were found to be “committed to young people in terms of safe and sustaining relationships”. The evaluators found clear evidence that outcomes were improved for the unaccompanied asylum-seeking young people as a result of the service. They identified the added value of guardianship, which lies in its ability to work across the three domains of asylum, wellbeing and social networks. It is all too easy to forget the real sense of contentment and self-worth that we derive from the most basic aspects of our lives when things are going well: a place we are happy to call home; interaction with our families, friends and wider communities; consistent provision of appropriate healthcare; and access to education. The guardians have made time and taken time to explain and to listen to the children who are referred to them. The guardians have not only helped those young people cope with the obstacles that they faced on their arrival and provided day-to-day support with other issues such as health, housing and education; they have actively encouraged the young people to improve their wellbeing by creating wider social networks, so that they can participate in Scottish life and meet others of their own age groups. The guardians have helped the young people to begin to feel like any other young citizens of Scotland. That is particularly important, according to the evaluators, who noted that the work that the guardians undertake in one domain has an impact on the young people’s capacity to deal with issues in other areas of their lives. In other words, it builds on their assets and builds their resilience so that they can overcome other challenges. The evaluators found that a young person’s capacity to deal with issues in relation to his or her asylum claim is often contingent on their general sense of wellbeing and on feeling socially embedded and connected. On the topic of wellness, resilience and connectedness, I heartily recommend the work and the words of Dr Larry Brendtro, whom I had the pleasure of listening to yesterday at an event on residential childcare, as he explains the psychological importance of all those things. The well-developed trust between the children and their guardians has resulted in more information being made available to UK Border Agency case owners, who are able to make better decisions earlier in children’s lives. A large increase has been observed in the number of young people who are granted refugee status or humanitarian protection at an early stage since the service came into being. The evaluators highlighted the circumstances in Scotland that have helped the non-statutory guardianship service to flourish, which include the Scottish Government’s commitment to ensuring that the children’s rights that are set out in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child are recognised and that children’s voices are heard, and the positive influence of our getting it right for every child programme. All of us in the Parliament can be proud of GIRFEC, which keeps the child at the centre of every decision that affects them. It involves everyone who works with children and it expects that they will co-operate in providing co-ordinated, holistic support for those children no matter who they are, where they live or what their circumstances require. The Scottish guardianship service mirrors that approach, and the learning from the scheme has fed directly into wider policy that affects vulnerable Scottish children and young people—particularly young people who are looked after at home—with the development of the long-term mentoring scheme by Susan Elsley through her work as a member of the looked-after children strategic implementation group. As Minister for Children and Young People, I am determined that all of Scotland’s children get the support that they need to become healthy, confident and responsible members of their communities—to be successful learners, confident individuals, effective contributors and responsible citizens. Every child and young person has that potential and deserves that opportunity and I want to ensure that we get it right for all of them, regardless of how Scotland came to be their home. These young people just want to lead normal, stable, secure lives and to have access to the same opportunities as their peers. The Scottish guardianship service can help them to achieve that goal, and in many instances it has already done so. I know how much the young people value the support and friendship that they have received in the absence of their families and I am determined that that support will be available in the future so that others who may find their way to our shores receive the same welcome and the same standards of care and assistance and go on to the same success. That is why we have committed funding to continue this excellent service for a further three years. Scotland has a long history of welcoming refugees and asylum seekers. That was the case even prior to the 1951 UN refugee convention. Migrants from various parts of Europe, Asia and Africa have been coming to Scotland for centuries, and we want to continue to be a welcoming country. We have a large, established migrant community and we welcome the contribution, colour and vibrancy that new Scots bring to our economy and society. I wish the Scottish Refugee Council all the best for next week’s refugee week, which seeks to ensure that there is a greater understanding and appreciation of the culture and diversity that immigrants, asylum seekers and refugees bring to Scotland, making a positive impact on our lives and our society. With the guardians, I have witnessed enthusiasm and a desire to help. The lessons that we have learned from this unique Scottish service can be shared with the rest of the UK and the service has attracted interest from Europe. Sometimes, that is not the case. It is time that we became proud of the fact that Scotland has a lot to contribute to public policy, particularly in this area. We should share our learning as well as learning from others around the world. It is often said that one of the measures of a civilised society is how well it looks after its most vulnerable members. These children are some of the most vulnerable members of our society. They come here in distress, needing help and looking for an opportunity to rebuild their lives and contribute to their new home. I am proud that Scotland has shown that we can accept and support young people from all over the world. In return, young people from all over the world have shown how willing they are to learn about and contribute to Scotland, enriching all our lives. I had the opportunity to meet such young people and I encourage members to do so, because they might be inspired by the stories that the young people tell. In such a policy area, challenges will always lie ahead and there will always be far more that we can do. This debate is about recognising the efforts of the people who have made the project a success and getting the Parliament to give its backing to the important work that continues to put Scotland at the vanguard of this policy area. I move, That the Parliament recognises that 17 to 23 June is Refugee Week 2013; welcomes the success of the Scottish Guardianship Service in supporting more than 100 unaccompanied young people going through the asylum system; further welcomes the positive evaluation of this unique Scottish service and the help that it has delivered to vulnerable young people, and commends the Aberlour Childcare Trust and Scottish Refugee Council for operating the service.

I am sure that John Mason will appreciate that the lessons that can be learned from the project have been fully recognised. The project that I mentioned on mentoring looked-after children recognises the strong policy levers that are evident in the report to which he referred.

Under section 25 of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995, which covers voluntary accommodations, the children about whom we are talking are covered by the regulations on looked-after children, which underpin the approach that we take. In many respects, that is considered to be stronger than the approach that Graeme Pearson proposes in relation to children in need.

I thank everyone who has participated in this positive debate, in which there have been many heartfelt contributions. The debate has been constructive, and there has been a healthy amount of consensus about the topic. No wonder. How could any of us fail to support work that helps frightened, daunted and possibly persecuted young people who arrive on our shores without the support of their family? John Mason put his 15-year-old self in the shoes of a young person who has arrived in Scotland without any family support, and Stewart Maxwell spoke about those young people’s lives through the prism of his own young daughter’s life. Those approaches give us a greater emotional appreciation of the important work that the guardianship service does. I think that all of us largely agree that supporting these frightened young individuals who arrive in Scotland is simply the right thing to do. The debate’s tone has been correct. As Murdo Fraser has said, this is a sensitive issue. I appreciate the comments that have been made from across the chamber. Members have been appreciative of the quality of the work, which has been acknowledged by the independent evaluation of Professor Ravi Kohli and Professor Heaven Crawley. John Mason acknowledged that high-level research and evaluation when he referred to standards 7, 8 and 9 in the evaluation of the guardianship pilot. His point about the need to learn lessons and apply them across the broader suite of policies on children and young people is correct. In an intervention on John Mason, I mentioned the national mentoring scheme for young looked-after people. That very much concentrates on those young people having a stable relationship with a trusted adult, and views that as being extremely important for their long-term wellbeing and positive future outcomes. Paul Brannigan is the star of the film “The Angel’s Share”, which was out last year. Speaking at the first learning session of the early years collaborative, he talked about his way out of the personally destructive lifestyle that he had been following. He got out through the support of his prison officer, who helped him to get through that. It was to do with more than support; it was about the stickability of that relationship, and the trust that he had in that prison officer. John Mason spoke about the importance of that sort of stable relationship with an adult, and that is what is so important about the guardianship service. Of course, it is important to apply lessons that are learned across other social policy initiatives in Scotland. It is important to remember that the guardianship service has flourished because of the current framework for dealing with the young children and young people through GIRFEC. I recently discussed with Dr Bruce Perry another approach that has generated international interest. He said to me that he believed that progressive social policy would come from small countries. I think that the GIRFEC approach and the guardianship service show that statement to be true. Neil Bibby made a valid point about the interplay between this issue and the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. The bill of course covers all looked-after children, including those who are voluntarily looked after, such as unaccompanied asylum-seeking children. I will happily get back to Neil Bibby to furnish him with more information on interfaith and racial bullying, but the Government takes bullying very seriously regardless of the motive behind it. I am happy to have dialogue with him on that issue. Christina McKelvie, Malcolm Chisholm, Neil Bibby and others raised the issue of trafficking. The Government is committed to improving the identification of trafficking and the prosecution of those who commit trafficking offences. In Scotland, we have firmly embedded the issue of child trafficking in our national child protection guidance, and the Scottish guardianship service has been instrumental in helping to identify child trafficking. That important issue is being considered in the on-going work of the anti-human trafficking summit, which is being led by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, Kenny MacAskill. The summit is due to reconvene early next year, but there is a progress group meeting next month. I am sure that some of the points that have been raised in the debate will feed into that meeting. Independent living arrangements as opposed to supported living arrangements for unaccompanied children have a risk attached to them. We have identified that they enhance the possibility of asylum-seeking children who have been trafficked being drawn back into the influence of the traffickers and being retrafficked. I am keen to look at ways of ensuring that appropriate accommodation for that group of children and young people remains available. I want local areas to have protocols on child trafficking in place, which all staff should be aware of, by the end of 2013. Of course, trafficking is a disgusting and criminal act, and we must do all that we can to support work on it. That work links to the work of a newly established working group, which I have tasked with looking at child sexual exploitation and ensuring that those connections are readily made. The issue of age assessment was raised in the debate. We recognise the difficulties in establishing the age of undocumented young people and we believe that it is best done through a fair and transparent assessment that is carried out sensitively and takes a holistic look at a young person’s needs as well as likely age. Sandra White’s example highlighted the need for the holistic approach. The Scottish Refugee Council’s age assessment practice guidance has filled a gap in the area, and the Government has provided £5,000 for training on that age assessment toolkit, which I think will be welcomed by many members who have contributed to the debate. John Mason, Christina McKelvie, Dave Thompson and Malcolm Chisholm noted the international element of the issues of asylum and immigration. The fundamental cause of the issue that we are discussing is, frankly, that people arrive on our shores because they are often fleeing from instability in their own country. In that context, John Mason and Dave Thompson rightly talked about the effect of the UK’s foreign policy footprint over a number of years. We need to remember the possibly devastating impact on children and young people now living in Scotland of hearing news reports about what is happening in their country. I think that we all agree across the chamber that a fairer and more peaceful world is possible. If we strive for that approach, that will stymie some of the issues that we have heard about in the debate of people arriving on our shores because of persecution and instability in their countries. Christina McKelvie has a long-held interest in and knowledge of this topic and she is to be admired for the tenacity with which she has pursued the wellbeing of asylum-seeking children and young people and adults. She rightly addressed why trafficking should be an issue for child protection committees, and we will continue to take cognizance of that point. She and Annabelle Ewing also raised the issue of the UKBA’s restructuring, and I agree that we need to be alert to the impact of those changes. I will continue to ensure that Scottish interests are safeguarded, particularly as we forge our own path in dealing with immigration. Sandra White raised the frustrating issue of members of the Scottish Parliament not being treated with parity by the UKBA. Stewart Maxwell asked how we can paint a more accurate national picture through better-organised data. We will look at that issue and get back to him on it in due course. The Scottish Government is proud of the guardianship service but, of course, as always, we need to do more to ensure that Scotland can be the nurturing country that we want it to be, especially for the children and young people who, for a number of reasons, arrive on our shores and who are very vulnerable indeed. If we want to create the best place in the world to grow up, it needs to be so for each and every child who makes Scotland their home. We must never take our foot off the gas on this important issue. We were right to debate the topic today. It sounds as though many people did not know about this unique Scottish service, so it has been good to be able to raise awareness. The debate has also been a nice introduction to Scottish refugee week and has helped to ensure that we fully appreciate the positive contribution that refugees across Scotland make to our society and our country.

The Scottish Government wants Scotland to be the best place in which to grow up for all Scotland’s children and young people. We have a range of measures in place to take that ambitious vision forward and they are underpinned by the getting it right for every child—GIRFEC—approach, which has been in place since 2004. It puts the child at the centre of services and focuses on improving their lives through appropriate, proportionate and timely measures. Our recently published Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill will underpin new ways of working and embed key elements of the GIRFEC approach in law. The Scottish Government wants to ensure that no parent or family ever feels isolated and that people can access information, advice and support whenever they are needed. Last year, we published Scotland’s first national parenting strategy to ensure that parents get the support that they need when they need it. That is supported by an £18 million investment to create high-quality, co-ordinated and accessible family support.

The member makes a good point. We acknowledge the importance of supporting young people in that way. That is why the Scottish Government has put £30 million into the voluntary sector for short breaks over the period 2010 to 2015. Of that, £8 million is directed towards supporting disabled children and young people and their parent carers, and that investment is administered through two funding programmes. Shared Care Scotland administers £1.3 million per year through the better breaks programme and the Family Fund administers £700,000 per year through the take a break programme. Both offer creative short-break opportunities for disabled young people and both encompass young people up to the age of 20. I know that the member will be reassured by that. If groups want to re-examine the age limits, it is entirely appropriate for them to do so and they should discuss that with the Scottish Government. Of course, we will always aim to continue constructive dialogue with whichever groups are supporting vulnerable young people.

As I outlined, we have structures in place—we have getting it right for every child—and our whole approach in the Government is to ensure that children who need help and support get that help and support in a timely way. The Government is motivated by that; it is a pity that perhaps the member does not take cognisance of that and instead wants to snipe from the sidelines.

The Scottish Government does not currently provide guidance on that. It is for local authorities to decide an appropriate level to pay partner providers. The key priority is to secure high-quality early learning and childcare for children. New statutory guidance will be published to support the implementation of the early learning and childcare proposals in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. A sub-group of the early years task force has been established to draft that guidance. The group includes representatives of private and third sector partner providers, including the National Day Nurseries Association, the Care and Learning Alliance and Parenting across Scotland, which supports parents and represents parents’ issues.

Yes, and I take on board what Rod Campbell—no relation—has stated. If he so wishes, I am happy to meet him to explain some of the proposals in the bill. I agree that parental choice is important. That is why we are introducing more flexibility through the bill’s early learning and childcare proposals. It is for local authorities to secure sufficient provision through their own services and through partner providers. The bill will introduce a requirement on local authorities to consult locally representative populations of parents with children who are under school age in order to identify patterns of hours that best suit parental needs and to respond to those views through local plans to reconfigure services to meet those needs. That is why the bill is so important. It is about giving parents flexibility and meeting children’s developmental needs.

I am happy to meet any member who wants to raise issues about specific elements in the bill. We seek to deliver something that is meaningful for all children and young people. We are particularly interested in early years childcare issues and we want the bill to deliver on meeting the developmental needs of children in Scotland. If Neil Bibby wants to meet to discuss some of those issues, I am more than happy to talk through some of the details with him.

The motion allows for the provisions in the UK Government’s Children and Families Bill to be extended to Scotland. The amendments in the UK bill carve Scotland out of the UK-wide statutory adoption register provisions in the Adoption and Children Act 2002. They relate to devolved matters of children and adoption, and they alter the executive competence of the Scottish ministers. For that reason, a legislative consent motion is required. The proposals in the bill do not affect and indeed are entirely consistent with our plans to establish a national adoption register for Scotland, as provided for in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Children and Families Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 4 February 2013, which amend the provisions in the Adoption and Children Act 2002 relating to the establishment of a statutory adoption register for the UK, in so far as these matters fall within the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The Scottish Government welcomes the report from Save the Children and the focus that it brings to the importance of high-quality support for women and their children. Our early years framework clearly sets out the steps that we need to take to make Scotland the best place in the world to grow up. Our multi-agency early years collaborative, which brings together partners from across civic Scotland to deliver with and for our children and families, is part of that activity. Indeed, one of the collaborative’s three stretch aims is to reduce stillbirth and infant mortality in Scotland.

Yes, I will join the member in congratulating Finland on being named the best country in the world in which to become a mother. I note with interest the progress that has been made by Finland, which is a small, independent country in northern Europe that is in full control of its destiny and is an example for us all. The report raises many issues that relate to inequality, particularly social, economic and health inequalities. We can do what we can to tackle persistent inequality effectively in Scotland, but we do so with one hand tied behind our back. An opportunity to create a fairer country presents itself next year—yes to emulating Finland, yes to a fairer society and yes to being in charge of our own affairs through independence.

The member makes the point that childcare and education are not indivisible. That is why we have taken on board his point and made a commitment to increase to 600 hours the provision of early learning and childcare.

I point out to Hugh Henry that a sub-group in the early years task force is looking at early learning and childcare for all. I hope that he will welcome that.

I start by welcoming the fact that the Labour motion welcomes our plans in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill to increase the funded entitlement to early learning and childcare to a minimum of 600 hours per year. I also welcome Labour’s desire to work across party lines on the further extension of childcare, and I recognise that Johann Lamont is to meet the First Minister in the near future to discuss childcare. We all recognise that high-quality early learning and childcare has a vital role to play for social, emotional and cognitive development and for parents who seek to balance their childcare responsibilities with work, education or training. The issue has profound implications for Scotland’s economy now and in the future. Our provisions in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill to increase free early learning and childcare for three and four-year-olds, as well as the most vulnerable two-year-olds, to a minimum of 600 hours per year represent a significant step towards our longer-term aim of achieving a transformational shift in childcare to build a high-quality, universal system of early learning and childcare that meets the needs of all children, their parents and their families. Our commitment to legislate for 600 hours of provision represents significant progress since we took office in 2007. That progress is an important component of our committed efforts to maximise household budgets through a social wage to benefit and improve the economic and social wellbeing of Scottish citizens. Our efforts will benefit around 121,000 children and their families, who, since 2007, have made savings equivalent to around £700 in childcare bills. We will add 188 hours of free early learning and childcare and—crucially—will increase flexibility to ensure that high-quality early learning and childcare is delivered in response to local needs and choices for parents. That will improve consistency and lead to better outcomes for children, and it will better meet the needs of parents, particularly those mothers who want to go back to work or into education or training. We are also on a journey of improving the provision of help and support for the most vulnerable in our society. That is exemplified by the extension of the childcare entitlement to two-year-olds who are looked after and those who are under a kinship care order whom we can prevent from becoming or remaining looked after. We recognise that looked-after children have some of the poorest outcomes in society and believe that it is essential that we focus our efforts where we can make a real and positive difference. Much has been said in the chamber about the benefits of extending the funded entitlement to a wider group of disadvantaged two-year-olds, and I know that the Opposition has cited the United Kingdom Government’s commitment to extend entitlement to the most vulnerable 40 per cent of two-year-olds. My reply is that this Government is absolutely committed to building a high-quality universal system of early learning and childcare for all children to benefit the most vulnerable in our society. However, we must do that in a manageable and sustainable way, and must be guided by the getting it right for every child approach, which has been designed to secure better outcomes for every child in our land. Failure to move forward on manageable and sustainable terms would compromise the quality of provision for our youngest children. Quite frankly, it is not acceptable to this Government to run the risk of there being adverse impacts on our youngest children. It is becoming clear that, in England, many experts have serious doubts about the affordability, practicality and effectiveness of expanding the funded entitlement so far and so fast. Only yesterday, the BBC reported that there was a potential shortage of 55,000 places for disadvantaged two-year-olds. Naomi Eisenstadt, who is a respected academic and former director of the sure start unit in England, is visiting Scotland tomorrow, and I hope to meet her. Professor Cathy Nutbrown, who is the academic who carried out the review that informed the UK Government’s “More great childcare” strategy, has now criticised that strategy. She was recently quoted as saying that “Trading staff-to-child ratios for higher-qualified staff is nonsense. Watering down ratios will threaten quality. Childcare may be cheaper, but children will be footing the bill.” This Government will not compromise on quality. We must get things absolutely right. To that end, the First Minister has asked the Council of Economic Advisers to look at the best models of delivery and funding for a system of childcare in an independent Scotland and, in doing so, to be informed by what other countries are doing. As I am sure that all members are aware, a range of models of provision and funding exist, but our concern at all times must be what is right for Scotland and our people. Therefore, I am delighted to announce our early learning and childcare strategic funding partnerships with the National Day Nurseries Association and the Care and Learning Alliance. We have allocated £155,000 in addition to the £1.5 million that has already been allocated by the Big Lottery Fund to early learning and childcare third sector partners through the third sector early intervention fund.

I said at the outset that I am happy to work with any party or member with an interest in childcare. I mentioned the additional money that has come through the third sector early intervention fund. One of the recipients of that funding is the Scottish Out of School Care Network, which provides childcare to children beyond the early years, so we recognise that we are asking those groups to take forward important work. They are doing so in a strategic manner through that funding. I am sorry that Mr Henry has missed that. Since the publication of the early years framework in 2008, this Government has shown a strong commitment to the early years. To step up the pace of change, we established in 2011 the early years task force, which brings together professionals, practitioners and politicians from across the political spectrum to inform the strategic direction of early years policy and establish a consensus on how to drive the transformational change that is needed in early years. The task force’s expertise is guiding us and ensuring that the actions that we take in early years policy and childcare are right and based on sound and strong evidence. Research that we have commissioned on other European models will be put to the Council of Economic Advisers so that its members can study the context and their applicability to Scotland’s labour market. We should not wait for the establishment of another commission to work together. We are already doing a lot of work and have made a lot of progress. I have made clear this Government’s commitment to building a high-quality, universal system that meets the needs of all children, not just those in the early years, and absolutely considers the childcare needs of families across the country. I look forward to working constructively with all parties as the Parliament debates the bill that we are bringing forward and to ensuring that we all work together on creating a bill that the Parliament can be proud of and which will benefit children of all ages across the land. I move amendment S4M-06475.1, to leave out from third “and believes” to end and insert: “; also notes the work of the Early Years Taskforce, which brings together practitioners, professionals and politicians from different parties to inform the strategic development of early years policy, including early learning and childcare; further notes the Scottish Government’s commitment to legislate via the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill to introduce flexibility into childcare provision and the help that this will provide in matching childcare to the circumstances of individual families, and further welcomes the forthcoming work by the Council of Economic Advisers to look at the best models of delivery and funding for Scotland and the associated economic and social impact of moving to the levels of support for childcare that is commonplace in other European countries.

Perhaps the member will be interested to know that the work of the task force draws on the expertise that she says is so important and that one element of the work is about ensuring that there is national guidance on quality. I hope that that gives reassurance that the task force is very much drawing on the expertise that it already out there in relation to the issue of quality.

Will Annabel Goldie give way?

Is the member completely discounting the work of the early years task force, which is looking at a number of the issues that have been raised today? It is bringing on board expert practitioners from around the country so that they can formulate a way forward based on their knowledge. Is he completely discounting that work?

I thank Gordon MacDonald for bringing this positive debate to the chamber. Like other members, I congratulate Dads Rock and pay tribute to all that it has achieved in the past year. It is good to see the representatives of Dads Rock in the public gallery. I am pleased that, following a debate on the Dads Rock Twitter account, David Marshall has chosen to wear his Dads Rock T-shirt rather than the suit that he thought might be more appropriate. It is a good T-shirt. Encouraging and supporting fathers to play an active role in their child’s upbringing is key if we are to improve the health, wellbeing and life chances of Scotland’s children and young people. Through the national parenting strategy, which we published in October, we are determined to ensure that parents get the support that they need when they need it, so that they can do their very best for their children. The Scottish Government’s aspiration for children and young people is simple but ambitious: we want Scotland to be the best place in the world for children and young people to grow up in. We want Scotland to be a more child-friendly country and to have a culture that supports all parents and carers. We want a country that recognises that dads do indeed rock. No parent should feel isolated or alone. Alison Johnstone rightly pointed out that families need to feel supported not only by public services but by their families and communities. Groups such as Dads Rock play a crucial role in offering fun activities for dads and their children, but they also provide a place for dads to speak to others about being a dad. That kind of local peer support is empowering and will benefit fathers and their children in many healthy and positive ways. It is right for us to focus on fathers, because dads are often cut out of the picture, albeit sometimes unintentionally, and that needs to change. In a modern, successful Scotland, we want to encourage and support both parents to play an active role in their children’s upbringing. As Gordon MacDonald and Gavin Brown noted, with Dads Rock, two dads found that there was little support in their area and decided to do something about it, so they set up their own fun musical playgroup for dads and their children in Sighthill in Edinburgh. I admire and applaud their work and achievement, and the work of the volunteers who help to deliver the playgroups. Without their passion, many of the dads who attend would feel isolated. I agree with Gavin Brown that many lessons can be learned from the group’s proactive approach. Last year, along with my husband and our wee boy, I had the pleasure of visiting Dads Rock when it opened its new musical group in Granton. My son enjoyed playing the drum kit and my husband, who is a stay-at-home dad, also enjoyed the experience and got a lot out of meeting other fathers. He liked singing in a key that he could reach at the end of the night, rather than some of the keys that he sings in at mother and toddler groups. I promise Gavin Brown that my speech will not feature me singing “We Will Rock You”, for which members should be thankful. Visiting Dads Rock was a great experience, and I hope that many more dads and their children will take part in and enjoy it. I thoroughly recommend it to Malcolm Chisholm and I encourage him to take his grandchildren along and prove that granddads can rock, too. I am delighted to hear about the plans that Gordon MacDonald and Malcolm Chisholm outlined to open a new playgroup in Dunfermline and to hear that the group is looking to establish a Dads Rock academy that aims to provide a year’s free music tuition to children and dads in the Sighthill area. The Government’s aspiration is to make this country the best place in the world to grow up in. The Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, which was introduced in Parliament last month, is a step on the journey towards fulfilling our ambition. However, legislation is only part of the answer. We know that the early years of a child’s life are crucial and set the pattern for their future development. We need to improve outcomes and reduce inequalities for all babies, children, mothers, fathers and families across Scotland to ensure that all children have the very best start in life and are ready to succeed. That is the ambition of our early years collaborative, which is a multi-agency local quality improvement programme that is delivered at a national scale and is taking forward the vision and priorities of the early years task force. A second learning session will take place at the end of this month. It will provide an opportunity for teaching improvement methodology and for community planning partnerships to share learning. I am really pleased to hear about that work and I want to highlight it, because Dads Rock will speak at the learning session. That shows the high regard in which Government and our partners hold the organisation. Last year, I launched the parenting strategy, which is an articulation of the importance of parenting that aims to strengthen the help and support that are on offer to parents. Dads Rock assisted with our engagement with parents in developing the strategy, and I thank it sincerely for that. Last year, we engaged with more than 1,500 parents and carers. About 500 of them were dads, and many of them told us that they feel that mums get offered support but dads are expected just to get on with things. Gordon MacDonald and David Torrance articulated some of those feelings. Many of those dads referred to mother and toddler groups. That shows that, as Graeme Dey noted, even the turns of phrase that are used can often make dads feel unwelcome. As a working mum whose wee boy is cared for by her husband, I and my family are really careful to call the local groups baby and toddler groups. The views that we received from all parents and carers were critical in shaping our national parenting strategy and really helped to identify the kind of commitments that we needed to include. We have now set up a fathers national advisory panel to help us to consider how our policies, services and communities can become much more dad friendly. I hope that that move will reassure David Torrance and Gordon MacDonald. In September, the First Minister announced the early years task force commitment of £18 million over three years to improve the provision of family support throughout Scotland. The fathers national advisory panel will help to ensure that that family support also addresses fathers’ needs. We recognise the range of important work that the third sector does to support families. That is why we are investing £20 million through the third sector early intervention fund plus directing an additional £10 million towards third sector strategic funding partnerships. I am delighted to say that Families Need Fathers Scotland and Fathers Network Scotland are two of the strategic funding partnerships that, along with the successful organisations that will receive funding through the third sector early intervention fund, will help us to improve the support for fathers throughout Scotland. Investing in parents is good not only for children and young people but for our communities and for the cohesion and productivity of our country. Working hard to remove the barriers that prevent dads from playing their part can only be good for ensuring positive outcomes for our children and young people. We have made a good start, which we are determined to build on, and we look forward to working with colleagues across the chamber, Dads Rock and other partners to help us to achieve that. I thank Gordon MacDonald for bringing the debate to the chamber and congratulate Dads Rock, the volunteers and all the other dads who take part. I wish them well and wish them every success for the future. Meeting closed at 17:37.

We are always pleased to learn from other countries’ experience in delivering education services. Stewart Stevenson may recall that in May of last year Dr Pasi Sahlberg, the director general for the Centre for International Mobility and Co-operation in Helsinki, spoke to the Scottish Parliament on lessons from Finland on its approach to education. In December of last year, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning met Leighton Andrews, the Welsh education minister, and discussed delivery of education services in Wales. That was followed by a meeting between officials to look at the Welsh approach to delivering education.

The improvement partnership programme is designed to facilitate schools working together either within local authorities or across local authority boundaries. The schools that are involved will learn from each other techniques and approaches that have been successful in raising attainment. We will work closely with key stakeholders, including the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland and School Leaders Scotland, to devise the details of the scheme, including the criteria for schools that are partnering with each other. However, it is clear that crude data comparisons will not be suitable for the purpose. Each relationship will be a long-term one and it will be of mutual benefit to all the schools and departments that are involved. Partnership will be voluntary. In direct reply to Stewart Stevenson’s point about league tables, in his speech at the University of Glasgow in March the cabinet secretary indicated that the right decision was made not to publish league tables in Scotland, and I can guarantee that that will continue.

The cabinet secretary’s announced his intention to raise attainment through the improving partnership programme, which is designed to facilitate schools working together to raise the attainment that is so desperately needed across the whole of Scotland, and to learn from areas that are doing good work. ADES, SLS and others have warmly welcomed that announcement as a positive and proactive approach that is in the spirit of working in partnership together to raise attainment, which is something that everyone wants, regardless of whether they are a practitioner, a politician or a parent. A partnership approach is crucial and will be welcomed, and that spirit will enter into the discussions with schools and teachers.

We want to make Scotland the best place to grow up. It is bold and ambitious, but we should never shy away from ambition when it comes to our nation’s children and young people. We believe that all children and young people in Scotland should be safe, happy and healthy, and supported throughout their childhoods and young adulthoods to be confident and healthy individuals who are ready to succeed. The Government cannot achieve that on its own, which is why the motion celebrates partnership working across the parties in the Parliament and with our partners in the public and third sectors, because despite any differences we may have, ultimately we are all united by the desire to ensure that each and every child in Scotland has the best start in life. We want all children and young people to become achieving, responsible adults who are ambitious for themselves, for their neighbours and for their country. Parents, families and carers want to do their best for their children, as do the professionals who support them. We in Government must do our best too, to help create a society where the wellbeing of every child is safeguarded and supported, and where no child is left behind. The evidence that links early intervention and investing in the crucial early years to the achievement of positive outcomes in later life is incontrovertible. However, early intervention does not equate to acting only in the earliest years and as the minister who is also responsible for Scotland’s fantastic older young people, I am keen that we focus on the whole life course of children who are growing up in Scotland. Overarching all our work for children and young people is the getting it right for every child approach. It is important to remember that the E in GIRFEC stands for “every”. GIRFEC is for every child—for each and every baby, toddler, primary school pupil and teenager in Scotland. GIRFEC is a personalised approach. It considers all the needs and risks of individuals and what is going on in their lives. It expects professionals to engage with children and young people and their families, to discuss what might help improve their wellbeing and their outcomes. It applies equally to all our children and young people. In some cases, that means getting it right for children who need extra help and support—for instance, ensuring that we support our young carers and children with additional and complex needs. We must ensure that, as corporate parents, we are giving the right support to children who are under our care. As part of the wider work on child protection, we will be looking at how services respond to protection issues and circumstances that are faced by vulnerable young people. Work on that will be taken forward by the ministerial working group on child sexual exploitation. The whole system approach in youth justice exemplifies how multidiscipline partnership working improves outcomes for young people as well as for victims and communities. That approach works across all systems and agencies, bringing together the Government’s key policy frameworks into one holistic approach for young people who offend. Through early intervention and robust community alternatives, many can be diverted from statutory measures, prosecution and custody. Working alongside our GIRFEC approach are our educational ambitions for all children and young people, as set out in the curriculum for excellence, which provides a coherent, more flexible and enriched curriculum from the ages of three to 18 and improves standards and attainment for all children and young people. Both GIRFEC and the curriculum for excellence are policy approaches that we should have pride in in Scotland. The early years framework was published by the Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in 2008. It was an important milestone, setting out a shared commitment to the early years and to the importance of preventative spending. To step up the pace of change, the early years task force was established and it is leading on the development of an early years collaborative. It is the first time in the world that such a quality improvement approach has been tried in a multi-agency context, attracting international attention and interest. The objectives are to deliver tangible improvement in outcomes and to reduce inequalities for Scotland’s vulnerable children; to put Scotland on course to shifting the balance of public services towards early intervention and prevention by 2016; and to sustain this change to 2018 and beyond. It is clear that we have the commitment and the will to deliver, and a strong evidence base about what works to make improvements. Up until now, we have lacked a method to scale up the pockets of excellent practice across Scotland. A few months ago, I had the pleasure and privilege of speaking to Bruce Perry from the Child Trauma Academy, who pointed out that small developed nations such as Scotland have a great opportunity to be at the forefront of progressive social policy. This collaborative will give us the platform to collectively drive the transformational change that we need and make it much easier for partners to learn from one another. Community planning partnerships will be the main vehicle for delivering this, because the real change will happen at local level. The collaborative’s first learning session, which was held in January, brought together more than 700 people from Scotland’s 32 CPPs and demonstrated that, as a small developed nation, Scotland is extremely well positioned to enable all relevant stakeholders, motivated by the collective will to do things better, to come together in one room and work together to do just that. Although the work of our dedicated professionals is critical, we know that parents are the greatest influence on children. I want to ensure that all parents feel empowered, valued and supported; indeed, that is the main aim of the national parenting strategy, which covers the parenting of children and young people of all ages, starting with preconception, and anyone else in a parenting role including kinship carers and the corporate parent of children who are looked after by the state. The views of parents lie at the heart of the strategy, which aims to champion the importance of Scotland’s parents, highlight the positive difference that they can make and strengthen the help and support that are on offer to them. We have already announced funding of £18 million from the early years change fund to help local authorities work with partners to provide access to high-quality, co-ordinated family support. Linked to that is the family nurse partnership, an early intervention programme that provides support to first-time teenage mothers and is making a valuable difference for vulnerable children in six health board areas. Indeed, the First Minister has announced an additional £11 million over the next two years to continue rolling out the programme across Scotland.

I am happy to provide the member with that detail, but nevertheless we should recognise the improved outcomes for the teenage mothers who are already benefiting from the partnerships’ early intervention approach and celebrate the fact that we in Scotland will be rolling that out across the rest of the health boards in the next two years. It is a very welcome move. If we want Scotland to be the best place in the world to grow up, we need to work to increase opportunities for children to play. After all, play is fundamental to a happy, healthy childhood and we are investing £3 million over three years in outdoor play opportunities to help children have fun, be physically active, learn to assess risk and foster links to their local environments and communities. I had the pleasure of listening to Dundee-based academic Suzanne Zeedyk, whose comments about babies being relationship-ready illustrate how crucial it is for parents to interact positively and to play with their babies from birth onwards. Evidence shows that 75 per cent of brain growth happens and 50 per cent of language gets put in place in the first three years of a child’s life, and we have been promoting such messages through our successful play talk read campaign, to which I am delighted to say we have committed £1 million per year over three years for its further development. That investment in play will help to provide a platform for our national play strategy, which will be published this year and will articulate the seriousness of play as a fundamental right for all children and young people. I have outlined some of the significant non-legislative work that is under way across Scotland to help to ensure that every child has the best start. I have also outlined the critical role of partnership working in realising our ambition. The children and young people bill, which will be introduced this year, provides a legislative framework to accelerate that change and ensure consistency. Through the bill, we aim to embed in legislation key elements of GIRFEC by defining the meaning of wellbeing; to reflect the important role of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child in influencing policy, practice and legislation through a series of new duties on ministers and the public sector; to ensure better permanence planning for looked-after children; and to increase early support for children, parents and families by expanding the amount—and, in turn, flexibility—of early learning and childcare to 600 hours per annum. That signals an increase of 45 per cent in Scotland since 2007, and we will also extend that access to our most vulnerable two-year-olds. Last year’s consultation on the bill drew 300 responses from a diverse range of stakeholders, and our programme of engagement included activities with 2,400 children and young people. Feedback and analysis indicate broad support for the proposed changes. I turn briefly to some of the challenges that we face in our pursuit of creating the kind of country that we want our children to grow up in and the opportunities that they deserve. One of the greatest barriers is poverty. Research shows that family disadvantage, in terms of income, education and area deprivation, can have a negative impact on children’s health and cognitive, social and behavioural development. However, research shows that a rich home learning environment, positive relationships, good communication and family meals can act as protective factors, counteracting some of the negative outcomes that are associated with a disadvantaged background. It is, therefore, clear that we must do everything that we can to resist the poverty trap. Sadly, poverty undermines parents’ efforts, so the poverty trap is no easy challenge to overcome. This Government firmly believes that children in Scotland deserve the best possible start in life. We do not want to see any child, never mind 17 per cent of them, born into or condemned to live a life of poverty. Unfortunately, poverty also undermines our best efforts to support parents and families. The current levels of poverty in Scotland, particularly among children, are unacceptable. We know the damage that poverty causes and none of us should be content to allow it to continue. The Scottish Government is doing everything that it can to tackle poverty and inequality in Scotland with the devolved powers and resources that it has at its disposal. Only last week, the Deputy First Minister outlined her vision for a fairer and more equal Scotland. Against the backdrop of a recent Joseph Rowntree Foundation report, she articulated this Government’s aspiration to go beyond softening the blows of punishing welfare reforms from London and to gain the powers to prevent the blows in the first place. It will never be easy to tackle the headline poverty figures while personal taxation and welfare benefits policies are reserved to the United Kingdom Government. We want a welfare system that is simpler, that makes work pay and that lifts families out of poverty. For us, on the Scottish National Party benches, it is clear where the solution lies: our Parliament should have control over such matters for the benefit of families and communities in Scotland.

The Deputy First Minister made her speech against the backdrop of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation report. She also made it clear that we cannot wait for Labour to become the Government at Westminster, which seems to be Scottish Labour’s position on tackling the persistent inequality that exists in this country. We are using all the powers that are currently devolved to our Administration to tackle the persistent poverty that exists in our very rich country. It is a real pity that Drew Smith cannot see that. I have outlined how we aim to realise our ambition of making Scotland the best place to grow up, working with partners. With full control of our tax and welfare system, we would be able to make the choices that would enable us to realise our ambitions far more quickly. A partnership approach to ensuring that we have the best place in the world for children to grow up in is key. Therefore, I look forward to working with colleagues across the chamber as we bring our children and young people bill to the Parliament and I extend my thanks to our partners beyond the Parliament, who are doing a fantastic job for Scotland’s children and young people. I move, That the Parliament supports the Scottish Government’s ambition to make Scotland the best place in the world for children to grow up; recognises that early intervention and an approach that builds on strengths are essential; welcomes the Scottish Government’s actions to speed up the pace of change; supports Getting It Right for Every Child, the Early Years Task Force and the National Parenting Strategy, and agrees that Scotland’s children and young people deserve nothing but determined action to achieve the best outcomes for them from the Scottish Government, the Parliament, public services and the third sector across Scotland, all working in partnership.

I would be interested to know why Labour did not propose an amendment to the budget. Furthermore, in the plans for the devolved budget, what would the member like to be cut in order to fund such an increase?

On the need to ensure that the third sector is part of early years policy making, I am sure that the member will welcome the fact that, among the 700 folk who turned up at the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre for the early years collaborative’s first learning session, there was a heavy representation from the third sector both as part of the local CPPs and from the national third sector organisations.

Will the member give way?

I point out to Liam McArthur that our focus is on quality childcare provision in Scotland. Evidence suggests that, unless there is quality for two-year-olds, the outcomes that he mentioned will not necessarily be realised later on. Will he consider what Naomi Eisenstadt said to the Education Committee in the House of Commons about the Lib Dems’ proposals? She said: “I do not think we are in a position financially to offer a free good to 40% ... I do not think that we have the quality in place to offer those that will make a difference. What we know from the evidence of the evaluation of the two-year-old pilot was, unless it was high quality, it did not make a difference.” We are concentrating on quality. What is Liam McArthur’s response, given the backdrop of increasing child to staff ratios?

We are making good progress. Our children and young people bill will be introduced in Parliament this year. It will include proposals to increase the flexibility of free early learning and childcare and to increase the hours of provision from 475 to a minimum of 600 per year, which will be a 45 per cent increase since 2007. The proposals will also include a minimum of 600 hours of early learning and childcare for looked-after two-year-olds, which will be flexible to meet their individual needs and family circumstances.

I would be happy to meet Graeme Dey and the practitioners and parents in his constituency to discuss our early learning and childcare proposals. I am delighted to congratulate the staff of the nursery class at Northmuir primary. It is an excellent achievement for a nursery to gain such high ratings in all areas of rigorous inspection by Education Scotland. I am sure that everyone agrees that we should celebrate and learn from that across the country.

A financial memorandum will be prepared to accompany the children and young people bill when it is introduced in Parliament.

The early years collaborative was launched on 1 October 2012. Since then, we have developed and agreed on the ambition and the stretch aims. The first learning session was held at the Scottish exhibition and conference centre in Glasgow on 24 and 25 January and was attended by more than 700 people from across the early years sector. The level of commitment to change and the enthusiasm that the participants generated at the learning session were outstanding. The Scottish Government’s early years practice development team is now working closely with community planning partnerships, which are constructing their first tests of change. Planning is well under way for learning session 2, which will be held on 28 and 29 May at the SECC.

I agree with James Dornan. The early years are crucial in determining children’s future life chances. The range of evidence to support that view is incontrovertible and widely understood. I agree that we all have a responsibility to contribute to positive outcomes for children as parents, families and community members, as well as in our roles as public servants. My experience of the early years collaborative’s first learning session is that there is huge stakeholder buy-in for the approach. We are all looking forward to working together closely to achieve our aims. I strongly believe that welfare reform will have a negative impact on the future of Scotland’s children and young people. Indeed, the Department for Work and Pensions has estimated that its latest changes to benefit uprating will result in about an extra 200,000 children being in relative income poverty by 2016 compared with the number using the current method of uprating benefits by the consumer prices index. Based on the current share of children in poverty, that will result in an estimated 15,000 children being pushed into poverty in Scotland. That is 15,000 reasons for people to vote yes next year so that we have control over welfare in Scotland and we can create a fairer and more progressive society.

I thank Malcolm Chisholm for his question and his involvement in the early years task force. Learning session 1 was the largest-ever gathering of people from across all community planning partnerships who work to support children and families from conception to the start of primary school, so there was a wide, representative cross-section of people from Scotland’s CPPs. It is good that everyone from across Scotland was able to take part in this groundbreaking and innovative approach to early years policy.

I thank John Mason for bringing this important debate to the chamber and for raising a number of important issues. I also thank other members for their thoughtful, considered and emotive speeches—I hope that I have enough time to cover everything. Through the national parenting strategy, which we published in October, we are determined to ensure that all parents get the support that they need when they need it so that they can do their very best for their children. I hope that that gives Anne McTaggart some comfort that the strategy is truly for all parents and those in a parenting role, including the corporate parent. It is right for us to focus on what that means for fathers. Sometimes when we talk about parents, we tend to mean mums and, perhaps unintentionally, we cut dads out of the picture. That needs to change, as I think everyone would agree. In a modern and successful Scotland, we want to encourage and support fathers in playing a much more active role in their children’s upbringing and, as Mark McDonald says, to view fathers in a much more modern way. During our work to develop the parenting strategy, we engaged with more than 1,500 parents and carers. About 500 of them were dads, many of whom were living apart from their children. We are acutely aware of the issues that fathers face, and I thank them for giving us their time to help us develop the strategy. In response, we have set up a fathers national advisory panel to help us consider how our policies, services and communities can become more dad friendly. That is a proactive move to provide a platform for fathers to input directly into policy. In answer to Sandra White, that group will help to dad-proof policies, and its members will include practitioners, academics and policy makers. Referring to what Mark McDonald said, we will also invite a representative with knowledge of disability and additional needs. I am delighted that Ian Maxwell from Families Need Fathers has agreed to sit on our fathers national advisory panel to ensure that we do not lose sight of the needs of fathers who do not live with their children. I strongly believe that both parents should be involved in their child’s upbringing, as long as that is safe, practical and in the interests of the child. Generally, it is best if parents can agree on what is best for their children. Services such as family mediation can help with that, and services should appreciate the very positive role that dads can play in their child’s life. Christine Grahame and Bob Doris raised the subject of educational barriers. My colleague Dr Allan has met representatives of Families Need Fathers to discuss those barriers against the backdrop of the Scottish Schools (Parental Involvement) Act 2006.

I will consider that point, and Christine Grahame and I can continue a dialogue on it. John Mason mentioned the parenting agreement for Scotland. The national parenting strategy commits us to updating it in 2014 and to publicising it more. We will certainly involve Families Need Fathers when we update it, and my officials will talk to Families Need Fathers shortly to discuss what we can do now to publicise it more. The debate is timely in relation to that dialogue. This year we have provided funding to Families Need Fathers for a project that provides information and support to fathers and other family members facing contact problems after separation. It is also working to improve understanding of existing legal rights and to promote involvement of non-resident fathers in their children’s education. I know how difficult some non-resident fathers can find it to be fully involved in their children’s lives. Indeed, many members mentioned that in their contributions. Contact cases can be very difficult for all concerned. John Mason referred to article 9(3) of the UNCRC, which provides: “States Parties shall respect the right of the child who is separated from one or both parents to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, except if it is contrary to the child’s best interests.” As John Mason, Malcolm Chisholm and Bob Doris mentioned, the key is the “best interests” of the child. The relevant Scottish legislation—section 11 of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995—provides that in cases such as contact and residence, the court “shall regard the welfare of the child concerned as its paramount consideration”. We are not planning any amendments to section 11 that could have an adverse impact. We believe that, where it is possible and safe, both parents should be involved in the upbringing of their children, but the child must always be at the centre. Sandra White mentioned courts and Christine Grahame gave a very factual and knowledgeable account of her experience in the legal field. I reiterate that I am happy to follow up any of the points that she wants to be covered. We are taking steps to improve the court system. Kenny MacAskill today launched a consultation on a bill to reform the civil courts, so the issue is very much live. That bill will address inefficiencies in Scotland’s civil courts and rebalance the system so that more cases will be heard in local sheriff courts. We hope that that move will find more user-friendly ways of dealing with family disputes. At another level, we have established a working group on bar reporters, on which Families Need Fathers is represented. Bar reporters provide reports to sheriffs in contact cases. Moreover, members who were unable to participate in today’s debate have raised with me the practical problems that can arise when a child is relocated in the UK. We will continue to work with the UK Government to raise awareness of the practical issues of child relocation in the UK. Bringing up children is a hugely rewarding job—none of us wants to forget that point, which was raised in members’ speeches—for dads as well as mums, but it can also be the hardest job that there is. If we are serious about improving outcomes for our children and young people, we need to ensure that all parents and carers get the support that they need, when they need it, and we need to ensure that dads are supported to play their full part. I am glad that Nanette Milne welcomed the work that we have done with the national parenting strategy to address some of the issues that fathers raised. As the First Minister announced in September, the early years task force has committed £18 million over three years to improve the provision of family support across Scotland. I am glad that Anne McTaggart welcomed that, given her experience of groups in Glasgow. Indeed, I visited the Parent Network Scotland in Greenock and I very much understand its good work. Family support will be influenced by the fathers national advisory panel and we will ensure that family support meets the needs of fathers across Scotland. It is important to recognise that we are not starting from scratch. Many members mentioned the dads rock musical playgroup that is run by dads for dads. I had the pleasure of meeting those dads a couple of times and I recognise the work that they do, which Mark McDonald and Malcolm Chisholm mentioned. Removing the barriers that prevent dads from playing their part is one of the most effective ways that we can improve the health, wellbeing, opportunities and life chances of our children and young people. Investing in parents—by that I mean dads as well as mums—is good for not only children and young people but our communities and the cohesion and productivity of our country. That is something that we should not forget. We have made a start and we are determined to build on that. We look forward to working with colleagues across the chamber and partners such as Families Need Fathers to achieve more. Meeting closed at 17:48.

I thank David Torrance for securing the debate. I, too, welcome our friends from Gingerbread, some of whom I think I had the pleasure of meeting at a Save the Children event in the Parliament before Christmas. If those folk are not in the chamber, I certainly want to welcome those whom I have not met, and perhaps we will get a chance to meet sometime soon. Like others, I pay tribute to Gingerbread for supporting families in Scotland and congratulate the Fife branch on its wonderful work over the past 25 years. It has been great to hear David Torrance’s fantastic description of what Fife Gingerbread does in its local communities. Despite Malcolm Chisholm stealing my thunder, I am delighted that Fife Gingerbread has been awarded £10,000 from the Scottish Government’s community and families fund to run a pilot playgroup in Dunfermline for dads with children under five and an interest in music, which will build on the success of—as Malcolm Chisholm rightly noted—the two dads rock playgroups in Edinburgh. Dads rock is another wonderful organisation; it recently celebrated its first birthday, so it is a wee bit younger than the Fife Gingerbread group. The Scottish Government's aspiration for children and young people is a simple but ambitious one: we want Scotland to be the best place in the world for children and young people to grow up. We want Scotland to be a more child-friendly country, and to have a culture that supports all parents and carers—including those raising children on their own—and values their role. We believe strongly that families need to feel supported not only by our public services but by their own families and communities. Gingerbread, One Parent Families Scotland and many other organisations play a crucial role in supporting lone-parent families. Jayne Baxter asked that we do more to support parents. I am pleased that the Government has shown its commitment to Scotland’s parents by ensuring that they are supported when they need it in order to do what can be—I am speaking as a mother of a two-year-old—a difficult job and to do it well. In the national parenting strategy that we published last year, we have recognised the particular pressures that lone parents face. We consulted 1,500 parents from all backgrounds in that consultation. It was a pleasure to meet so many wonderful people whose contribution culminated in the publication of our strategy. The main aim of the strategy is to strengthen the help and support on offer to parents. We want parents, carers and families to know that, whatever their needs and wherever they live, practical support is available. As David Torrance said, that could be to overcome self-esteem and confidence issues. As the First Minister announced in September last year, the early years task force is committing £18 million over three years to improve the provision of family support across Scotland. Malcolm Chisholm is a member of that task force; I thank him for his work on that and his deep interest in the area. In addition, we will continue to provide specialist information, advice and support services tailored to meet the needs of lone-parent families and the practitioners who work with them. That includes telephone support, telephone mentoring, benefits and money advice, online information for lone parents, and training and material for practitioners. I am particularly proud of the tradition of community-based projects in Scotland, including those, such as Fife Gingerbread, that rely on volunteers to deliver sustainable support for local communities, drawn from the communities themselves—a truly asset-based approach. They provide a wide variety of services to lone parents in local communities, including early intervention and support for families who have a range of multiple and complex needs. It is right that we celebrate their work, the holistic approach that they take, and the volunteers who make all that happen. I would like to touch on the support that lone parents in Fife get from Fife Gingerbread and, much more generally, on the challenges that lone parents face. The issue is an extremely important one, because almost one in four children live in one-parent households and the figure is projected to rise significantly. Nine out of 10 lone parents are women, but I have met a number of lone fathers who face a number of different challenges. That shows us that, as Annabelle Ewing and Liz Smith said, we should scratch beneath the stereotypes; we should certainly not stigmatise lone parents. Liz Smith gave us personal testimony of why we should be careful of stereotyping. We know from the latest growing up in Scotland findings—David Torrance and Jayne Baxter mentioned this, too—that lone parents are less comfortable engaging with formal services and less likely to attend baby and toddler groups, so the support that they get from services such as Gingerbread and One Parent Families Scotland can make all the difference. Whether children have always had only one parent, or whether their parents have divorced, they were never married or one of their parents has died, there is no evidence to suggest that being brought up by one parent rather than two automatically leads to worse outcomes. It is important to avoid discriminating attributions and assumptions that relate to perceived links between lone parenthood and social problems. Loudly and clearly, I pay tribute to the many lone parents in Scotland who do an amazing job in raising children without the support of a partner, which they often do while living in particularly difficult circumstances. However, it is also important to recognise, as many members have, that just under half of the children who live with one parent are poor, compared with 24 per cent of children who live in couple families. As Roderick Campbell pointed out, Fife Gingerbread’s recent report, “Surviving Poverty—The Impact of Lone Parenthood”, powerfully highlights the many challenges that lone parents face. As organisations such as One Parent Families Scotland, the Poverty Alliance and the Child Poverty Action Group in Scotland tell us, our best efforts to support Scotland’s parents are undermined by poverty. This Government firmly believes that children in Scotland deserve the best possible start in life. We do not want any child to be born into, or condemned to, a life of poverty. It is simply morally unacceptable that 17 per cent of our children still live in relative poverty. We are doing all that we can to tackle poverty and inequality in Scotland within the limited powers and resources that we have, for example through our commitment to increase the offer of early learning and childcare for three and four-year-olds to 600 hours and through the work of the early years task force and the early years change fund. Although I know that there is constitutional disagreement, this Government’s point of view is that we need the powers over personal taxation and welfare benefits that are currently reserved to the UK Government. We all want a welfare system that is simpler, that makes work pay and that lifts people out of poverty, but I believe that the solution is for this Parliament to have control over such matters, so that we can devise policies for the benefit of the Scottish people. I end by thanking Fife Gingerbread and its team of volunteers and other projects in Scotland that provide crucial support to lone-parent families and help parents to do the best job that they can. I wish Fife Gingerbread and the families that it works with every success for the future. Meeting closed at 18:08.

In all cases where allegations of child sexual abuse have been raised, social services, the police and other relevant agencies must ensure the safety of the child and identify whether any on-going actions are necessary to protect the child and others. A range of issues is considered, including whether the child needs counselling or therapy. Local authorities assess each case on its own merits to determine what level of support and protection is required by the child, for the immediate future and in the longer term.

The Scottish Government does not tolerate any form of abuse at all. Our practices are delivered through the prism of the getting it right for every child approach, and we want to ensure the safety and protection of our most vulnerable children. There are always opportunities to refresh guidance and to find ways of improving the situation. Recently, we have achieved three significant gains in our manifesto. We published the national framework for child protection, learning and development—the risk assessment framework and child protection guidance for health professionals. We are also in the process of refreshing the national child protection guidance that was published in 2010, and intend to publish that later this year. There are strict guidelines for how to approach a child with regard to the sensitive situation that we are discussing. There is guidance on how to conduct interviews. Opportunities to further improve the situation are presented by the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill, which is about improving the way in which vulnerable witnesses are treated in courts. There are a variety of opportunities and a range of on-going work. Through the prism of GIRFEC, we seek to ensure that we get it right for every child in Scotland.

We recognise the dedication of young carers and the support that they need. Due to the continued priority that we give to supporting young carers, there is now much more recognition of their needs. That is resulting in greater impetus at the local level to help to ensure identification and support in schools. The additional support for learning acts place duties on education authorities to identify and meet the additional support needs of all their pupils, including young carers. We fund the Scottish young carers services alliance to produce the Eryc and Trayc toolkit to equip primary school teachers with the necessary skills and knowledge to identify and support young carers. Work is continuing to support and promote the continuous roll-out of the toolkit. Similarly, resources for secondary schools, also funded by the Scottish Government, will be launched in the next few months.

I know that Claudia Beamish has a real interest in the subject. I met her at the young carers festival in West Linton last year. As I outlined, we provide support to young carers in a number of areas, but identifying who and where they are is important, too. That is why, for the first time, data has been collected in the census about young carers and their additional support needs. We have a duty to support young carers and we also want to ensure that that monitoring is in place. That is done through local authorities, with whom we have dialogue, and the Scottish young carers services alliance, which is collecting data through its monitoring of the roll-out of the important Eryc and Trayc toolkit. We need to ensure that we have the relevant data to ensure that we get policies in place that give young carers the support that they need.

Disclosure Scotland offers a range of checks, which include the basic disclosure under the Police Act 1997. An individual can apply for a basic disclosure for any purpose. Standard and enhanced disclosures are also available under the 1997 act for certain prescribed positions. In addition, Disclosure Scotland provides the protecting vulnerable groups scheme, which is a membership scheme for individuals who do regulated work with children or protected adults.

I thank Nigel Don for raising that important issue. The decision on whether third-party disclosures should take place lies with the chief constable. When information is relevant to a particular individual and situation, disclosure may be made after consultation between the police and other agencies responsible for the offender’s management. The multi-agency public protection arrangements provide a focus at case management level for agencies to consider community notification actively. It is important to note that any decision to disclose further information is made carefully on a case-by-case basis that takes into account a range of factors, which include the nature and pattern of previous offending; compliance with previous sentences or court orders; any predatory behaviour, which might indicate a likelihood of reoffending; and the probability that a further offence will be committed and harm caused. I hope that that answer is helpful. If necessary, I am happy to meet Nigel Don to provide any other information that he seeks.

The Scottish Government is aware that Children 1st, for example, is receiving increased approaches to its parentline service following the recent high-profile child abuse investigations. The Scottish Government does not tolerate any form of child abuse. The wellbeing and safety of children and young people in Scotland are key priorities for the Scottish Government. All children and young people have the right to be cared for and protected from harm and to grow up in a safe environment in which their rights and needs are respected. Over the past decade, the culture, legislation and policy around child protection have changed considerably. A greater level of awareness and vigilance operates across all public services. We have stronger arrangements for preventing children from being exposed to individuals who can perpetrate those offences, and we have introduced measures to improve standards and ensure that practitioners have the necessary skills and knowledge to protect children from neglect and abuse. I encourage anyone who is looking for support to visit the SurvivorScotland website, which provides details of a range of support services.

I thank Margaret Mitchell for raising the matter. I understand that she has a particular interest in it and has done a lot of work in the area, given her position as convener of the cross-party group on adult survivors of childhood sexual abuse. I am always happy to engage with her on the matter. Since 2007, we have allocated £5.1 million through the SurvivorScotland strategy to fund a range of support services for survivors, and we have successfully piloted a forum to give adult survivors an opportunity to talk about their experiences of residential care. We are now working to set up a national confidential forum, and we have established In Care Survivors Service Scotland to support adults who suffered childhood abuse in care. Furthermore—this relates to my particular brief as well—we have a range of measures in place to ensure that children are less exposed to incidences of harm and people who can perpetrate harm and abuse on them. We must always remain vigilant. In engaging with stakeholders in the police and national organisations, we must ensure that we are constantly vigilant because we cannot become complacent about the issue. We must ensure that we always work together so that children are protected and safe, and that there is a safe environment in which people who have experienced historic abuse can disclose their experiences and get the help and support that they need.

The consultation is being led by Scotland Excel in partnership with Scottish local authorities and follows lengthy engagement with providers and local authorities. The Scottish Government sees the framework as a necessary first step towards the implementation of strategic commissioning of residential childcare services at a national level.

I am aware of the concerns that are raised by a small number of independent residential care providers about the consultation process. However, it is important to note that the involvement of providers and other stakeholders has been an essential element of the process. Officials have agreed to meet, on Monday 17 December, the small group of providers who have voiced concerns, and they will listen to what they have to say. That is absolutely correct and the right thing to do during a consultation process. Stewart Maxwell is absolutely right that we need to ensure that the systems that we have in place protect some of the most vulnerable children in society. I know that Stewart Maxwell shares my passion to do better by that group of looked-after children, as is our responsibility as corporate parents. This is about improving the system, providing consistency and transparency and having in place something that has children and young people at its heart.

Will the member give way?

This is national adoption week, and the British Association for Adoption and Fostering is running its 15th annual campaign to raise awareness of the benefits that come with adoption. Those benefits improve the life chances not only of children, but of adoptive parents. This year’s theme is rule yourself in, a call to encourage people to think of themselves as possible adopters as opposed to ruling themselves out because, for example, they think that they may be too old, they live in the wrong place, they are single or they have a partner of the same sex. It is a simple campaign to get folk to realise that they can make come true the dreams of children and young people who are in need of a family who love them. Parents are the biggest influence and the most important educators in a child’s life. Children who experience a secure, loving and nurturing home environment are far better able to withstand life’s challenges and achieve their full potential. Getting it right for every child means that every child deserves that environment, regardless of their circumstances. Our challenge is to achieve that for the children who, for whatever reason, cannot be looked after by their birth parents. The Parliament has consistently and correctly put aside party politics on this agenda. Together, we have learned of the importance of the early years, of secure attachments and of play and touch. We have also learned the value of strong and plentiful relationships in developing the self-control, risk awareness and resilience to cope with setbacks that we all need to help us through life. This time a year ago, the then minister, Angela Constance, told Parliament about the Government’s commitment to improve the timescales and quality of decision making for children who are looked after by local authorities. The report on care and permanence planning by the Scottish Children’s Reporter Administration focused minds when it revealed that the longest that it took for a child to be placed with an adoptive family was 10 years and 10 months—an unacceptable figure, but at the extreme end of the scale. In response, we stated our intention to do what we could to shorten the length of time that it takes to find a permanent home for a child. We said that we would do that in partnership with the looked-after children strategic implementation group—LACSIG—and other partner organisations through a shift in care planning towards fewer placements for children, an early permanence decision for every child and a system that puts the child at the centre of service design and delivery. It was clear to us that that is a long-term ambition that we need to get right, which means ensuring that the pace of change is correct to avoid driving forward a change process that unintentionally creates dangerous consequences for our most vulnerable children and young people. Today’s debate allows me to outline the distance travelled since last year’s national adoption week in the Government’s activity and allows the Parliament to do our bit to raise awareness of adoption. Last year, LACSIG hit the ground running by identifying the need for better planning and decision making for children in care. Through its care planning hub, LACSIG co-ordinates the activities that are detailed in the Scottish Government’s care and permanence plan, which was published in 2011, all of which are designed to support the agencies that are responsible for care planning. The care and permanence plan seeks to build a system that is proactive, identifying and responding to the needs of children as early in their lives as possible. It is a system in which multiple agencies work together to support and sustain placements, reduce disruption and keep placement moves to a minimum. Many other organisations and professionals are involved in making timely and considered placements for children—it is not just the domain of social workers. We rely on the children’s hearings system and panel members, lawyers and sheriffs, court officers, health professionals and the many voluntary organisations that work with children. Therefore, to bring about the improvements that we all want to see, a range of approaches will be required and we will need everyone who is involved in the system to commit to that change. I will outline the progress that has been made so far on care and permanence planning. The Scottish Government-funded centre of excellence for looked-after children in Scotland is now just over a year old. CELSIS has a dedicated care and permanence team and is staffed by a range of experienced professionals from the social work, research and legal sectors. Their job is simple: they work closely with the individual local authorities and their partners to make improvements to the local decision-making systems. The team is focused on practical, on-the-ground change, trouble-shooting when things go wrong and, more important, supporting comprehensive redesign of the care system one area at a time. With all that we know about what works with regard to early intervention, concurrent planning and the need for speedy decisions, the team is uniquely placed to offer the sort of intensive, system-wide support that is needed to bring all that together and to help transform the care experience of every child. I am pleased to report that the team is already in place and that it is working with seven local authorities on a range of specific improvement projects. For example, the team has successfully engaged with a local authority on managing contact. In addition, the team has concentrated its efforts on working with professionals such as social workers and their managers, panel members and so on through focus groups. So that others can benefit from what is learned during each project, the team holds regular regional permanence events for practitioners and leaders. Six events have already been held to allow professionals from different regions to meet and to help us to focus efforts on what will really make a difference. We have listened carefully to the valuable and often candid feedback from those events, and it is helping us to shape what we and the permanence team do next. The team has identified good examples of best practice, which it intends to highlight and promote in practice exchange events. In addition, children’s panel members, social workers, lawyers and voluntary organisation workers have told us what the guiding principles should be for policy and practice concerning our looked-after children. Collectively, we should have much more ambition for our looked-after children, and should always strive for permanence for older children and those who have disabilities, are in sibling groups or are from minority ethnic communities. We should intervene in a child’s life at the right and earliest point, and should ensure that what is offered to them is the best support that they can get to enable them to stay in their family when and if that is possible. We need to work hard to provide the right support for practitioners to help them to make what are often extremely difficult decisions confidently. We must work to create a shared understanding of what putting a child at the centre of service design and delivery means for social workers, panel members and the judiciary. Perhaps the most consistent and overriding request is for strong leadership at all levels of public life and across the wider corporate family. Since coming to my current post nearly a year ago, I have taken my responsibility as a corporate parent very seriously. In this chamber, we are all corporate parents and have an opportunity, not least in today’s debate, to provide national leadership from Scotland’s Parliament to ensure that we do things better for our looked-after children. I hope that members from across the chamber will engage with the corporate parenting training that is available next week. If we are to achieve our ambition to make Scotland the best place in the world for a child to grow up, our children must feel loved and special in order to have a sense of trust and confidence in themselves. We know that secure attachments are necessary for a child to thrive, and that a child with secure attachments will do better at school and is likely to be good at making friends, forming relationships later in life and coping with life’s events. That is an essential component of our work on the early years. One of the biggest risks to the wellbeing of any child, especially our most vulnerable children, is the impact of insecure attachments. After all, a poorly attached child becomes a poorly attached adult, whose footprint on public services throughout their life will be large and expensive. It is timely that CELCIS, having been commissioned by LACSIG, will shortly publish Scotland’s first comprehensive study into how attachment theory is taught and used in practice to assess and plan the care of looked-after children. We intend that to have a direct impact on practice across Scotland, by sharing the lessons of projects such as the Jeely Piece Club in Castlemilk, Change is a Must in Perth and Kinross, and Seamab School in Kinross-shire. We need to be in a position in which every teacher, social worker and health professional understands attachment. Another part of our ambitious plan was the launch of Scotland’s first national adoption register. We did that during adoption week last year in partnership with the British Association for Adoption and Fostering. The register provides opportunities for children to be matched with families from across Scotland rather than just with families in their local area. So far, 19 local authorities and all four voluntary adoption agencies are referring children and approved adopters to the register. Ideally, referrals are being made no more than three months after a child’s plan for adoption has been agreed. Over the short life of the register so far, 135 children and 139 families have been referred to the linking service. Currently, we have 82 children who have been linked to 47 families. Fourteen children have already been matched for adoption by the register. That is 14 more than would otherwise have found a safe, stable, nurturing and permanent home. While that is a modest start, the register is nevertheless becoming an important tool to achieve early permanence for those who are referred to it. I would like all local authorities to use the register. The children and young people bill proposes that agencies are required to make referrals for any child who is not found a home after three months. However, there is a need to do more to ensure that the approved families and children on the register are a match for each other. It is important to consider that children who are referred to the linking service find it much more difficult to find a family by virtue of their age, medical needs or developmental uncertainty, and some need to be placed with their siblings. Those issues all present challenges to the chances of a child finding a permanent home. That is why the work of the register has been expanded to help manage the expectations of prospective adopters and help them see the real child who can benefit from adoption. I look forward to meeting tomorrow some of the 75 families who attended Scotland’s first two national adoption exchange days, which BAAF organised. The exchange days are events at which prospective adopters are invited to come along and learn more about the children in their areas who could be adopted. I understand that the events have been a real eye-opener for those taking part, who have valued the opportunity to speak directly to social workers and foster carers who know the children well. I also understand that more such events will be held. However, the register can do only so much, and it can support only families who have already been approved to adopt. If we are going to provide secure homes for more children, we badly need to find more adopters. The Adoption and Children (Scotland) Act 2007 introduced more opportunities to adopt, particularly for single people and same-sex couples, but we are not seeing significantly more people coming forward. A key aim is to spread the word to those people who may not see themselves as prospective adopters and encourage them to rule themselves in. The main criterion for people to adopt in Scotland is the ability to provide a safe, loving and nurturing home in which a child can flourish and maximise their future life chances. I urge anyone who can offer such a home to contact their local authority or local voluntary adoption agency this week, and I urge all members in the chamber to do what we can to spread the message across our constituencies.

I take on board entirely Liam McArthur’s point, but in that regard it was interesting to listen to a call-in programme in which people expressed the realisation that they had to remind themselves that some of the questions and processes are designed to put the child at the heart of the decision and to ensure that a family is correct, in order for the child to have a safe and nurturing home. I understand Liam McArthur’s point, but we need to balance that view with the need to ensure that the child is at the centre of the policies and processes that we put in place. As part of what we outlined in the debate last year, we asked local authorities to submit their adoption service plans earlier this year. The plans outline how adoption services are planned and delivered, and should evidence that every authority has a clear plan to raise the number of young people afforded permanence or adoption. Two themes emerged: that adoption activity has increased over the past few years and a number of local authorities are taking steps to improve permanence planning; and that Scotland as a whole could recruit more adoptive parents. A number of research studies have found that personal qualities such as emotional resilience and positive, realistic motivation are more likely to predict successful adoptive parenting than age or family structure. Despite that, many authorities have maintained age-based criteria, with the upper age limit for adopters of young children ranging between 40 and 45. We also discovered divergences in the way in which plans were prepared. I will work to find the best and most constructive way in which to work with local authorities around achieving consistency, while respecting local decision making and looking at delivery and improvement. Some authorities are doing better than others, and I want to ensure that we learn from the best and support those authorities that need a bit of assistance. As I have said, each and every member in the chamber is a corporate parent to more than 16,000 children and young people who are looked after by local authorities. Through no fault of their own, they find themselves in a position whereby their birth family could not care for them unsupported. They are Scotland’s most vulnerable children and they are the responsibility of all of us. We should care for those children and have the same expectations for them as if they were our own. I have had the pleasure of meeting many looked-after children and young people, who are inspirational, resilient and articulate. We should all be proud of them and what they can offer to our country. It is up to us to ensure that they can always realise that potential. I am confident about the work that we are doing to implement this agenda. It is moving in the right direction. I also have confidence in the work of LACSIG and CELCIS, which will be enhanced by other areas of activity across Government to help children and young people in Scotland. We recently launched the national parenting strategy and we finished our consultation on the children and young people bill. We accept that there is much to do and more to achieve, but it is right to celebrate the 15 years for which BAAF has been working to highlight adoption, and to recognise the importance of adoptive parents and potential adoptive parents in realising positive outcomes for children in Scotland who need our care and support. I move, That the Parliament recognises that this is National Adoption Week; congratulates the work of the British Association for Adoption and Fostering in raising awareness of adoption via its campaign, Rule Yourself In; acknowledges that there is an increase in the number of children being adopted, including those from care; welcomes the Scottish Government’s recently launched Parenting Strategy, which includes commitments to all of Scotland’s parents, including corporate parents, as well as the proposals contained in the Rights of Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, and agrees that the work to support a collaborative multi-agency approach to improving the quality of decisions in respect of permanence planning should continue.

Mr Malik makes valid points, which show the importance of raising awareness of the rule yourself in campaign. It is necessary to ensure that a broad spectrum of people put themselves forward as potential adoptive parents. The illustration that Mr Malik has given shows why we have a bit of work to do to ensure that people can be actively ruled in to provide a loving and nurturing home, which I know he has provided for his family.

As many members have mentioned, the debate has provided a timely opportunity to raise awareness of and reinforce our collective commitment to issues around looked-after children and young people—in particular, issues around permanence and adoption. Contributions from members have been considered and thoughtful, and most of all they have highlighted that we all want the best for our looked-after children. Indeed, as corporate parents ourselves, we want all our children to experience a safe, stable, nurturing and permanent home. That is the best way in which to ensure that they are equipped with the confidence and self-esteem that they need to help them withstand life’s challenges. It has been heartening to hear that there is recognition across the chamber that it does not matter where children live or whether their parents are single, a couple, or older than those of their peers. The important thing is that our children feel loved and secure. As we have heard, we cannot pretend that achieving that is an easy task—everyone has recognised that it is no easy thing to achieve. It is not without its challenges and we can sometimes feel frustrated at the length of time that it can take to find a permanent home for our children and young people. Many members have cited legal issues or issues around professional capacity, but nevertheless we understand that the time that it takes to find a permanent home can be frustrating. However, we have also heard—in particular from Gil Paterson in his personal account and from Mark McDonald—about how doing that too fast can have adverse effects and we must always remember to put the child at the centre of all care planning decisions. Let me put on record that the Scottish Government is working hard to improve the life chances of our looked-after children. I, like everyone here, am a corporate parent and I am determined to focus on those things that will make the biggest difference and to support our partners across the sector such as BAAF, the independent adoption agencies and every one of our local authorities so that each child is found a permanent home as quickly as possible. I am confident that we have the right policies and the right approach, but we need to remain vigilant and keep those things under review. Our approach is to support those at the front lines who do the heavy lifting. We are doing that effectively through our key initiatives such as the national parenting strategy, getting it right for every child, the corporate parenting agenda, the looked-after children strategic implementation group care and permanence plan, the national adoption register and, of course, the proposals that we set out in the children and young people bill. Those initiatives are already delivering positive change and positive differences to many children’s and young people’s lives across Scotland. Despite there being 16,000 looked-after children that we know about, often the reason for that is that children are staying in care for longer. There are also fewer children coming into care. In addition, the numbers are showing encouraging upward trends in adoption so there is modest improvement and we are definitely travelling in the right direction, which gives us all a bit of confidence that we are making the right decisions. I turn to some of the remarks that colleagues have made. Neil Bibby made a thoughtful and compelling speech, which acknowledged the need for us all to work together to move the agenda forward in a way that always recognises that the child should be at the centre of service delivery and design. Neil Bibby also acknowledged the need to support our social workers and to thank them for their work; so too did Hanzala Malik and Kevin Stewart. I absolutely agree with that. Social workers do fantastic, often unsung work and they often need to make challenging and difficult decisions, so it is right that we ensure that social workers feel confident. We recognise the need to ensure consistency in decision making. Lack of consistency has been raised by many members, including Stewart Stevenson—I apologise; I meant Stewart Maxwell—and Joan McAlpine. I recognise that that is an issue. The Scottish Government has set standards that are expected from child protection services in national child protection guidance and we are creating a national framework for child protection learning and development to support the developmental needs of a multi-agency workforce. However, we know that we always need to do more. We also recognise the need to show leadership and to ensure that we work with local government in recognising local needs, while recognising the need for national consistency. Liam McArthur thoughtfully and constructively made the point about the need for earlier and better permanence planning. That proved to be a theme in many members’ speeches. I take that point seriously, because it is crucial that we get the right decisions made for every child as quickly as we can. That is why we will continue to help local authorities to address their current case load by providing a consultative permanence team and disseminating good practice. We have already commissioned a project to look into delays and we will continue to raise awareness of the need to get things done quickly. Related to the theme of early permanence is the issue of preventative spending and child development. The earliest years of a child’s life are the most important for their outcomes in later life, cognitively, emotionally and socially. Children cannot be expected to cope with multiple placements and I would not expect that of them.

Attachment is very important. Gil Paterson, Liam McArthur, Joan McAlpine and Clare Adamson all discussed that in their remarks. We have a greater understanding of that from experts such as Suzanne Zeedyk and Bruce Perry, who show us that babies are born relationship ready, that they are able to communicate before they are even born and that their synapses are firing. Therefore, the interventions that we make and the decisions that we take as policy makers are important. They last a lifetime and need to be positive. If attachment does not happen, the child could have foundations that are not as strong as those of a peer who has been loved and cherished. That is why our parenting strategy and our play, talk, read campaign, which promotes positive interactions, more love, more cuddles and more nurture from day 1 of a child’s life, are so important. Those things do not cost anything, but in terms of a child’s long-term outcomes they are absolutely priceless. Stewart Maxwell spoke knowledgeably as the convener of the Education and Culture Committee. I put on record my thanks to him and the committee for their work on this agenda. I particularly welcome the committee’s work to highlight outcomes for children who are looked after at home. I plan to host a summit that will look specifically at that issue. In the light of Hugh Henry’s remarks, I would happily engage with him and others who have an interest in the subject to inform how we progress that work, if they would like to do so.

Yes. Of course, the invitation that I extended to Hugh Henry and others in different parties will be extended to Stewart Maxwell. As we develop our approach to the summit, we will liaise with him to ensure that he knows what work we are planning to do. Nanette Milne, Helen Eadie, Gil Paterson, Richard Lyle and Hanzala Malik all made good contributions and powerfully used their own experiences to show how wonderful it can be to adopt a child and provide a loving, nurturing home. I thank them for that, as it added a real richness to the debate. I would be pleased to liaise with Helen Eadie regarding the issue of Romanian children that she raised. I cannot promise that it will be tomorrow, but I give a commitment to speak to her. I recognise her clear passion on the subject. Clare Adamson, Willie Coffey and George Adam all highlighted the fantastic work of Who Cares? Scotland. I have had the pleasure of meeting some of the looked-after children from Who Cares? Scotland and have sat in on its corporate parenting training. I only hope that many MSPs take up the offer of participating in that corporate parenting training. I visited the debate project last week to mark national care leavers week. Some of the testimonies that those young people gave me about their experiences of the care system were tough to hear, especially given that we, in this chamber, are responsible for creating the system that put them through those experiences. We absolutely need to do better by our looked-after young people. I encourage every member to engage with Who Cares? Scotland to get that real-life perspective on our care system, which is a system that we constantly need to improve. Many members have mentioned the need to ensure that we have robust data. I chaired the last LACSIG meeting, at which it was clear that people in that setting also recognised the need to have much more robust data to inform how we move policy forward. I know that LACSIG is looking closely at the issue. We cannot collect data just for the sake of it; we must collect the correct data to inform policy and ensure that we have a system that is not becoming a pipeline for prisoners, as Graeme Pearson and others suggested. We have lots of opportunities, whether through the bill, the national parenting strategy or the work of LACSIG and CELCIS. Many people are committed to the permanence and adoption agenda. I thank everyone very much for their contributions to the debate, which recognises national adoption week. It is good for the Parliament that, collectively, we can send out the message that we are on the side of looked-after children and that, as corporate parents, we know that we need to do far better by them.

We published our analysis of responses to the consultation on the rights of children and young people bill on 11 May 2012. The 300 responses to the subsequent consultation on the proposed children and young people bill, which ran from 4 July until 25 September, are being analysed. All non-confidential consultation responses will be published on the Scottish Government website on 30 October.

Absolutely. One key driver of the bill is to enshrine elements of the GIRFEC change programme in law so that our unique and distinctive Scottish approach that puts the child at the centre of service delivery is better co-ordinated around the needs of the child. Wellbeing is at the heart of the GIRFEC approach and of the children and young people bill, and play is a fundamental part of a child’s wellbeing. The Scottish Government and I attach a great deal of importance to play, given how it can help with a child’s learning and development. The importance can be illustrated by our successful play talk read campaign, which promotes positive interaction between parents and their little ones through more playing, talking and reading.

Presiding Officer, I remind you that it is Aileen Campbell not Aileen McLeod.

It is an easy mistake to make. There can never be too many Aileens in life. I, too, warmly congratulate David Torrance on securing the debate and thank him for drawing to our intention the achievements of the 5th Fife scout group, which is not an easy name to say. It is a bit like that old score, East Fife 4, Forfar 5; it is a bit of a tongue twister. I thought that it was the 5th Kirkcaldy scout group, but maybe I am wrong. Nevertheless, the 5th Fife scout group deserves our recognition. The motion has given us the opportunity to debate the contribution that young people are making in their communities and to society. It is good to hear that the chamber is united in support of the motion. I am pleased and privileged to close the debate. I congratulate the 5th Fife scout group on becoming the Scottish champions, having won the Black’s of Greenock national camping competition this year. David Torrance laid out very well the challenges that the scouts undertook to win the award. I bet that, despite the challenges, it was a lot of fun. That is what Richard Lyle was alluding to when he said that fun is fundamental to the scouting movement. I am sure that the scouts have a lot of stories to tell, which they might share with us later on. It was nice to meet the scouts in the garden lobby earlier and see them being shown round our Parliament. I pay tribute to Clare Adamson for her intervention, which was useful in highlighting the fantastic work that the scout movement does around the country. Like others in the debate, I want to name the scouts involved: Jenny Ritchie, Reagan McLauchlan, Chloe Whyte, Kiah McIntosh, Robbie Swanson and Olivia Ewan. Their talents, hard work and tenacity contributed significantly to the scout group winning the award, so well done to everyone involved. Well done, too, to the 9th Airdrie scout group and the 4th Arbroath and Montrose scout group, who were the runners-up in that challenging competition. I also welcome to the chamber James Duffy, the chief executive of the Scouts Association; Carol Lindsay, the Kirkcaldy scout group leader; Duncan Clark, the chairman of the association’s Scottish board; Alex Duncan, the association’s commissioner of the East Scotland region; and others who are involved in youth work. It is good to know that other uniformed groups and cadets are represented in the public gallery. Over the summer months, I enjoyed meeting the Boys Brigade, the girl guides and the cadets at the Edinburgh military tattoo. Like Stuart McMillan, I had to make an admission about my background. At the Girl Guides event that I spoke at, I had to admit that I was a member of the Girls Brigade. Nonetheless, I recognise the support that each of the uniformed groups give to one another. Like Duncan McNeil, I take the opportunity to thank Black’s of Greenock for its support over the past four years for the Scout Association in Scotland. It is partnerships such as that that help to forge communities, enhance society and make a real and lasting difference to young people’s lives. I wish his grandson all the best at his first scout meeting tonight. The Government wants Scotland to be the best place in the world for children to grow up. Youth work organisations, such as the scouts, are helping our young people to be the successful, confident, effective and responsible individuals that our nation needs. David Torrance provided a useful historical overview of the development of the scout movement over the years, and it is good to know that Dennis Robertson’s positive and happy memories of the scouts have had a lasting legacy. As Anne McTaggart stated, youth work is making a significant contribution to young people’s health, wellbeing and learning. It supports delivery across all the national outcomes and it contributes to key policies such as curriculum for excellence, opportunities for all and getting it right for every child. The youth work sector has a vital role to play in implementing curriculum for excellence. There are important delivery partners in the sector that offer young people valuable opportunities for learning and personal development both in and out of school. Young people learn in different ways, and youth work gives them the chance to flourish in a wide range of learning contexts. Curriculum for excellence recognises that not all learning takes place in schools, and activities such as the scouts can play an important role in young people’s lives. In informal and fun settings across the country, youth work organisations are helping young people to develop confidence, learn to problem solve and work well with others. Employers are calling out for those skills and our young people need them to succeed in the modern world—Claire Baker made a point about how important it is for people applying for jobs to have such skills in their résumés. In particular, as other members did, I want to highlight the valuable role that the thousands of volunteers play across Scotland. Without volunteers, it would be impossible to deliver the activities that organisations such as the scouts provide. A recent snapshot survey by YouthLink Scotland estimates that more than 73,000 adults are volunteering with national voluntary youth work organisations. In my constituency, the Biggar youth project, street level with universal connections, and many others including the local uniformed groups are providing positive activities for our young people. Volunteers make that happen, and it is right that we acknowledge their time commitment towards ensuring that young people have activities in their communities. Indeed, Scouts Scotland is a volunteer-led movement. Its programmes for young people are delivered with the support of almost 7,000 adult volunteer members, not to mention the countless number of parents and other supporters. In addition to that, more than 2,000 young scout members regularly volunteer their time to support their younger peers. As Claire Baker said, volunteers build a real and lasting legacy for a community.

Absolutely. Dennis Robertson’s experience during his time in the scouts is a perfect illustration of why the scouts and other uniformed groups are so important. They give young people the chance to be young people and to experience all the things in life that are natural for young people across Scotland to experience. The member makes a very good point. It is important that we focus on the positive aspects of what young people in Scotland do. Too often, we see negative headlines about aspects of young people’s lives that are not going well, but there is a raft of young people who are doing extremely good things in their communities. It is often the case that we do not hear enough about those stories. Tonight’s debate is important in that it highlights the young talent that we have in Scotland. We should never shy away from showcasing what Scottish young people can do for their communities. Young volunteers are essential, and it is good to know that opportunities have been provided by the voluntary sector and by people across the country. We should value that army of workers more. Youth work organisations such as the scouts are a vital cog in our drive to improve young people’s life chances. Youth work really is about giving people the skills that they need to succeed in life, which is why I am pleased to congratulate the 5th Fife scout group on its achievements in building young people’s skills and capacities, developing young people as future leaders, and trusting young people to take charge. I am pleased, too, to thank the group for giving us a good debate. The scouts who have attended the debate deserve our recognition, and the scouts and others who are involved in youth work deserve our thanks for improving the life chances of young people across Scotland. Meeting closed at 18:11.

I, too, welcome the debate. I thank Neil Bibby for bringing it to the Parliament in Hugh Henry’s absence and I pass on my condolences to Hugh and his family. I thank everyone for a thoughtful and constructive debate, in which innovative and good work to support children and families has been highlighted. As Anne McTaggart said, this is far above party politics. We can absolutely unite around the aim of providing the best outcomes for children and young people around Scotland. I found it particularly interesting to hear more about the good work that the NSPCC does to support children, young people and their families. I am delighted that it continues to be committed to services for children and families through the roll-out of its new initiative to support parents and tackle issues of neglect. I am always interested to learn more about the outcomes, as members have asked me to. I recognise collectively all the other third sector organisations for their contribution to services for children and families across the country. Earlier today, I visited St Eunan’s primary school in Clydebank with Save the Children to learn more about its families and schools together—FAST—programme. I believe that Neil Bibby has seen that project and I encourage others who are interested to engage with Save the Children on it. Liam McArthur, Jamie Hepburn and others mentioned innovative and good practice in their areas. In my constituency, Healthy Valleys provides local support to parents and families in Clydesdale. Anne McTaggart made points about the New Orleans project—I, too, have met Matt Forde to discuss it. I am interested in that work, which will be of particular interest to the Education and Culture Committee, given its investigations into looked-after children. As many of us know from personal experience or from having family members who have children, being a parent is the most rewarding and the most challenging role that we will ever take on. We all want to give our children the best start in life, so that they can develop into healthy, happy, confident and successful individuals who are ready and equipped for the challenges of adult life. However, I am aware of the difficulties that are faced by some families and children throughout Scotland. As the Minister for Children and Young People, as an MSP and as a mother, I am committed to ensuring that we are getting it right for all children, young people and families by tackling those persistent issues head-on. As members have noted, neglect remains one of the most insidious child protection problems in Scottish society. The recent study that we commissioned from the University of Stirling showed the scale and nature of neglect, and highlighted that it remains one of the biggest challenges that face our children’s services. There is no single simple initiative that will resolve those problems, but a variety of actions taken together can make a huge difference for families and for children who are experiencing neglect. Neglect can arise from a range of different factors and can take an enormous number of different guises, as members have highlighted. It often involves substance misuse, poverty and a range of risk factors that can undermine the ability of parents and families to cope. Anne McTaggart, Mary Fee and Jamie Hepburn outlined some of the stark figures in relation to the subject. We are taking a holistic approach to addressing neglect, which is based on collaborative working. That approach lies behind our forthcoming national parenting strategy and underpins the work that we have done with stakeholders to improve the tools, guidance and support around child protection in recent years. We have piloted a risk assessment toolkit to help professionals to protect vulnerable children, and it will be launched soon. Liam McArthur mentioned that the debate is pertinent to the work of the Education and Culture Committee, but it is also pertinent to and timely for the work that the Government is doing. Next week, we will launch our national parenting strategy, which aims to ensure that parents get the support that they need when they need it so that they can do their very best for their children. We want parents to feel empowered, valued, supported and confident in their ability to care for their children. We are clear that the national parenting strategy will articulate the importance of parenting and of parents, because they are the single biggest influences in their child’s life. We will focus on ways in which we can work together to support parents and carers to do their job well. As part of the strategy, we engaged with more than 1,500 parents throughout Scotland, and we have received strong messages about the support that they need. In response to Mary Fee’s comment about the need to look not only at the early years but at the whole life course of a child, we will also reflect on the needs of parents with adolescent children. That is an important point, as we cannot simply equate early intervention with early years. Our strategy will be a welcome articulation of the real respect that parents need. We recognise that—as Liz Smith, Mary Fee and others pointed out—poverty has a huge impact on families and children. I certainly do not want any child to be born into or condemned to a life of poverty, and it is not acceptable that 17 per cent of our children still live in relative poverty. We are doing all that we can with the powers that we have to try to tackle some of those issues. Our child poverty strategy for Scotland expresses our commitment to focusing on the need to tackle the long-term drivers of poverty through early intervention and prevention partnerships and holistic services. We have all coalesced around the idea that we need to use preventative measures and early intervention, and that is a hallmark of what the Government is trying to do. The earlier we can spot the signs of neglect, the better chance we have of taking steps that will prevent the problems from escalating. The message that we received from our engagement with parents around the country was that they need support and help before a problem becomes a crisis. The early intervention approach is embedded in our getting it right for every child strategy, and we are proposing legislation to ensure that early intervention is mainstreamed across public services in Scotland. That approach will underpin what we want to achieve through the children and young people bill. The consultation on the bill, which closed last week, gathered views from the public and wider stakeholders throughout Scotland. We hope that that legislation, along with our parenting strategy and our collaborative work with the third sector and others, will ensure that we go on to make Scotland the best country in the world in which to grow up. That will take a lot of work, and it is not an easy challenge to face, but everyone wants to see that happen. I congratulate Neil Bibby, Hugh Henry and the NSPCC on the work that they are doing to ensure that we can take some small steps towards achieving that greater aim.

It is the statutory responsibility of local authorities to secure pre-school provision for three and four-year-olds. The Scottish Government increased the entitlement from 412.5 hours a year to 475 hours a year in 2007. Under proposals that are currently being consulted on as part the children and young people bill consultation, the Scottish Government will provide more free early learning and childcare hours than anywhere else in the United Kingdom and offer more flexible choices of delivery, including compressed hours and hours during holiday periods. The aim of the proposals is to improve outcomes for young children and reduce the barriers to work and training that many parents face.

I am aware of the issue that Linda Fabiani raises, and I know that South Lanarkshire Council is working closely with on-site nursery providers on providing the affected children with alternative full day care options in the local authority area. The Scottish Government realises the real pressure on families to have a work-life balance. That is why John Swinney and I hosted a summit, to which business leaders were invited, to discuss more flexible working patterns and working at home, which increase productivity and staff morale. We understand that there is a real issue for parents throughout Scotland, not only in East Kilbride. I offer my support to Linda Fabiani in her work to represent her constituents, and I would be happy to meet her to discuss the matter further if she wanted to. However, I know that South Lanarkshire Council is working hard to support the children who are affected by the closure of the nursery provider.

We recognise the dedication of young carers and the support that they need. That has resulted in greater impetus at local level to ensure identification and support in schools. We fund the Scottish young carers services alliance to produce resources to equip primary school teachers with the necessary skills and knowledge to identify and support young carers. Similarly, resources for secondary schools—also funded by the Scottish Government—will be taken forward. We will shortly publish a long-term plan for implementation of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2009, which will include actions to support schools in identifying and supporting young carers. The proposal in the proposed children and young people bill to have a named person for every child will take into account caring responsibilities.

I recognise and respect the deep interest that Claudia Beamish has in the subject; no doubt she has experience of it from her professional life. I also attended the young carers festival, which the Scottish Government is committed to help with for another two years. I take on board the points that Claudia Beamish made and the other issues that young carers raised, and I will continue to engage with young carers to ensure that we provide the services and support that they need. I will always be willing to have a door open to ensure that those messages are loudly heard by the Government, but initiatives are in place to ensure that schools support young carers, and there are toolkits to ensure that young carers can come forward and disclose the sensitivities of their personal backgrounds.

There have been two allocations from the early years change fund that will increase the level of funded early learning and childcare provision. From 1 April 2012, £4.5 million per annum is being provided from the change fund to local authorities in their role as corporate parents to deliver additional early learning and childcare provision and to work with the parents, where appropriate. In addition, a further £4.5 million has been invested from the change fund in the communities and families fund to promote community-based solutions for support for families and childcare. We are establishing a sub-group of the early years task force to consider how we might develop high-quality integrated and co-ordinated family centres and early learning and childcare services.

I acknowledge Bob Doris’s commitment to early years policy. We are exploring the potential of European structural funds, as part of the Scottish Government’s broader strategic approach. We are participating in European Commission working groups and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development networks on early childhood education and care. I will continue the dialogue with Bob Doris on the matter.

The Scottish Government’s aspiration is for Scotland to be the best place for children and young people to grow up in. We want all our children to have the best start in life so that they can develop into healthy, happy, confident and successful individuals who are ready and equipped for the challenges of adult life. That aspiration is shared across the chamber. I am delighted to talk about the Government’s national parenting strategy, which aims to set out a cohesive and compelling narrative about the value and importance of parenting and how it contributes to improving outcomes for children and young people. I also look forward to hearing constructive thoughts and views from representatives across the chamber, which will enable the debate to contribute to the strategy. Parents and carers are the greatest influences on their bairns’ lives, so we must ensure that they get the support that they need when they need it. I want a parental culture in Scotland in which it is completely normal and never a failure for parents to ask for help or advice to enable them to grow in their role. I want parents to feel empowered, valued, supported and confident in their ability to care for their children. A national parenting strategy will bring the necessary leadership, co-ordination and momentum to this crucial issue and will ensure that, across the public sector and wider Scottish society, we focus on ways in which we can all work together to support parents and carers to do their important job well. Many of us know that being a parent is both the most rewarding and most challenging role that we ever take on. The strategy will be aimed at all parents, because parents in all circumstances can find parenting difficult. We must ensure that more targeted intensive support is available for families who need it most. The strategy will be relevant not only to mums and dads, but to anyone who is involved in bringing up children—not least grandparents, who play a hugely important role in childcare and provide additional practical and emotional support to their wider families. It is crucial that the parenting strategy recognises and supports the roles that grandparents and other family members play in bringing up children. The strategy will also include the vital role of kinship carers, adoptive and foster parents—whom it is particularly important to mention during fostering fortnight—and corporate parents, including all of us in the chamber, who have a duty of care and responsibility for our looked-after children. Whenever I refer to parents, I refer to all kinds of parents. The early years framework that was published in 2008 highlighted the strong influence that parents have on their babies and very young children. The work of the chief medical officer, Sir Harry Burns, has taught us about attachment behaviour, the importance of consistent parenting to help children right from birth to make sense of the world, and the impact that environmental and biological influences have on the development of babies during pregnancy. However, parents often struggle with older children and teenagers—in fact, around a third of all calls to parentline Scotland are from parents of teenagers. For that reason, the parenting strategy will cover the widest possible age group, from pre-conception to adulthood. It will also consider how we can prepare our children and young people to be confident parents of the future. The strategy must make a practical difference to parents, so it is important that it will have the views of parents at its heart. Over the past few months, we have gathered the views of more than 1,500 parents from throughout Scotland. I say a huge thank you to the many organisations that hosted discussion groups on our behalf. I also record my heartfelt thanks to the parents who took the time to tell us about their experiences. I have had the privilege of meeting some inspirational characters and brave families who have told me—through tears, smiles and laughter—what they believe we need to do. Their views will help to shape our approach. We asked what would make a real practical difference to them as, for example, disabled parents, teenage parents, grandparents or parents who are affected by imprisonment, substance misuse, alcohol or domestic abuse. We also asked what the best things are about being a parent, because the strategy will also aim to celebrate parenting and to demonstrate the positive value that we must place on parents and carers for the role that they play in improving outcomes for children and young people. I am delighted that our approach has won praise from Children 1st’s chief executive Anne Houston, who said: “Children 1st welcomed the Scottish Government’s commitment to develop a national parenting strategy for all parents and carers. We welcome the Scottish Government’s approach to seeking views from such a wide range of people with a parenting role, many of whose voices are not normally heard.” We will publish a report of parents’ views in June. I have met some of the groups of parents and seen some of the early feedback, so I know that it will be a thought-provoking report. When we talk about parents, many of us tend to think about mums, so I want to talk about fathers. I am pleased to see a number of dads in the chamber and will be interested to hear what they say during the debate. In our consultations, we have had a lot of feedback from dads, who often tell us that they want to be more involved in their children’s lives but are sometimes made to feel unwelcome or excluded.

I will give way to dad Mark McDonald.

Mark McDonald has made a valid point. The issue was the subject of discussion in the context of the Queen’s speech in the United Kingdom Parliament, and I look forward to hearing more details about that. We will certainly reflect the wider views of dads in our parenting strategy. We want to change how we see and respond to fatherhood. In a modern successful Scotland, we want to encourage and support fathers to play a more active role in their children’s upbringing. The strategy will consider how services and communities can become more dad friendly and at how employers can encourage dads and mums to balance the worlds of work and parenthood. There is no doubt that the agenda is huge and challenging and that change cannot be achieved overnight, which is why we are taking a phased approach. As a starting point, in September we will set out our aspirations for parents and for children and young people throughout Scotland. The position statement will help us to sharpen our focus on parenting, to place higher value on the role of parents, to articulate the benefits of supporting parents and to make the case for parents across a range of services and sectors, while ensuring that appropriate support is tailored to meet need. It will also reflect what parents have told us would make a practical difference, and will set out more detailed plans for later phases of work. On the basis of meetings that I have had with parents, I anticipate that the next phase of our work, which will kick off later this year, will focus on three strands: parenting in the early years, parenting of older children through to adulthood, and preparing our children and young people to be the parents of the future. I have set out what is planned for later this year, but we should not forget that a huge amount of excellent work is going on to support parents in Scotland. At national level we have a continuum of support from universal provision to specialist targeted support, which can be shaped to meet the particular needs of children and families at different stages of their lives. At local level, I have had the pleasure of visiting a number of projects and hearing at first hand from the parents who have benefited from their work. The getting it right for every child approach is making a practical difference by ensuring that our key policies and services are child centred. We want to continue to build on that approach. As the motion says, a number of excellent initiatives are helping to support parents throughout Scotland, including the highly successful play, talk, read campaign, which encourages positive interaction between parents and their wee ones. This year the campaign has a bespoke bus, which is travelling to some of our most deprived and isolated communities. The family-nurse partnership programme is a preventative, intensive home-visiting programme, which is delivered exclusively to teenage first-time mothers. The programme will be expanded so that by the end of 2013 it will support three times as many families as it currently supports. A key and recurring theme that parents raise is childcare, which has been the subject of intense debate in Parliament. We know that high-quality early learning and childcare are vital in improving outcomes for children, and in enabling parents to participate in the labour market, so we are putting in place a range of measures to increase the amount of flexible affordable provision. The forthcoming children and young people bill will increase the flexibility of early learning and childcare provision by increasing entitlement from 475 hours per annum to 600 hours per annum of early learning and childcare for three and four-year-olds and looked-after two-year-olds. This financial year we committed £4.5 million from the early years change fund to support local authorities in providing early learning and childcare for our most vulnerable two-year-olds, and we have established a £4.5 million communities and families fund to support community-based solutions for family support and childcare. We will develop public-social partnerships to pilot early learning and childcare services in areas of particular or unmet need, and we will hold a national summit in June to explore new ways of working with the private sector to promote more flexible working and family-friendly practices. In addition, we are establishing a sub-group of the early years task force to consider how we might develop high-quality integrated and co-ordinated family centres and early learning and childcare services. In conclusion, I say that I am very excited about the parenting strategy and the role that it can play in improving lives in families across Scotland. I know that we all recognise the importance of supporting parents as a way of improving outcomes for children and young people, and I will sincerely welcome constructive views from colleagues across the chamber on the approach that I have set out. I move, That the Parliament supports the Scottish Government’s aspiration to making Scotland the best place in the world for children to grow up; acknowledges that the vast majority of parents in Scotland already provide excellent support for their children; recognises the vital role that parents and carers play, not only in improving outcomes for children and young people in their care, but also in creating stronger communities and a more positive future for all; agrees that all parents need support at times and that parents and carers bringing up children in difficult circumstances may need additional support; welcomes the development of a national parenting strategy as a way of driving forward the shared ambition for improving outcomes for children and young people across Scotland; supports the approach taken to gathering the views of a diverse range of 1,500 parents whose voices are not normally heard and using this as a foundation for the national parenting strategy; thanks the many organisations that have hosted discussion groups with parents on the Scottish Government’s behalf, and welcomes the Scottish Government’s commitment to continued working in partnership with parents and a wide range of partner agencies to develop the detail of the work.

I grant that a lot of the consultation work with parents who face particular challenges has been done, but my intention in having the debate was to give members an opportunity to shape and focus how we take forward the parenting strategy. I hope that Opposition members support that approach.

Hugh Henry’s closing remarks were certainly quite a challenge—I do not want to disappoint him. I thank all colleagues for their largely helpful contributions. In particular, I congratulate Clare Adamson, who became a stepgranny recently. I assure members that the Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that all families in Scotland receive appropriate, timely support that is based on their needs. We all acknowledge that bringing up children is a hugely rewarding job and we heard many people talk about their own first-hand experiences as parents, but we also accept that it can be the hardest job that there is. If we are serious about improving outcomes for our children and young people, we need to ensure that parents and carers get the support that they need, when they need it. I am disappointed that some speakers felt that having an opportunity to help to shape a national strategy was a negative approach. I imagine that if I had published a strategy that they had not been able to feed into, they would have grumbled about that as well. Nevertheless, we all agree that investing in parents is a good thing—not only for children and young people, but for our communities and for the cohesion and productivity of our country. It is part of building a better future for us all. We have made a good start. We accept—I accept as Minister for Children and Young People—that we have a lot of ground to make up. We need to do more, but we are determined to build on that good start as we move forward, because supporting parents to be the best that they can be and to do the best that they can is one of the most effective ways of improving the health, wellbeing, opportunities and life chances of children and young people. We also recognise that supporting parents can help to prevent difficult circumstances from escalating or even arising—by making sure that we listen to parents and act on what they tell us. That is one of the key themes that has come through from some of the discussions that I have had with parents. Parents want to feel valued and they need to feel that their voices are being heard. If parents are equipped and able to nurture their children and give them the love, support and guidance that they need as they grow up, that can help to reduce a whole range of negative outcomes. For that reason, we see our commitment to support for parents as part of our work on prevention and early intervention. We have plenty of evidence about the importance of parents in reducing crime and offending behaviour. Parents have a key role in developing self-control, reducing the risk of and building resilience to trauma, building strong social bonds and setting appropriate boundaries for behaviour. By improving our support for parents we expect to see positive impacts across a range of outcomes. Supporting parents is good for Scotland, as we all stand to gain, whether or not we have children ourselves. I turn to specific comments from members, who made valuable contributions to the debate. Clare Adamson made the important point that there is a need to articulate parents’ value to society. I agree absolutely, and I am determined to ensure that the strategy will do that and make us all value parents’ contribution to society a whole lot more. In an informed speech, Nanette Milne referred to the growing up in Scotland study and the need to tackle some persistent intergenerational problems. We recognise that we need to make sure that there is much more mixing up of society, so that people experience life alongside older people and so that we break the cycle of poverty. We must make sure that parents who, as children, did not have the best start in life are given more tuition to be responsible parents themselves. They can then go on to be good parents and ensure that the persistent cycle of intergenerational social problems is broken. We have an opportunity to do that with the forthcoming children’s bill and with this parenting strategy. I am glad that Nanette Milne made that important point. Nanette Milne also mentioned the importance of schools for the strategy. I agree absolutely. I note that the curriculum for excellence covers the responsibilities of parenthood. I take on board her points, but I also recognise that teachers now have much more well-rounded training so that, when they have completed their registration, they are able to identify additional needs. Maureen Watt spoke about the isolation that many new mums feel. The groups that I have met all note the importance of building up networks, making new friends and finding others with common interest. She also spoke of the need to build resilience, which is essential if we want to enable and equip families and communities to find their own solutions. Dennis Robertson spoke about being a proud Aberdonian, about getting a two-for-one deal when he had his twins and about being a modern man and helping with the nappies. His serious points about coping and normalising the seeking of help were an important part of the debate. Mark McDonald raised specific issues about post-natal depression and the importance of early diagnosis. Having gone through childbirth myself, I know how difficult it is to have a newborn child and I can only imagine the difficulties that are faced by women who have post-natal depression. We must ensure that we get things absolutely right. He also made points about parental leave. I will happily discuss those issues with him and will factor the nuanced points that he made about parental leave into the strategy and other pieces of work that I am undertaking. Liam McArthur noted the need for almost a culture change in the way that we view parents and what we must do to ensure that we value good parenting. Along with Hugh Henry, Jamie McGrigor, Malcolm Chisholm and others, he highlighted the real work that we need to do to make sure that we get things right for looked-after children. I do not think that any of us can look at the current statistics without realising that we need to do a lot more. The Education and Culture Committee and others are undertaking good work to articulate the importance of focusing on that group of children. Nanette Milne made a related point about looked-after children who have not had a good experience of being looked after by the corporate parent. She said that we must ensure that they are able to be good parents themselves when they have families. Graeme Dey made an important point when he observed that our value as parents is not who we are or what we have, but what we do. Playing and cuddles do not cost anything, and we must get right some of the simple things that we do. Malcolm Chisholm noted some specific parenting strategies that are on-going throughout Scotland, including the positive parenting programme, the incredible years programme and family-nurse partnerships. He also highlighted the importance of speeding up adoption placements. I agree with that. We all know that, for that particular group of children, better outcomes can be achieved if we can get permanent placements for them earlier. We are not starting from scratch. As we have heard, lots of really innovative and effective work is already under way throughout Scotland to support some of our most vulnerable parents. Siobhan McMahon and Neil Bibby cited some good practices in their local areas, and Neil Bibby also mentioned Save the Children’s FAST project. I have seen at first hand some great examples of different agencies working in partnership to support parents through schools and prisons, for example. Many of those projects live in the vibrant and vital third sector, to which I pay tribute for the hugely important role that it plays in supporting families throughout Scotland. Hugh Henry wanted me to mention play specifically. We have taken forward the hugely successful play talk read campaign. I do not know whether he has had an opportunity to visit the campaign bus, but I recommend that he do so. We have also announced money through go play, and support has been provided through grounds for learning to ensure that children have much more access to play opportunities. Given that the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child specifically notes a child’s right to play, a rights-based approach is a fundamental part of how we approach this agenda. Hugh Henry also wanted me to talk about kinship carers. I gently remind him that no Administration has done more than the current one to recognise kinship carers formally. We will continue to work hard to ensure that they are supported and will continue to lobby Westminster to make sure that it recognises their specific and unique parenting role, just as the Scottish Government has recognised it. As I said at the start of the debate, it is the Government’s ambition to make Scotland the best place in the world for children to grow up in. I am sure that that ambition is shared by everyone here today. However, it is a journey—we know that we are not there yet and we must create the type of Scotland that we want our children to grow up and flourish in.

I welcome everyone’s contributions to the parenting strategy and hope that members have valued this opportunity to shape the direction that we are taking in the strategy. This is an important time for us all in Scotland, and this is an important move by the Government that has been widely welcomed by people across Scotland, including the groups that I have met. I hope that, when the strategy is published, it will be welcomed by all members as well.

Changes to child tax credits that were introduced on 6 April mean that approximately 84,900 families with children in Scotland are no longer eligible for child tax credit. Those families are people who are claiming at or below the family element of the child tax credits, which is worth £545 per year per family. That will affect 118,700 children across Scotland and will undoubtedly have an impact on the ability of families to pay for childcare. Despite the fact that we have limited powers over tax and benefits, we are taking immediate and major steps to support families with early learning and childcare.

Within the powers that it has, the Scottish Government has taken a number of measures to ensure that children and young families are supported. For example, £4.5 million from the early years change fund is available to local authorities to provide early learning and childcare for our most vulnerable two-year-olds. I share Christina McKelvie’s concerns about the negative impact that the welfare reforms will have on families and children across Scotland but, as I said, we are taking measures to ensure that we improve the life chances of children and families throughout the country. We have in areas that I believe need more attention a number of public-social partnerships, which will focus on parents who are on low incomes and/or in poverty. We will hold a business summit in the summer this year in an effort to influence businesses to ensure that they are much more flexible in helping families with childcare issues. Of course, the major step that we will take is the introduction of legislation to increase the amount of free childcare provision from 475 to 600 hours. That is a fantastic step which, unfortunately, will be impacted on by some of the regressive steps that the UK coalition Government has taken.

All students who already have a further education qualification are eligible to apply for full support from year 1 of a higher education course. That includes help with tuition fees, student loans, bursaries and any living-cost grants to which they may be entitled. In addition, a care leavers grant is available to some students who were previously looked after in care.

I thank Fiona McLeod for being a good corporate parent by raising the issue that her constituent faces—it sounds as though he is a talented young person. I encourage her to contact the chief executive of the SAAS to ensure that her constituent receives the full support to which he is entitled. I recognise the potential complexity with support for law degrees. As part of the post-16 reform programme, we are reviewing the higher education previous-study rules with a view to improving and simplifying the system from 2013-14. I hope that that helps Fiona McLeod to help her constituent.

We are making good progress on the commitment to ensure that all pre-school children have access to a teacher. Annual statistics from the Scottish Government pre-school census show that the percentage of children with access to a teacher has increased from 66 per cent in 2008 to 75 per cent in 2011.

I agree, as does the Scottish Government, that teachers play a vital role in delivering high-quality early learning experiences to children in pre-school settings. I stress the reply that I gave to the member’s first question, which is that we have made good and significant progress. We remain committed to ensuring that all children have access to a pre-school teacher and we will continue to work with local partners on the delivery of that commitment. The issue should be seen in the context of the stream of work that the Government is doing to upskill all people who work with children in the early years to ensure that children’s experiences allow them to go on to fulfil their potential.

In my reply to Alison McInnes, I outlined the significant progress that we have made so far on this agenda. Hugh Henry does a disservice to all the people throughout the country who work with children in the early years and who are being upskilled by the Government—they do a fantastic job. The member should perhaps reflect on his comments.

Yes, it will. The getting it right for every child programme, or GIRFEC as it is more commonly known, is a whole-child approach. That means ensuring that all children’s services, not just education services, work together where appropriate to support a child’s needs and to address risks. Any legislation to embed GIRFEC principles will have to reflect that.

Under the GIRFEC approach, the roles and responsibilities of the named person and lead professional mean that co-ordinated support for a child can be planned and provided regardless of boundaries. We already promote that practice and we will continue to do so. We will consult publicly on the extent to which the principles and practices of the getting it right for every child approach need to be enforced in the forthcoming legislation.

Significant progress is being made. The 2011 schools census indicates that the average primary 1 class size is at a record low of 20.5, compared with 23.1 in 2006, and that, over the same period, the number of P1 pupils in classes of more than 25 has been slashed by 96 per cent.

I reiterate to Sarah Boyack that progress has been made since the manifesto commitment to reduce class sizes was made, so much so that Professor Lindsay Paterson wrote in The Scotsman on 8 December last year: “in the early years of primary, there has been a noticeable change, and indeed in primary 1 the change is remarkable.” Even outside the Government, the reduction in class sizes in the early years has been commended. I take on board Sarah Boyack’s points and we can perhaps get back to her on specifics. I remind her that teacher unemployment levels in Scotland are significantly lower than those anywhere else in the United Kingdom. We are making good progress on that and significant progress on low class sizes. It is regrettable that Labour has missed that positive story.

I am happy to have another opportunity to set out in more detail what we seek to achieve with our expanded early learning and childcare commitment and why we need primary legislation to do that. I will explain the facts to Labour. It is a pity that Labour has struck such a negative tone in the debate. First and foremost, with our pledge to increase early learning and childcare provision to 600 hours, we intend to bring about a transformational change in the way in which provision for our youngest children is delivered. Our approach is not simply about increasing the number of hours of pre-school education that children receive; it is far more comprehensive and ambitious than that—it is about taking strides on our journey towards making Scotland the best country to grow up in. Despite the negativity, I remain hopeful that others will work with and support us in achieving that ambition.

The First Minister also said in his conference speech that the system must be “flexible in its delivery”. I will go on to explain why Labour has kind of missed the point in the debate. The current situation is based on three and four-year-olds being entitled to 475 hours of pre-school education a year. However, as Bronwen Cohen said in an article in The Scotsman last week, “In the early years, care and education are indivisible.” She is right, which is why we must legislate to break down the current barriers. We need to ensure that all three and four-year-olds, as well as looked-after two-year-olds, receive flexible, high-quality early learning and childcare that meets their developmental needs and the needs of working parents. We need to move beyond the rigidity of a system that is wholly tied to schooldays and terms. Increased hours are important, but the bigger prize is the flexibility that we can achieve through primary legislation. Parents and families tell us that they require flexibility. We need to support them if we want Scotland to thrive and grow. We are legislating not to tinker round the edges but to bring about a fundamental and positive shift that delivers for families and for the children of Scotland. As the First Minister said when he announced our intentions, that is “a statement of faith and commitment to the future.” Last week, Labour spoke of a need for a Scottish model of childcare, which is what we seek to develop. However, we need to do it properly and we need to get it right. Primary legislation is vital to deal with the fundamental and complex issues of flexibility. By taking forward the issue through the children’s services bill, we will provide the necessary long-term focus that the children of Scotland deserve. To deliver the fundamental change that is needed, we must engage with the people who will deliver and use the services. We will have a full and proper discussion during the consultation process and will develop our plans accordingly. We will engage with local authorities to develop a system that offers the increased entitlement and, crucially, a system that is more flexible and better integrated across early learning and childcare. At the core of our thinking will be the role of parents and the home environment. Our proposals to legislate are bold and exciting but, in the here and now, there is much that we are doing and will do to make progress. From April, we will deliver increased early learning and childcare provision for our most vulnerable two-year-olds and their parents and carers. This year, we will deliver community-based early learning and childcare solutions in the shape of the £4.5 million communities and families fund. As I outlined in the debate last week, we will develop a series of public-social partnerships—PSPs—that will cover a range of early learning and childcare issues to meet parents’ needs. Those include the issues of parents who are on low incomes and/or who are in poverty; parents and carers who work shifts; out-of-school care, including holiday clubs; parents and families living in rural areas; and outdoor or nature kindergartens. I am also aware of the important role for employers in providing flexibility for parents. As John Park highlighted in last week’s debate, a lack of flexible working and childcare opportunities can impact on the ability of families to engage economically—the economic arguments in the debate should not be ignored. That is why, as I also announced last week, we will hold a national business summit in June to explore new ways of incentivising and encouraging more flexible working in the private sector, including the promotion of childcare vouchers. That is action that the Government is taking now to address childcare needs. Our early years task force will play a critical role in taking forward our aspiration for transformational change in and through the early years. It brings together experts from across civic Scotland, including health professionals, police and our partners in local government. That body disregards political boundaries, and I am pleased that Malcolm Chisholm is a member of it, because the early years are far more important than party politics. The task force has agreed its vision and priorities, which were published on the Scottish Government’s website and issued to key local delivery partners last week. The paper builds on some of the priorities in the early years framework and restates our commitment to key strands of work including the parenting strategy, the play talk read campaign and the further development of family support, early learning and childcare provision. The task force met on Tuesday to discuss increasing early learning and childcare provision and our commitment to expand that to 600 hours. The task force members were supportive of that, but they were very clear that flexibility in the delivery of additional provision is vital if we are to achieve the impacts that we seek. Julie Wild of the National Parent Forum of Scotland, who is also a member of the early years task force, said: “We welcome the increase in hours, but we especially welcome the added flexibility that the new proposals will bring for children and their parents. Flexibility is crucial to enabling parents to have a good work/life balance and to ensuring that services can be tailored towards individual circumstances. That is what families in Scotland need.” Those are words that all members should take notice of. We have within our grasp the opportunity to make an enormous positive difference for families in Scotland. I hope that, despite some of the comments that have been made so far, we can work together to put the needs of the children and families of our nation to the fore as we continue to strive towards making Scotland the very best place for children to grow up in. I move amendment S4M-02430.1, to leave out from “there is no need” to end and insert: “, to provide a statutory right to more flexible early learning, primary legislation is required; welcomes the Scottish Government’s intention to provide this through the Children’s Services Bill to be introduced next year, and further recognises the importance of developing early learning and childcare by working in partnership with local authorities, nursery and childcare providers to ensure that both the developmental needs of Scotland’s children and the varied needs of parents are met.”

We are not doing that.

Will the member give way?

With all this negativity, will the member not at least try to concede that we should welcome the bold and ambitious target that the First Minister has set for the wellbeing of the children of our country?

I am proud to open the debate for the Government, because it comes after the First Minister’s hugely important announcement on childcare at the weekend. The children’s bill that will be introduced to Parliament next year will contain a statutory guarantee on provision of more than 600 hours of funded early learning and childcare for every three and four-year-old and for every looked-after two-year-old in our land. Make no mistake—that is a highly significant step. It represents the best package of free early learning and childcare anywhere in the UK. As the Minister for Children and Young People, it is for me an honour to demonstrate this Government’s firm commitment to our nation’s future. It represents another step forward in our aim of making Scotland the best place for children and young people to grow up in. The early years are a key priority for this Government. We know that, for parents and carers who are juggling work and parenthood, the availability of high-quality, flexible and affordable early learning and childcare is vital, and is essential to improving the life chances of Scotland’s children.

We are committed to making improvements to the life chances of children across Scotland and to introducing potential legislation next year. We will work with local government to ensure that all people across the country get the level of provision that we aspire to provide. The fact that more than 600 hours of funded early learning and childcare will be provided is great news in itself, but the First Minister’s announcement was about more than hours and numbers. Key to our ambition of implementing a transformational change in Scotland’s delivery of early learning and childcare is flexibility. We want to ensure that provision can be accessed in ways that meet the needs of parents and families. We are heading on an ambitious and bold journey, and local government and other partners will have important parts to play as we work together to deliver our vision for high-quality, flexible and affordable childcare across the nation. In addition to the offer of extended early learning and childcare provision, we will work with the early years task force and we will use its wisdom and expert knowledge to build a clear picture of current provision and to identify any gaps. I am happy to confirm that we will go further: in June 2012, we will convene a national business summit to explore new ways, including the promotion of childcare vouchers, of incentivising and encouraging more flexible working in the private sector to make it easier for parents with young children. We will develop a series of public-social partnerships, or PSPs, which will cover a range of specific childcare issues on which I believe more action is required. Those issues include parents who are on low incomes and/or in poverty; parents and carers who work shifts; out-of-school care, including holiday clubs; families who live in rural areas; and outdoor and nature kindergartens. PSPs represent a partnership approach to service development once an issue, such as childcare for shift workers, has been identified. PSPs will give all partners an opportunity to test new services and to evaluate them before tendering for delivery. The Scottish Government is promoting the PSP approach through the sector generally and we will, in the coming weeks, discuss with our local partners the best way to progress PSPs. I am sure that that approach will bring huge benefits to design and planning of local childcare provision in the specific areas that I have mentioned. The Daycare Trust and Children in Scotland report “The Scottish Childcare Lottery” has made a significant contribution to the childcare debate. Although the report highlights that costs in Scotland are high, I emphasise that they are not the highest in the UK and that, in many cases, increases in costs in Scotland have been smaller than those south of the border. I also acknowledge the report’s raising of issues to do with the sufficiency of childcare and variation in costs across Scotland. I will ensure that those issues are investigated by our early years task force and local partners. The Government will not rest on its laurels when it comes to taking action to improve the lives of Scotland’s children and families, and we are setting out the steps and actions that we need to take to improve early learning and childcare provision in Scotland in order that we match the best in Europe. High-quality early learning and childcare are vital for parents and children. For parents, they can provide a route out of worklessness and an opportunity for increased access to rewarding careers, and there is a wealth of evidence relating to babies and young children, perhaps most notably the effective provision of pre-school education—or EPPE—study to tell us about the benefits of high-quality early learning experiences. That is why the Government is committed to increasing the range of flexible and affordable high-quality early learning and childcare provision. We have already announced an additional £4.5 million to provide early learning and childcare for all looked-after two-year-olds in Scotland, and a further £4.5 million to promote community-based solutions to family support and childcare from April this year. I have outlined the range of work that we are undertaking to develop flexible and affordable childcare provision, but there are limits to what we can achieve to support parents with the costs of childcare while most of the levers for doing so remain reserved. We should contrast the Scottish Government’s actions and aspiration for a Scotland that is the best place to grow up in with the regressive welfare reforms by the coalition in London. I have huge concerns about the impacts that those reforms will have on our children and families. We think that it is right that people should be supported into work, but the coalition’s welfare reform agenda is leading to a number of arbitrary budget cuts that will have damaging impacts on individuals and families in Scotland. As Malcolm Chisholm mentioned, the UK coalition Government reduced the cap for the childcare element of the working tax credit from 80 to 70 per cent in April last year. “The Scottish Childcare Lottery” report cites Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs data that estimate that that represents an average cut of £531 per year for families in Scotland.

Annabelle Ewing raises a very good point, to which Liam McArthur should pay close attention. We have committed to increasing early learning and childcare provision by more than 125 hours per year, but the coalition Government is, in effect, cutting working tax credit provision for the most vulnerable people by 80 hours. There will also be changes to child tax credit from April this year: the income threshold will be lower for most people. The changes mean that 84,900 families with children in Scotland will no longer be eligible for child tax credit. That will affect 118,700 children across Scotland. We are taking action to benefit 120,000 children across Scotland, but the Tory Government, supported by its Lib Dem coalition partners, is introducing cuts that will impact negatively on 120,000 children across Scotland. Ordinarily, I would welcome the fact that the Lib Dems’ motion suggests that they are concerned about childcare, but unfortunately I cannot forget their failure to stand up for children and families in Scotland. We all know that the Lib Dems are in a coalition Government at Westminster, but they must not shirk their responsibilities. They will not pull the wool over the eyes of ordinary Scottish families, whose household budgets are being plundered by the coalition. It is plain that having control of tax and welfare systems could help us to deliver real changes to early learning and childcare provision in Scotland. I joined the SNP in order to create the country that I want my child to grow up in—a country that has social democracy at its core, and fairness and equality as its hallmark. I am glad that we are taking decisive action now to improve the life chances of children in Scotland before the referendum. I move amendment S4M-02338.2, to leave out from “with concern” to end and insert: “the issues raised in the recent report, The Scottish Childcare Lottery, regarding cost, sufficiency and variation of early learning and childcare in Scotland; welcomes steps by the Scottish Government to address these issues, including the commitment to legislate to increase the amount of free nursery provision from 475 hours to a minimum of 600 hours for all 3 and 4-year-olds and all looked-after 2-year-olds; further welcomes the Scottish Government’s commitment to work with the Early Years Task Force, local authorities, parents’ representatives and childcare providers to consider how best to deliver increased and flexible provision, identify more clearly provision across Scotland and to learn from the best provision elsewhere in Europe, and condemns the UK Government’s proposed welfare reforms that will have a detrimental effect on thousands of families across Scotland and have a negative impact on their access to childcare.”

Will Neil Bibby welcome the commitment that the First Minister made at the weekend to 600 hours of free early education and childcare?

I remind Neil Bibby of my announcement about engaging with the third sector to identify gaps. Will he welcome that move, if not the 600 hours?

On that point, I made it clear in my opening remarks that we recognise that this is not just about numbers and hours but is about transforming the provision of childcare services and offering flexibility to parents. That is why we want to think carefully about how we approach the delivery of 600 hours.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Does Willie Rennie propose to do more than just suggest a review of the UK Government’s proposals for welfare reform? He should do more than just sit back and accept blindly that 118,000 children will be losers as a result of his Government’s reforms.

The Scottish Government recognises that all parents should have the choice of a range of high-quality and flexible early learning and childcare provision that meets their needs and those of their children. That is why we are committed to expanding the range, capacity and flexibility of early learning and childcare provision. We are scoping the steps that we need to take to make early learning and childcare accessible and affordable for all.

I thank Alison Johnstone for raising that point. We will, of course, work with anyone who wants accessible, affordable and flexible high-quality childcare everywhere in Scotland. I would welcome any thoughts that the member has on the issue, and I extend to her an invitation to meet to discuss the matter further. We have the early years task force, which is co-chaired by Pat Watters of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. In addition to the work that we are doing collaboratively through that task force, we have made other progress on the issue. Last year, I announced an additional £4.5 million to provide early learning and childcare for all looked-after two-year-olds. That is one step towards making much wider access to childcare a possibility throughout Scotland.

I welcome Malcolm Chisholm’s input to the debate and to the early years task force. Of course I would be delighted to meet him and visit that childcare centre. I know that my predecessor thoroughly enjoyed her two visits there.

I associate myself with the points that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice made in opening the debate. I also welcome the opportunity to speak on this important subject and to reinforce the message that the evil practice of human trafficking will not be tolerated. That message has been shared by everyone who has contributed to this constructive debate. The Scottish Government takes very seriously all areas of trafficking, including child trafficking. As Minister for Children and Young People, I am committed to improving the life chances of all children and young people in Scotland: there is no more important role for us than keeping all children safe and well. Along with colleagues, I will do all that I can to create a society that leaves no one, especially the most vulnerable people, behind—a place where every child, regardless of how they got here, gets the best start in life. Sadly, a number of children are trafficked for the purposes of exploitation or abuse, so I will set out some of the issues that affect children. Our work on child trafficking is grounded in our commitment to working together with partners at local and UK levels. I welcome any work that helps to highlight and to reduce the risks to our children. Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People helped to publicise the hidden crime of child trafficking through last year’s report on it, which highlighted the complex issues that are connected to child trafficking, from the various modes of trafficking to the heightened vulnerabilities of the child victims—which Mary Fee raised and in which I know she takes a great interest. The report contains recommendations that are aimed at helping all the relevant partners to identify and support children who have been trafficked. I urge all those who are involved to act on the report’s recommendations. Christina McKelvie noted that although immigration processes are reserved, we are responsible for the welfare of children in Scotland, and this Government is committed to ensuring that when trafficked children are uncovered, they are supported appropriately. John Finnie and Rod Campbell spoke about the number of children who are involved. We are working closely with the police and other agencies to combat the trafficking of children, and we will continue to do so. The Scottish Government’s approach to child trafficking is set in the context of our wider approach to child protection. We have embedded child trafficking firmly in our national guidance on child protection. The guidance contains a dedicated section on the subject that makes it clear that when child trafficking is suspected, it is essential that timely and decisive action be taken. The guidance also sets a national framework to help to shape local practices and procedures, which many members have called for. It aims to improve the way in which all professionals and organisations work together to give all children the protection that they need quickly, effectively and at the earliest possible stage.

The guidance is refreshed continually, because child protection is an ever-changing arena, but if Mr Macdonald has specific views that he would like to express, I invite him to let me know. We are working to make a difference in this area, and we are constantly vigilant for changes that are required in child protection. We have created a risk-assessment toolkit, which will support front-line practitioners in assessing all vulnerable children and young people at risk. The toolkit is being piloted and will be published in spring 2012. In addition, my officials are working with the west of Scotland child protection sub-group on child trafficking to explore how the tools that the London Safeguarding Children Board has developed can best help local authorities in Scotland. I hope that that provides further reassurance to Lewis Macdonald. Following the recommendations in the commissioner’s report, the Scottish Government will explore local protocols for child trafficking with the Scottish child protection committee chairs forum at its next meeting in March. I believe that it would be beneficial to encourage awareness raising among children of the dangers of child trafficking, as the commissioner has mentioned. My officials intend to work with key stakeholders over the course of 2012 to explore how that can be achieved. Many members have called for such awareness raising work to be done. I highlight the promising results from the first annual evaluation of the Scottish guardianship project, which is provided by Aberlour and the Scottish Refugee Council, and is supported by funding from the Scottish Government. It is a pioneering project that has the aim of helping unaccompanied asylum-seeking and trafficked children to navigate their way through the complex welfare and immigration processes. Since it was set up in the autumn of 2010, it has helped to match more than 60 unaccompanied children with guardians. It is the first service of its kind in the UK, and it demonstrates the Scottish Government’s commitment to ensuring that all children in Scotland get the help that they need when they need it. I turn to some of the points that were raised in the debate. Malcolm Chisholm, John Finnie, Gil Paterson and Margaret McDougall reminded us that trafficking is not a Glasgow-only problem. I know that they will welcome the fact that the trafficking awareness-raising alliance provides a service across Scotland and continues to be financially supported, along with Migrant Help in Scotland, which provides much-needed help and support to the victims of trafficking.

Yes—I was just coming to the points that Jenny Marra raised.

Jenny Marra raises a point about training, which is always on-going. Agencies are training their staff: the national health service is developing training and resources, and other agencies remain vigilant in that regard. The child protection training toolkits that I mentioned are constantly being updated. That was not the point by Jenny Marra that I was coming to—she also raised the issue of prosecutions. She may be interested to know that the multi-agency pentameter 2 operation, which focused on human trafficking, led to 21 people being prosecuted. We remain committed to working on that issue, and we can keep Jenny Marra updated on that work. David McLetchie and Annabel Goldie explained why collaboration across boundaries—professional or geographical—is important, and made a positive argument from their side of the chamber for how we can deal appropriately with the perpetrators of human trafficking. Roderick Campbell mentioned the barriers in the legal system and welcomed the summit to which the cabinet secretary referred, which will progress a strategic approach. A lot of members have called for a strategic approach to tackling trafficking, and I know that everyone will welcome the summit. The cabinet secretary will get back to people on the date, and we will ensure that everyone is informed of it. We will listen to Annabel Goldie’s point about ensuring that communities are engaged on the problem of human trafficking.

The cabinet secretary has just indicated to me that he will try to do it this year, but he will let people know as soon as possible of the date on which he intends to hold the summit. Christina McKelvie and Sandra White raised some interesting issues, and they have had a long and outstanding interest in, and personal commitment to, tackling human trafficking. Christina McKelvie made a good point about the changing nature of the crime and—relating to my brief—the need to be vigilant about child trafficking, which is not always related to serious and organised crime. Graeme Pearson and John Finnie gave us a professional insight into the issue. Their comments were useful, and we are happy to engage with them on the issue of children being sold from care homes. I would be interested to hear more from Graeme Pearson on that point. He may be interested to know that the cabinet secretary has met the Home Secretary and is a member of the inter-departmental ministerial group on human trafficking, which includes several UK Government ministers and ministers from the devolved Administrations. Members raised the important issue of the national referral mechanism discouraging victims from co-operating with prosecutions. We accept that immigration concerns are a major issue for victims, and we would welcome any constructive suggestions on how to address that. The debate has been good and a lot of constructive points have been raised. We can progress those issues, on which we are constantly willing to engage with members from across the political spectrum. I thank members for their contributions, and I thank the EHRC and Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People for highlighting in their reports so many important issues that relate to human trafficking and the child element within that.

Does Jackie Baillie acknowledge that we very strongly recognised the army of kinship carers by legislating for the first time to recognise them formally, which Labour failed to do during two terms in government?

I welcome the opportunity to debate the subject constructively, to set out the facts, to show my commitment as Minister for Children and Young People to all Scotland’s children, and to show my passion, which is shared by the Scottish Government, for caring for the most vulnerable people in society. Last year, nearly 16,000 children and young people were being looked after by our local authorities. They are the responsibility of us all. I look forward to closing the kinship care conference in Perth on Monday. The Scottish Government moved quickly in 2007 to publish our strategy, “Getting it right for every child in kinship and foster care”. In 2009 we introduced legislation that recognised kinship care and kinship carers for the first time, offering the chance of a safe, stable, nurturing home with the wider family. The introduction of permanence orders under the Adoption and Children (Scotland) Act 2007 enhanced the chance of a child finding a permanent home with the wider family. We should acknowledge that kinship carers are unique. They do what they do for love, not money. We recognise their incredible efforts and remain committed to doing all that we can do for them and for their children, and we understand the financial challenges that they experience. By working with our partners in local government we have made progress, and all local authorities are financially supporting kinship carers. We have also worked with the third sector on the provision of support and guidance for kinship carers. The Government has made progress, but despite positive changes, in discussion with councils and the United Kingdom Government, we have not yet achieved enough. Despite our Government’s formal recognition of kinship carers, our efforts have been constrained by a UK benefits system that does not recognise kinship carers’ parenting role and even claws back existing benefits when allowances are received. The Scottish Government secured changes in 2010 to mitigate that effect. Kinship carers can now be confident of receiving housing benefit and council tax benefit without any deduction. Allowances are now tax free, and some kinship carers are up to £50 a week better off. However, those are sticking plasters compared with giving kinship carers access to all benefits that are available to parents, such as child benefit and child tax credit. Since 2007, the number of children in kinship care has grown more than expected. That is a concern for local authorities throughout Scotland. However, we know that kinship care is an effective care placement that offers scope for councils to provide a safe, supportive and nurturing environment for children and young people. To get the best from kinship care, we need to continue to invest. Family support is fundamentally about supporting children and their parents, which is why we are developing a national parenting strategy. The strategy will be for not only mums and dads but grandparents and the wider family, as well as foster, kinship and adoptive parents. In other words, it will be for anyone who is involved in bringing up children. It will cover parenting of children of all ages, from the pre-conception stage, through early childhood, school years and adolescence to adulthood. At the heart of our strategy will be recognition that all parents might need support from time to time, which will vary according to their circumstances. Our highly successful play, talk, read campaign is an example of action that we are taking to provide advice and support for all parents. The campaign’s aim is to promote the importance of positive interaction between young children and their parents or carers, from the very start. Some parents will require more intensive support. It is vital that they receive such support, so that we can avoid negative cycles in which poor outcomes are perpetuated across generations. For young first-time parents who are particularly vulnerable, we have piloted the family-nurse partnership, which is a preventative, intensive home-visiting programme that is delivered by highly trained nurses. The programme, which is being delivered exclusively to teenage first-time mothers, begins at the early pregnancy stage and lasts until the child reaches two. It takes a holistic approach to the family, focusing on different aspects at different points, based on the age and stage of the mother and the baby. The programme is based on a deep, therapeutic relationship between the mother and the nurse, leading to long-term positive outcomes for the family. The Scottish Government has also shown its commitment to moving towards an early intervention approach through the creation of the early years task force, which comprises key children’s champions across Scotland. That important group will identify how best to drive further forward our key priorities on parenting, family support, play and early learning and childcare. We have announced funding to support care provision for looked after two-year-olds. I take very seriously the concerns that kinship carers have raised. We have made efforts to improve what they do and how they do it.

As I have said, we have been working very hard with local government on the issue, and COSLA has agreed to deliver our manifesto commitment and the resources, given time. The Association of Directors of Social Work has been supportive of efforts to bring meaningful financial support to kinship carers, particularly in relation to the way in which support is delivered through the UK benefits system. We continue to lobby the Westminster Government to ensure that the UK benefits system recognises kinship carers as this Government has done—but as Jackie Baillie’s Government never did.

No, I am going to move on. I want to make some progress. I remind Jackie Baillie that despite having two terms in office the Labour Party did nothing to recognise formally this important group of carers. It took the election of the SNP Government and our legislation for that to happen. However, we are not complacent and we understand that more needs to be done. It is unfortunate that this Parliament has no competence over welfare and social security, as that system is under threat from the coalition Government. We will continue to press for changes to the UK benefits system and to have kinship carers recognised as parents. Of course, with independence we will no longer have to lobby Westminster for progressive change to realise our country’s vision for a fair, equal and better society. This Government is committed to ensuring that all families in Scotland receive appropriate and timely support based on their needs. That is what we continue to do through the getting it right for every child approach and our early intervention strategies. Bringing up children is a hugely rewarding job, but it can also be the hardest job that there is. I have outlined the range of work that we are driving forward to support parents and families in order to break the cycle of deprivation and poor attainment for our children, with a focus on early intervention. We will continue to build on that as we move forward. I will remain committed to ensuring that the child is at the heart of all that we do. I move amendment S4M-01828.1, to leave out from first “notes” to end and insert: “welcomes that substantial resources have been provided to local authorities to allow them to provide financial support to kinship carers; recognises that, unlike its predecessors, the 2007-11 Scottish administration acted to introduce regulations to allow financial support to be provided to kinship carers; supports wider efforts to empower families, including the development of a national parenting strategy, the Play, Talk, Read campaign and the roll-out of the Family Nurse Partnership; condemns the UK benefits system as not being fit for purpose as it penalises kinship carers and other vulnerable groups, and calls on the UK Government to fairly support kinship carers.”

Will the member give way?

I entirely take on board the issues that Richard Simpson raises. However, in my speech, I talked about the national parenting strategy and interventions that we can make early on in order to support kinship carers, who, as a group, say they that need more than just money and that they need support as well. That is why we have commissioned Children 1st to run an advice service and give support to kinship carers. We realise that professionals need to communicate issues to one another, and we are making efforts to ensure that early intervention is effective.

Will Mr Bibby elaborate on my colleague Derek Mackay’s comment that, as a Renfrewshire councillor, he voted against kinship care payments? Why are the kinship carers in Renfrewshire not worthy of that additional support?

We are working with local government to ensure that kinship carers are given the support that they need. Kinship carers want additional support. They want guidance and they need help and signposting to the benefits that are available to them. We will make a robust case to the UK Government to ensure that the welfare system properly helps kinship carers in Scotland.

The national steering group on advocacy support for children and young people last met on 24 August 2011. The group discussed the content of the draft Scottish Government discussion paper “Improving advocacy for children and young people: Principles and minimum standards”. That paper is currently the subject of a full public consultation that is scheduled to run until 29 February. We strongly encourage anyone with an interest in our proposals to participate in that process.

I understand and recognise the real interest that Siobhan McMahon has in the area and I will discuss the issues with her when we meet soon, when she can also set out any other points that she would like to raise. We are clear that we want to ensure that children’s voices are heard, and that they are heard in a way that ensures that they have access to the appropriate advocacy support services. We will ensure that, when the consultation runs its course and finishes on 29 February, a full analysis is carried out. We will be able to take stock of what people say at that point.

I am delighted to take part in today’s debate. I congratulate the convener and committee on their work so far and look forward to hearing their views in this important debate. I also welcome the new Labour education team, whom I met for the first time at yesterday’s committee meeting. As Minister for Children and Young People and as a corporate parent, I take the educational attainment of looked-after children very seriously. It is vital that we do all that we can to raise attainment and give these children the best possible start in life. This Government’s ambition for our looked-after children is no different from our ambition for all children in Scotland—and is absolutely no different from my ambitions for my own son. We want children to be safe, healthy and loved, to enjoy their childhood, to achieve their full potential and to grow into responsible adults who are capable of making positive contributions to our society. We know that the educational attainment of our looked-after children and young people remains persistently poor. As the latest statistics show, looked-after children are absent or excluded from school more often and leave school earlier with fewer qualifications than those who are not looked after. They are also less likely to go on to education or employment after school. They are among Scotland’s most vulnerable children, and the reasons why they do not reach their full potential are various, complex and interrelated. I have no doubt that the committee will have heard about some of the reasons during its inquiry. Given that—as Stewart Maxwell noted—looked-after children and young people face additional barriers in accessing education, they require additional support from all who are involved in their care. Indeed, this Government and the previous Executive have worked to provide that support. We will continue to ensure that the needs of looked-after children, young people and care leavers are embedded in wider work to improve outcomes, including getting it right for every child, curriculum for excellence, additional support for learning and the more choice, more chances strategy. We have strengthened the additional support for learning legislation; all looked-after children and young people are now automatically deemed to be in need of additional support at school unless the local authority determines specifically that they are not. Therefore, educational authorities and schools have a duty to assess each looked-after child or young person and to plan for and provide any additional support that they might need. We will continue to monitor how that legislation is being implemented. The ministerial report, “Looked After Children and Young People: We Can and Must Do Better”, which was published in January 2007, set out an action plan to improve the life outcomes of looked-after children and young people and recognised that education cannot be seen in isolation. That report and the accompanying training materials will now be updated in line with current legislation and with the getting it right for every child and young person policy. The role of designated manager for looked-after children and young people in schools was established following the publication in 2001 of the report, “Learning with Care: The Education of Children Looked After Away from Home by Local Authorities”. There being designated managers in educational establishments and the development of a reciprocal role in residential care establishments are central to the improvement of educational outcomes. Our looked-after children and young people need someone in their school and in their home setting who understands their issues and supports their educational attainment. In September 2008, we published “Core tasks for Designated Managers in Educational and Residential Establishments in Scotland”, which clarifies the role and responsibilities of the people who undertake that important role. We will continue to monitor that work and are committed to strengthening the role of designated manager so that looked-after children get the support that they need. To be able to learn, children need safe, stable, nurturing and permanent homes. That is why this Government is focusing on ensuring that looked-after children experience as few placements as possible. Our ambition is that children experience only one placement so that a child’s first placement is their only placement, from which they will return home or go on to permanence. Timescales for reaching decisions about permanence and adoption should be reduced. This Government believes that, by properly embedding corporate parenting principles, we will be able to meet the needs and aspirations of each looked-after child. We have seen the role of corporate parent evolve and improve over the years, but more needs to be done. We are working in partnership with Who Cares? Scotland to deliver a national training programme so that those who care for looked-after children and young people are the best-possible substitute parents. We will build on the success of that programme by continuing to work with the corporate family to ensure that our looked-after children receive the support that they deserve. In addition, children cannot be successful learners if their health needs are not identified and met. Local health services must take on a much more engaged role as corporate parents and provide health assessments within four weeks of a child’s coming into care, and must share information with councils and make access to services easier. We are totally committed to a partnership approach. Along with Stewart Maxwell and the rest of the committee, I want to see professional boundaries being overcome and everyone working together to drive forward improvements. We know that, during the first three years of life, children’s brains complete 75 per cent of their growth and that, by the age of three, they have learned 50 per cent of their language skills. We know that what happens, or fails to happen, in the early years has a significant impact on an individual’s capacity for learning and attainment. We have a particular focus on the early years; we are committed to increasing the quality of early learning and childcare opportunities as part of our wider drive to improve the future life chances of all Scotland’s children by giving them the best start in life. That is why I recently announced that we will fund additional early learning and childcare and work with parents for all looked-after two-year-olds. Over the next three years, we will make available £1.5 million a year to local authorities for their role as corporate parents. It has been shown that children whose parents or carers talk and read to them and play with them have better language skills. Our play, talk, read campaigns encourage mums, dads, grandparents and carers to find simple fun ways to help their children’s brains to develop, and to give them the best chances in later life. We are also focusing on even earlier interventions so that children who are at risk of coming into care are provided with support in their family environment in order to allow them to go on to lead positive lives without coming into care. Support for parents is key to improving outcomes for looked-after children and young people. We want parents to be positively and proactively involved in their children’s development. Parenting—in whatever shape or form—is the most important job that anyone can take on, and we all know that it comes with many challenges. That is why we are committed to developing a national parenting strategy. I want to highlight the importance and value of parenting in the context of the life chances of our children and young people, and I want the strategy to help to ensure that parents and families get the help that they need, when they need it. The educational attainment of children who are looked after at home is particularly poor. The Scottish Government recognises the need to provide better support for that cohort of looked-after children, which the committee identified, and for their parents. We also acknowledge that leaver destinations for looked-after young people and care leavers are significantly poorer than those of their peers, so we are prioritising support for that group to access learning and jobs. We continue to improve throughcare and aftercare services for young people in the care system, so that they can effectively access learning and jobs.

I take on board the point that Stewart Maxwell has made. We want to ensure that permanence is embedded in the system, in order to ensure that young people who go into care are in a stable and nurturing environment in which they can improve their attainment. I will be happy to continue the discussion after the debate. The development of the throughcare and aftercare work plan is aimed at improving outcomes for looked-after children by strengthening the role of the corporate parent. We will do that by working in partnership with CELCIS, childcare practitioners, members of the corporate parenting family and young people. In December, we announced a three-year £1.5 million package to support up to 1,000 young people who face the greatest barriers to employment. The initiative, which covers groups such as care leavers and young carers, will from April 2012, as part of the opportunities for all initiative, offer employer incentives and other tailored support to help young people into work. It will support all 16 to 19-year-olds who are not in work, education or training. As corporate parents, we all have a duty to help to shape the lives of Scotland’s looked-after children and young people. We have a duty to ensure that looked-after children and young people are supported to achieve the same levels of success as their peers achieve, and that when young people leave care they are able to lead fulfilling and healthy lives. Members of the Parliament can work together to achieve that. I thank the committee for its hard work and look forward to hearing members’ views during the debate.

Those figures have been updated, and there has been a slight increase in behaviour support staff.

In my new role as Minister for Children and Young People, I have been pleased to hear members’ views in this important debate. As I outlined in opening the debate, it is the responsibility of us all, as corporate parents, to work together to support our looked-after children, young people and care leavers to become successful learners, confident individuals, effective contributors and responsible citizens. I am greatly encouraged by the cross-party support for tackling this issue, and by hearing the examples of good practice from across the country. We would all agree that more needs to be done. In the words of the 2001 report, “we can and must do better”. A number of points have been raised during the debate and I would like to take time to address some of them. Mary Scanlon noted the need to work in partnership—whether between the health authorities and the council, or within the council and across professions. Indeed, many members—Liam McArthur, Dennis Robertson and Claudia Beamish—have spoken about the need for working in partnership, and I absolutely agree. In my role as Minister for Children and Young People—and, indeed across the Government—collaborative working, and the need to disrespect boundaries and place the child at the centre of all that we do, are fundamental to driving forward improvements. That is why we launched the corporate parenting national training programme. Change will also be driven by the new inspection regime that is being developed by the care inspectorate and which is based around children’s experiences. Many members have spoken about the need to ca canny with additional strategies, and the Government is taking action, working with the looked-after children strategic implementation group and with CELCIS. I welcome the comments from Joan McAlpine, Christine Grahame and others who linked the issue of looked-after children and young people with the issue of offending. In the previous session of Parliament, my work on what the children’s commissioner termed the innocent victims of crime—meaning, the children of prisoners—has given me a huge interest in the subject. We need to break the cycle of being in care and then offending. That is why the Government is committed to intervening in the earliest years and to providing safe, stable, permanent and nurturing homes. Christine Grahame asked whether CELCIS would work with academics and others to prevent young people in care from offending. The answer is yes—work is going on just now. I hope that that provides Christine Grahame with some assurance. Jean Urquhart urged that we should listen to professionals. I assure her that that happens through CELCIS, LACSIG and others, as we try to drive forward good policy. Anne McTaggart, Claudia Beamish and Alison Johnstone shared their valuable professional experience, adding a great deal to the debate. Anne McTaggart made a passionate case for ensuring that looked-after children and young people are not forgotten in welfare reforms. The point was well made. Adam Ingram spoke about the importance of parenting and of the need to close the gap in attainment between looked-after young people and other young people. Correctly, he noted the need to act early, before permanent damage is done. He noted the need for speed in decisions on permanence. The Scottish Government is committed to improving the care journey for children, and to creating a national parenting strategy. I thank Adam Ingram very much for his points. Hanzala Malik made specific points about the need to support Punjabi-speaking families and service users, and about issues surrounding Punjabi language and the SQA. My colleague Alasdair Allan has said that he will speak to the member to see what can be done. Neil Bibby, Neil Findlay, Hanzala Malik and others made good points about the excellent work of behavioural support staff. The 2011 figures that I have show a slight increase and I commend the local authorities that are doing everything to support the important work that behavioural support staff do. Kevin Stewart, Mark McDonald and Neil Bibby spoke about innovative practice and positive stories that surround the issue, and highlighted the good work that is being done in their local areas. We need to hear such news, and the committee will appreciate the opportunity that the debate has given it to add it into its report. When we hear positive stories, we should learn from them and ensure that good outcomes are passed on and that we learn from best practice.

As the member said, the Government should always learn from other countries and not just look for good examples within our boundaries. If there are good models being used in Finland, committee members will appreciate Linda Fabiani raising that matter with them and they will make it part of their report. I will certainly ensure that the Government learns from such models. Jenny Marra and Stewart Maxwell spoke about looked-after children at home. Because outcomes are so poor for that cohort, corporate parents need to focus more effort on keeping such children engaged in school and health services. We have commissioned CELCIS to undertake a baseline study of the circumstances of children who are looked after at home. Through GIRFEC, curriculum for excellence, additional support for learning and more choices, more chances, we will continue to ensure that the needs of looked-after children, young people and care leavers are embedded in wider work to improve outcomes. As a result of our additional support for learning legislation, all looked-after children and young people are automatically deemed to be in need of additional support in school unless the local authority specifically determines that they do not need it.

We have improved data collection and will ensure that the inspectorate that I mentioned earlier, which is for looking at the way in which the initiatives and strategies happen, will ensure that children are at the heart of all that we do and that improvement is driven forward. I hope that that reassures Mary Scanlon. Many members have raised the fact that there are many different strategies out there and that it is necessary to piece them together to get clarity. I am sure that we can all work together to ensure that that happens, and I make that commitment to Mary Scanlon. We will drive forward the implementation of national policy and address the major barriers that are faced by practitioners by concentrating on three priority areas: how to raise attainment and measure the record of achievement; how to assist the children’s workforce to provide educational support; and how to ensure that the educational needs of looked-after children are reflected in the inspection evaluation process. As we know, all that cannot be done in isolation. I have also outlined plans to support at an early stage families who are in difficulty, to improve permanent and care planning arrangements, and to improve support for corporate parents. I hope that members are reassured that we are committed to tackling the poor educational attainment of this vulnerable group and to working together across political parties to do better by all Scotland’s looked-after children.

In 2009-10, the latest financial year for which this information is available, the three modern apprenticeship frameworks with the highest drop-out rates in the first year were accounting, providing financial services and retail.

Ministers met with the chair of Skills Development Scotland on 28 September 2011, and I met the chair informally last night at the modern apprenticeship awards in Glasgow.

The purpose of single outcome agreements is for community planning partnerships to set out how they will contribute to the achievement of national outcomes by improving local outcomes in their areas in a way that reflects local circumstances and priorities. The Scottish Government therefore expects CPPs to engage with their communities, to find out what local residents see as their needs and priorities, and to tell them how the CPPs are performing in delivering better outcomes.

I am grateful to Paul Wheelhouse for highlighting the results of East Lothian Council’s local survey, which shows that the people of East Lothian trust and have confidence in their council. Where we have a good example such as that, we should highlight it. I look forward to discussing the results of the survey with East Lothian Council when I visit it in the near future. I agree that local authorities should find out how people feel about the services that they receive, as that can inform the design and delivery of better local services.

The Scottish Government is committed to maintaining the council tax freeze for the remainder of the current session of Parliament and is currently working with local authorities to deliver it for 2012-13.

Margaret Burgess will be pleased to know that the average saving for a council tax band D dwelling over the current session of Parliament will be more than £1,136. That is on top of the savings that have been made in the previous parliamentary session, thereby providing hard-working families with a cumulative saving of £1,239 throughout the lifetime of the policy. The policy involves the Scottish National Party Government doing what it can with the powers that it has to protect hard-working families. Along with policies such as the abolition of prescription charges and the provision of free tuition, the council tax freeze provides tangible help for real people’s lives, and it helps the constituents of North Ayrshire, about whom I know Margaret Burgess cares so passionately.

I thank colleagues for a lively debate on an important issue and I extend my welcome to Mary Scanlon in her new role. The views of Conservative party colleagues are no particular surprise because, despite warm words and efforts to disguise it, those views seem still to be founded on the notion that the public sector is part of the problem, rather than an essential ingredient in achieving economic prosperity and social wealth, as Rod Campbell expressed well in his speech. That is not the view of the Scottish Government. As Mr Swinney set out at the start of the debate, we recognise and are taking action on the importance of public sector reform. We are not shying away from the many challenges with which we are presented and which are made even more challenging by the financial constraints that have been placed on us by the UK Government, one half of which—the Lib Dems—was not here today to participate in this important debate, the subject of which is affecting many people across Scotland. The UK Government appears to be incapable of considering the economic damage that its policies are causing, or of changing its course. We believe that such challenges are best faced in partnership and collaboration wherever possible—a point that Chic Brodie made. The best way to get the best results is by engaging and showing respect, not by diktat. On partnership working, we agree with what Richard Baker and Hugh Henry said in their opening remarks. Another area where we find agreement with Richard Baker is in his welcoming of the Scottish Government not doing to local government what the UK Government has done to us regarding local government pensions. That is welcome—it is better late than never, given the comments that his colleague Paul Martin made yesterday. What we need—rather than a piecemeal approach—is a measured and coherent approach to public sector pension reform. That is the best approach for achieving potential once-in-a-generation changes. Let me be clear: the Scottish Government is committed to public sector pensions that are affordable, sustainable and fair to public sector workers and taxpayers alike. We recognise that a case has been made for longer-term reform and we will consider that once we have greater clarity on the UK Government’s proposed reforms and their impact on Scotland. However, we will do that to a timetable that suits Scotland’s interests rather than those of the UK Government. We think that it is wrong to increase public sector workers’ contributions to their pension schemes at this time and in this way. It is a naked cash grab that is geared towards reducing the UK deficit and will do nothing to address the sustainability or fairness of pensions over the longer term. We have made abundantly clear our principled opposition to the UK Government policy of increasing employee contributions at a time when public sector workers face pay freezes, significant increases in national insurance contributions, higher VAT and rising inflation and fuel costs. In response, the Scottish Government is taking a number of positive steps to address the challenges: the living wage, no compulsory redundancies, the council tax freeze and the abolition of prescription charges are all policies to protect families and provide security at a time of uncertainty.

We believe that we have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to look at the matter as a whole instead of taking the piecemeal approach that the UK Government is taking, in which the unions are coming blind-sided into negotiation agreements. The UK Government’s position is absolutely clear. Danny Alexander’s letter of 5 September confirmed that if the Scottish Government does not implement the increase in pension contributions, he will cut the Scottish budget by more than £100 million in 2012-13 alone, which is not a sustainable position. That would have a knock-on effect on Scottish public services, thereby making the necessary reforms much harder to achieve. Therefore, and regretfully, unless the UK Government can be made to think again we will implement the increases in pension scheme contributions for 2012-13 for the NHS, teachers, police and firefighters schemes. Despite the announcement by the Chief Secretary to the Treasury of an improved pension reform offer on 2 November, we are concerned that the UK Government is taking a piecemeal approach to this significant issue. Not only has it introduced short-term contribution increases in a way that has contaminated discussions about longer-term reforms, but it also appears to be realising its policy proposals bit by bit. That is either a deliberate way of stifling debate, or it is evidence that the UK Government’s proposals are simply being made on the hoof. Indeed, if we look at the various twists and turns in the UK Government’s short-term proposals, it is possible to see a pattern that begins with a set of principles that are subsequently abandoned in favour of the bottom line. In a very impressive speech, Marco Biagi noted that the approach that is being taken by the UK Government—its lack of meaningful engagement with others in terms of using the opportunity to look at pensions in the round—represents an opportunity lost. Rod Campbell helpfully pointed out the gender concerns with regard to the pensions issue. His speech included some good points that were well made. Paul Wheelhouse also made some excellent points and posed some pertinent questions that need to be addressed by the coalition Government. I look forward to hearing the Conservatives’ responses when they sum up the debate. Although we can find common cause with the public sector on the short-term increases in contributions and can understand the frustrations around the proposals for longer-term changes, we believe that striking is the wrong choice. We will make a strong case as to why these clumsily handled reforms are wrong and we will send a strong message to the UK Government that it must think again.

Liz Smith says that the lowest-paid people are not getting a bad deal. Will she concede that she is comparing apples with pears and that the comparisons should be made with people who will be working up to the age of 68, as opposed to people who are retiring now at the age of 60?

The Scottish Government has fully funded the council tax freeze since it was introduced in 2008-09 by providing an additional £70 million each year. By the end of this session of Parliament, the cumulative cost of the council tax freeze will have been £630 million.

I thank Margaret McDougall for raising those points. I am still in a bit of a quandary as to what the Labour Party position is on the council tax freeze. At first, it was against it. Then it thought that the bills would not go up. Then the run-up to the election suddenly focused Labour members’ minds, and they were for the council tax freeze. The council tax freeze is fully funded and is helping hard-pressed families during these extremely tough economic times. For Margaret McDougall’s information, in the period 2008 to 2012, the freeze saved the average band D householder more than £300. Extending the freeze for the whole of this session of the Parliament will mean that the same household will have benefited by around £1,200 in total, based on the Government providing an additional £70 million each year.

I have visited the Glasgow house as well, and I concur with many of the points that the member makes. The buildings are attractive not just because of their carbon-reducing nature and energy efficiency, but because they are well designed and well decorated inside.

I can clarify for the member’s information that there will be a consultation on planning fees. If he wants to tease out some of the issues, he may like to contribute to that forthcoming debate.

Will the member give way?

My goodness, thank you Tricia—sorry, Presiding Officer. I apologise. This has been an excellent debate, which has given us a tour of Scotland. It has been interesting to hear about Drew Smith’s profound obsession with Lego and to hear that Linda Fabiani has reached agreement with Michael McMahon. The Government wants a future for our country in which the quality of life of all Scotland’s citizens is greatly improved. Every one of us deserves to live and work in environments of which we can be proud, and we all want a prosperous future for Scotland. The quality of our built environment can motivate and inspire us. It can make us feel good about ourselves. It is also vital to the country’s economic future. The Government thinks that a strong and widely supported and understood vision for the future is a prerequisite for successful cities, towns and rural developments in Scotland. The manner by which we aim to achieve such a vision goes to the heart of democracy. It is vital that the development of Scotland’s built environment is inclusive. We want to make the planning process easier to understand, we want greater public participation, and we want to enable participants to see that direct account is taken of their views. The cabinet secretary talked briefly about what we are trying to achieve through the Scottish sustainable communities initiative. The underlying principle that she described is the taking of a long-term view of development strategies, which is concerned with outcomes and delivery. A modernised planning system, which is focused on outcomes, can help to deliver sustainable growth and development of the right quality in the right places.

I take on board Claudia Beamish’s point. The fact that the cabinet secretary with responsibility for culture opened the debate and the minister with responsibility for planning is closing it shows the breadth of support for the agenda. The member might be interested to know that I launched the document “Green Infrastructure: Design and Placemaking” the other day, which is about innovative use of green space and allotments, among other things. Of course, Architecture and Design Scotland does work in schools, as Claudia Beamish probably knows, given that she is a former primary school teacher. Our agenda is twofold. We want to ensure that future developments are consistent with our principles of sustainable growth and we want to help existing developments and communities become more sustainable. However, the translation of policy and guidance into effective outcomes on the ground through the planning system is not easy and successes are not as numerous as we would wish them to be. Therefore, along with Architecture and Design Scotland, we are working to promote and support practical projects, the benefits of which can be understood, seen and felt on the ground and can be replicated, through successful processes. We are all familiar with the term “charrette”—Kevin Stewart seems to be a bit of an enthusiast—which is one of the ways in which we are taking the agenda forward. A charrette is a design process, which takes place over a number of days. The public, design professionals and project consultants work together to develop a detailed masterplan for a site. Charrettes can help to harness communities’ deep understanding and knowledge of the places in which they live and work. The approach gives local people a voice, so that they can contribute to the development of well-informed plans, which provide the best opportunities for their communities to flourish. The process is truly inclusive. I hope that that will encourage Patricia Ferguson, who made clear her passion for architecture and place making and warned of examples from the past of people being ignored and of developers having no understanding of how people in the community live and where new development should be created. Jean Urquhart also stressed the need to learn from our past.

I am happy to praise that project. I visited it when I visited Aberdeen City Council. It is a great example of the council investing in its community and providing a one-stop shop, similar to that which Elaine Smith described in Coatbridge. The charrette in Lochgelly was attended by students of planning from the University of Dundee. They were enthused by that process, as are the young planners across Scotland. It was a remarkable success. [Interruption.]

Building on that achievement, we recently launched a new programme that is aimed at mainstreaming that innovative approach. I acknowledge the issue to do with Lochgelly that Helen Eadie raised. I assure her that Scottish Government officials have been working with Fife Council since that project and continue to do so. The SSCI mainstreaming programme involves a further series of charrettes across the country, linking new projects with specialist design teams. That is intended to embed charrette-style working in Scottish practice. I hope that that gives some reassurance to Linda Fabiani that we are not taking a “do something and then clear off” approach but instead are trying to empower people to use their abilities, skills and knowledge. The first of those charrettes, which I attended last week, was held in Johnstone south-west. The next will be held in Callander, and one will be held in Girvan at the start of the new year. A remarkable amount of work was done in Johnstone to engage folk, not only using typical approaches but also going out and enthusing people to come along. That meant that it was not just the usual suspects at the meeting but a breadth of people from the community. They even turned up again last Saturday, at the close of the charrette, despite competition from the Singing Kettle and Stacey Solomon, who was switching on the Christmas lights in Paisley town centre. Through the mainstreaming of charrettes, Scotland is leading the way in how communities are contributing to their future environments. I should also mention, with regard to the SSCI, that, last month, the exemplar project at Knockroon in Cumnock opened the first phase of a new neighbourhood to the public. Many people, such as Mike MacKenzie and Jamie McGrigor, will be pleased to know that that development looks Scottish and gives the visitor a sense of being in Ayrshire. I suggest that members go and visit it, because it is something that East Ayrshire is proud of. It is also in an area that is one of the most challenging in the Scottish housing market, yet it attracted more than 1,200 visitors in its opening weekend. It is well worth a visit. The high level of interest was generated to a great degree by the strong vision and commitment of—

I am in my last couple of minutes. I apologise to Mr McGrigor, but I will touch on planning issues before I close, as I am sure he would want me to. We want in the future to develop new places like Inveraray, and we want to do that well, taking on board people’s views and opinions as we do so. We have launched a couple of new guidance documents. The first is about green infrastructure, which I mentioned to Claudia Beamish, and the other promotes good design in rural landscapes, which is of particular interest to the members who represent rural areas. This afternoon, we have had an excellent discussion on the value of our historic environment and the need for contemporary design to match the quality of architecture that Scotland has produced in the past. All too often, heritage and development are viewed as being in conflict. However, we cannot continue to create a heritage for the future without development. Marco Biagi made a passionate case for preservation and the need to be sympathetic to our history and heritage, with particular reference to Edinburgh. Similarly, Elaine Smith and Helen Eadie made a valuable point about how unhelpful the carbuncle awards are and how demoralising they can be for local residents who are trying to do their bit to improve their area. They do nothing to help Scotland’s image internationally. Joe FitzPatrick and others have made great contributions about the importance of—

I would just like to say that we have had a tremendous debate. Clearly, one of the greatest themes in the debate was community engagement. That is at the very heart of what we want to do, as well as improving Scotland’s economy for the future.

I am aware of the proposals that the council is considering as part of its alternative business model programme. It is for the council, as a body of elected representatives, to determine how it delivers services for the people of Edinburgh, within the framework of its duty to secure best value, with the principles behind best value in statutory guidance, including responsiveness to the needs of communities, citizens, customers, and employees. I understand that the council has deferred a decision about environmental services until next month to allow members to get more information and to enable them to scrutinise the proposals fully, as is their responsibility.

I thank Malcolm Chisholm for his question. I reiterate that it is a matter for the City of Edinburgh Council. On the pension scheme, I understand that the council is fully aware of its duty to comply with the guidance that is issued under section 52 of the Local Government in Scotland Act 2003 in relation to employment issues and contracting. Again, that is for Edinburgh councillors to consider. During the month for which they have opted to defer the decision, I expect them to ensure that they cover all bases in respect of the issues that Malcolm Chisholm has raised.

Marco Biagi’s point is well made. We all know that public sector resource budgets are under pressure as a result of their being slashed because of choices that have been made by the Tories—and previously by Labour—at Westminster. We have made it clear that we will not continue the overly expensive PFI because it is apparent that it is not delivering best value for the taxpayer: no new PFI projects have been initiated since 2007. The PFI legacy is a drain on public finances and shows us that instead of accepting credit-card levels of repayment under PFI, we need to get the best value from our capital to enable us to do far more for our economy and our society.

Like everyone else, I congratulate James Kelly on securing the debate. I, too, met Mr and Mrs Hansen yesterday, who spoke movingly about the tragic loss of their daughter as a result of carbon monoxide and highlighted their campaign, which has been so successful in New York. They have brought their ideas to Scotland and I believe that today they are taking them to the National Assembly for Wales. For most home owners, a house is a home rather than an asset. That said, it is usually their most important asset. Planned maintenance is the best way to avoid major repairs, and owners must be able to find reputable traders. That is why the nail the rogues campaign is to be thoroughly commended. There are many reputable traders in Scotland and there is support to help people to find them, too. The Scottish Government encourages owners to use traders who are members of trade associations. Services such as the Federation of Master Builders’ find a builder service, the construction licensing executive’s reference service, the buy with confidence scheme that is currently being introduced in South Lanarkshire, which I am sure James Kelly will be aware of, and other local authority trusted trader schemes are to be commended for helping home owners to find reputable traders. James Kelly and Graeme Pearson mentioned the police in that regard as well. Low bids might tempt some home owners to use rogue traders, but the lesson from tonight’s debate is that they should be warned that an offer that sounds too good to be true probably is. Again, advice is available from local authority private sector housing teams and trading standards officers. Along with the Federation of Master Builders, the Scottish Government has called on the UK Government to reduce the rate of VAT from 20 to 5 per cent on home repair and maintenance works. We believe that that would not only stimulate the economy by providing an incentive for home owners to carry out essential repair works, but be a useful tool in tackling the prevalence of rogue traders by helping to make reputable firms more competitive in the repair and maintenance sector. Many members have spoken about the importance of that. The Scottish Government is prioritising support for small businesses. Many in the construction sector form that cohort of important businesses and are benefiting from the support that the Scottish Government is giving. In addition to continuing with the small business bonus scheme, we are taking forward a range of policies to help small and medium-sized enterprises to grow and, through Skills Development Scotland, make it easier for SMEs to hire staff and take on apprentices—Graeme Pearson made the point that one of the benefits of having good traders is that they bring with them apprenticeship opportunities and contribute to the wider economy in that way. We should not lose sight of that. The role of trading standards in local authorities is crucial in helping to protect citizens and ensuring a fair market in which business can flourish. I thank trading standards officers for their important contribution to combating rogue traders in a range of sectors. Fiona McLeod mentioned specifically the East Dunbartonshire trading standards officers and their innovative approach to highlighting their work. As Bob Doris mentioned, we should recognise that consumer matters and trading standards are reserved and that the UK Government is planning to change the delivery landscape. I particularly welcome Dave Thompson’s points about the challenges facing trading standards, which have arisen as a result of the UK’s work in this area. He is particularly well placed to offer an expert perspective on the matter. I welcome his views on what we might do to make trading standards services much more effective if the relevant powers were devolved to this Parliament. The UK Government has published plans to restructure the consumer landscape, and the Scottish Government is keen to negotiate a transfer of powers and funding—the two are inextricably linked. For now, however, we await a response from the UK Government. If that is positive, we will work with all stakeholders and examine all the options to devise an efficient and effective structural model that delivers for Scotland’s consumers and for Scotland as a whole. In terms of devolved powers, we should acknowledge how the Scottish building standards system protects the public interest. Home maintenance can include repairs but can also entail significant alterations and building work. A home owner must ensure that work that is done to their house meets building regulations and that, when required, a building warrant is granted. Competent people, such as approved certifiers of design or construction, provide the owner with assurance that work is done properly. Cutting the cost of doing work might cause structural defects and increase the risk of fire and electric shocks. It can also lead to poor air quality, creating an unhealthy living environment. The Scottish building standards system sets minimum standards for building work and local authority verifiers check that building designs are compliant and are inspected during construction and on completion. However, the home owner must still ensure that the work is being properly done. With regard to the protection of the most vulnerable members of our community, particularly the elderly, Bob Doris, James Kelly and Ruth Davidson mentioned the need to get references and mentioned that the most vulnerable suffer at the hands of hard-nosed salespeople as well as the rogue traders whom we have been discussing. The Government is keen to do all that it can to support legitimate businesses in the construction sector. That is why ministers continue to engage with this core sector of the economy. I recently heard from local businesses in Inverness when I attended the north of Scotland construction summit and, last week, I met the Chartered Institute of Building to discuss a broad range of issues, many of which have been mirrored in the debate. In these challenging economic times, the ideal would be for legitimate businesses to secure these contracts and prosper, because that is what is good for the economy as a whole and such businesses will provide families and householders with the quality building services that they need. The debate will continue to raise awareness of the dangers of using rogue traders and of the efforts being undertaken to drive those people out of business. I again congratulate James Kelly on securing the debate and thank members for all the other very positive contributions that have been made. I am pleased that consensus has broken out across the chamber at the end of the parliamentary week. Meeting closed at 17:50.

At national level, since 2007 the Scottish Government has worked constructively with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Association of Scottish Community Councils to raise the profile and capacity of community councils. At local level, local authorities are responsible for supporting community councils practically and financially and for determining how best to do so. The ASCC has recently announced its intention to cease its work and, while we are disappointed by its decision, we respect it. The Scottish Government continues to engage with the ASCC, while recognising the importance of providing future support to community councils. I am talking directly to community councils and others involved in supporting the sector about how best to do that.

I appreciate Lewis Macdonald’s interest in community councils. I met the Association of Scottish Community Councils a couple of weeks ago, when I made it clear that although I respect its decision to cease its work, we will continue to work constructively on how to develop community councils. I am willing to meet Lewis Macdonald to give him the opportunity to highlight any constituency interest that he has. The association was offered funding that was comparable to that in previous years, but it demanded an increase of more than 100 per cent on its past funding. We have provided funding and have supported the association to develop community councils. I will continue to engage regularly with community councils and other stakeholders.

I absolutely share the concern that Mark McDonald raises, as do community councils, which understand that they have a role to play in attracting new younger members and members from different communities, in the engagement process. Community councils have an important statutory role in our country’s governance and they share the desire for community councils to be much more representative. I am happy to meet Mark McDonald to discuss any proposals or interest from community councils in his area about how we can develop that.

Every wind farm application is subject to a thorough and comprehensive consultation in order that all relevant considerations can be assessed and weighed up before a decision is made. It is important that we balance our renewables ambitions and the associated economic benefits against local impacts. Such decisions are important, and public engagement is a key part of the robust and transparent planning process, which must take into account impacts, including cumulative impacts, on the landscape, natural and cultural heritage, communities, defence, aviation and roads.

Public consultation is a key part of the planning process. Although there is an estimated additional cost to consumers’ bills, relatively speaking it is not as much as the price hikes in energy bills from other companies. We understand that no one wants to see consumers’ bills being added to, but we want to incentivise renewable energy and ensure that we can take forward our renewables obligations.

Government research has shown that by allowing sensitively sited wind farms to go ahead, the interests of tourism and sustainable energy production can remain compatible. Indeed, John Lennon, the chair of the travel and tourism department at Glasgow Caledonian University said: “There is no doubt that wind turbines do intrude on the landscape, as they are not natural structures. However, research we have carried out, in locations like Stirling Castle, where a windfarm can clearly be seen, is that tourists are largely indifferent towards them. They are more worried about the impact of nuclear or coal-fired power stations”. I am sure that that argument can be translated quite effectively to the constituency that Rob Gibson represents, and represents well.

As set out in the Scottish planning policy, planning authorities should set out in the development plan a spatial framework for onshore wind farms over 20MW, and that framework should identify areas of protection and constraints. Of course, additional planning advice is available online to help planning authorities to reach a balance.

Ministers always assess every planning application on its merits, taking into account the views of consultees, interested parties and, of course, the public.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member not recognise the role of local authorities in that case? That decision was rightly up to South Lanarkshire Council and it made its decision.

It is part of the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006 that local decisions would be made locally.

Will the member take an intervention?

For clarification, the upper limit is 300,000 tonnes.

Will the member give way?

I just point out to the member that the Scottish planning policy and zero waste plan provide a framework for waste treatment and that planning advice is forthcoming that will be peer reviewed and go out to consultation later this year.

I thank Jackie Baillie for raising such an interesting yet critical issue during this period of imposed austerity for Scottish public expenditure. Although I note the sentiments in the motion that was lodged for debate by the Labour Party, I have suggested an amendment to it. I hope that the amendment will be accepted: it attempts to reflect the broad consensus on the need to improve care for all vulnerable people and to provide a system that works in all cases. I also note Mary Scanlon’s amendment and fully understand the sentiment behind it, but I do not feel able to support it at this time. This debate is complex enough without adding in charging for residential care, which requires much more thought and further debate. To answer Jackie Baillie’s point, I am leading in this debate as I am not only the planning minister but the local government minister. She cited local government a number of times, so it is entirely appropriate that I should answer. That illustrates this Government’s commitment to working across sectors—in particular, across health and social care.

I think that we are sending a clear signal that this Government has a joined-up approach, and we are reflecting the importance of local government in the debate. Let me be clear from the outset that, despite the overall £1.3 billion funding cuts imposed by the United Kingdom Government, the total funding package of £11.5 billion has maintained local government’s share of the overall Scottish budget in 2011-12. I also want to make it clear that, despite the tightening of funding, this Government will do what it can to ensure that every vulnerable person receives the highest level of social care, and that the appropriate structures and regulations are in place to ensure that they receive that care. We are working with the public and key partners to develop a compelling vision for the care of older people in Scotland now and into the future—a vision of fully integrated care, and a vision that sees our increasing older population living longer, healthier lives, and staying for as long as possible in their homes or in the community. Over the summer, I have been lucky enough to visit a number of inspiring projects across the country, which serve to illustrate how people’s lives can be changed for the better when public services do what they can to work in partnership and take innovative approaches to the delivery of health and social care. In South Lanarkshire, I learned about a very important project between the council and NHS Lanarkshire, which was focused on reducing falls and their associated hospital admissions. The project’s early success has led to it being rolled out widely around all council care homes and to it being looked at furth of South Lanarkshire. In Highland, I visited Nairn hospital, which is a multi-use facility that has been jointly commissioned by the council and NHS Highland. Those projects underlined to me how much more we can achieve when we work together, but they also underlined to me that people who use such services care about the service and its quality, not about who delivers it. What is important is the person, not the way in which we structure our organisations. We need to provide better services, with better outcomes, for more people, using resources that will be under pressure for some time to come. Audit Scotland’s review of community health partnerships made it clear that a voluntary approach towards the integration of health and social care has not delivered fast or far enough. We therefore need to drive up efficiency and productivity, and we need to accelerate the integration of health and social care delivery, which will help to ensure the sustainability of high-quality care. We are ensuring that we speak to people—key stakeholders—about how we do that. We want to build on the systems that are already working well and not get diverted into reforming structures for the sake of change.

We are taking forward that joint approach. The cabinet secretary will provide further detail later. As I said, we have been speaking to key people, but we must accelerate progress on shifting the balance from acute hospital settings to the community and get better at early intervention. I think that that goal is shared across the chamber. We have established a £70 million change fund as bridging finance to help make those shifts. That has driven the integrated approach and I am sure that it is of interest to Richard Simpson. The need for change is urgent and non-negotiable, so we are examining a range of options for how health and social care services can be reconfigured and integrated so that they can meet many more people’s needs. We are working with partners to reshape radically the provision of care for older people. That will prioritise delivery of the care, compassion, support and dignity that they need and deserve. That reshaping cannot be driven by short-term needs to reduce expenditure and there must be a strategic approach to joint commissioning. Johann Lamont (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab) rose— To that end, we are developing proposals to help partnerships develop joint commissioning strategies; we asked them to work on those strategies together with third sector and independent sector organisations as part of the change fund guidance for 2012-13. The reshaping also requires us to enhance the role that people can play themselves, with support, to play a fuller part in their own care. We see the importance of giving people as much flexibility as possible in how they manage their care arrangements.

The member makes a very good point: the cuts that have been imposed on the Parliament were started by Labour and have been continued by the coalition. What is driving forward the change is the need to ensure that we work in partnership together to ensure that the person is the focus of the changes and that we work innovatively together. Some people have packages of care that are funded by the local authority and the health service, and we need to ensure that they have the opportunity to shape their care package in a way that meets their needs. Self-directed support will require far greater emphasis on commissioning strategies that focus on outcomes for individuals. Block contracts may have provided some security for providers in the past, but such contracts and the constraints on monitoring them have not necessarily empowered citizens. We are supporting providers to adapt to the change in culture and approach. This year, we are allocating £1 million to help providers to build their capacity to deliver self-directed support. The future shape of the way in which we provide care in the community raises very timely and legitimate questions about who should provide that care. The Scottish Government procurement directorate and the joint improvement team developed social care procurement guidance, which was published in September 2010, following consultation with a wide group of internal and external stakeholders. It emphasises that decisions on procurement should rarely be taken on price alone and that there should be greater emphasis on the quality of services provided.

I am in my last minute, and I have taken three interventions already. It is important that public bodies and service providers work together to find innovative ways to provide services to make the best use of available funds and maintain quality services. I have attempted to outline how this Government will respond to that question. Care for people is, rightly, an issue that is high on the public and political agenda. I intend to ensure that we treat our people with respect, compassion and dignity and provide them with the care that they deserve. However, we must go further in joining up service delivery if we intend to do that. I move amendment S4M-00854.2, to leave out from first “notes” to end and insert: “notes that, despite cuts to the Scottish Budget by the UK Government and the previous Labour administration, local government funding in Scotland has been significantly protected compared to local government funding in England; welcomes the commitment of the Scottish Government to continue to improve care for older people by maintaining free personal care and improving the integration of health and social care to help ensure long-term sustainability of high quality care; believes that local authorities should have due regard to the Scottish Government’s guidance on the procurement of care and support services, which was co-produced by a reference group involving all key stakeholders’ interests and which sets out guiding principles for use by local authorities as a framework for evaluating local practice; further believes that, in accordance with the guidance, local authorities should promote the achievement of positive outcomes for service users and carers through the delivery of good quality, flexible and responsive services and ensure that continuity of care and the importance of a skilled and competent workforce are fully taken into account, and further notes COSLA’s intention to tackle variation on charging via its fundamental review of the cost of care.”

Will Mary Fee take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

In Perth and Kinross, in Murdo Fraser’s region, the change fund has helped to enhance service delivery and provision. That has involved local government working with the third sector.

Operational air safety is of paramount importance when considering the impacts of any wind farm development. The Scottish Government formed the south-west Scotland aviation solution group in March 2009, which brings together all the relevant stakeholders and led to the publication of the Scottish Government’s feasibility report. The report described the potential for finding solutions to radar issues and is the foundation on which much of the progress made to date has been built. The Scottish Government is also a member of the aviation management board, which brings stakeholders together at United Kingdom level, including to support the development of new technological solutions.

I thank the member for his reply; I understand that he has a real interest in wind farms and the planning issues that surround them. There are lots of different solutions in place or on the horizon. For example, Prestwick airport and a consortium of developers have agreed heads of terms for financing a new radar facility at Prestwick, which led to the consent for Blackcraig Hill wind farm being granted in March this year. NATS is working with other developers to find solutions, and it is not a standstill situation as alternative solutions continue to emerge. On the funding of radar solutions, the Scottish Government expects developers to fund any radar mitigation schemes. If the member wants to meet me to discuss any of the issues, I am happy to do that.

Planning modernisation has introduced enhanced opportunities for people to get involved at earlier stages in the planning process, and recent online planning advice for onshore wind has reaffirmed that role. Shortly, the Scottish Government will publish a renewables route map, setting out how it will meet challenging new targets. The route map will set out our ambitions for locally sourced energy and will include consideration of public engagement. In addition, we will consider the responses to the Government’s consultation “Securing the Benefits of Scotland’s Next Energy Revolution”. As was stated in a written answer to Mary Scanlon last week, we are “proactively seeking to further improve the consenting system and promote best practice, in particular by instigating and leading the European GP Wind Project. This EU-funded project identifies good practice in reconciling objectives on renewable energy with wider environmental objectives and in the active involvement of communities in planning and implementation.”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 16 June 2011; S4O-00051.]

Our planning guidelines on wind farms are set out clearly in Scottish Planning Policy, which is supplemented by online planning advice. The online planning advice, which was launched only in February this year, includes advice on how to prepare spatial frameworks for large-scale onshore wind farms and advice on onshore wind, which deals with detailed siting matters for turbines. It suggests that securing support from local communities ought to be an area of focus for planning authorities. If Adam Ingram has ideas on how that advice could be supplemented, he should feel free to write to me and my office.

As I said in reply to Adam Ingram, the online advice can be supplemented. If Dave Thompson wishes to discuss those points with me, he should feel free to write to me and I will look at the issues that he has raised.

“Scottish Planning Policy”, which was published in February 2010, recognises that effective engagement with the public can lead to better plans and decisions and more satisfactory outcomes, and can help to avoid delays in the planning process.

As the member will be aware, the proposal that he mentioned is currently before ministers on appeal against the council’s decision. It would therefore be inappropriate for me to comment on the particulars of the case. I agree with Gordon MacDonald that communities should be involved in the planning process. Community engagement is reflected in all aspects of the planning system.

Scotland’s national planning policy and spatial strategy for onshore wind energy are set out in national planning framework 2 and Scottish planning policy. That is supported by online renewables planning advice, which was launched in February this year and which includes specific advice for preparing spatial frameworks for large-scale onshore wind farms in development plans and for considering detailed siting matters in determining planning applications for wind turbines.

I thank Alex Fergusson for welcoming me to my post. I am aware that Dumfries and Galloway Council is consulting on the draft interim planning policy for wind energy development, and I understand that that consultation will run until 22 July. I propose that, if Mr Fergusson has concerns, he should fully engage in that consultation process. Local authorities are, of course, the main planning authorities and their decisions should be respected. However, I would not want to comment on any planning applications that may come before me as minister, in case I prejudice the case.

Cumulative impact is considered, and Scottish planning policy provides specific planning direction on the siting of wind farms. Local authorities should support the development of wind farms in locations where the technology can operate efficiently and cumulative impacts can be addressed satisfactorily. However, I take on board Adam Ingram’s points, and will consider them fully.

The Scottish Government’s policy on green belts is set out in the Scottish planning policy that was published in February 2010. There are currently no plans to revise it.

I am aware of the proposals by Murray Estates for development to the west of Edinburgh. They have been submitted to the strategic planning authority for Edinburgh and south-east Scotland, and they will be considered through the development plan process. SESplan’s proposed plan will be published for consultation towards the end of this year. If Mr MacDonald’s constituents are concerned about the situation, they should raise their concerns during the consultation period. Green belt policy is set out in the Scottish planning policy, and green belt designation is a strategic planning tool. As Gordon MacDonald has stated, green belts enhance the quality, character and landscape of our towns and cities and give access to open space.

The Scottish Government has indicated to local authorities that, under revenue-funded projects, their total funding contribution towards the design and construction of schools will be no more than it would have been under capital-funded projects. Therefore, there will be no additional costs for authorities in moving from capital grant to revenue funding for the school building programme.

Local authorities have been provided with the outline detail of the funding model by the Scottish Government and the Scottish Futures Trust. Local authorities will be in a no better, no worse situation compared with the position of schools that were funded by capital grants. Regardless of how a building is funded, maintenance still needs to be covered. That is good practice for ensuring that substantial investment is not wasted. As for a comparison with the private finance initiative, I remind Ken Macintosh that, under the present model, authorities will not pay the sort of credit card repayment rates that applied to local authorities under PFI.

There is no precise definition of mass waste incinerator. The zero waste plan policy is to recycle 70 per cent of waste by 2025. Forthcoming regulations to restrict inputs to energy-from-waste plants will make the mass incineration of unsorted or untreated waste less of an option in future. The development plan, national planning, waste and energy policy and the views of consultees and local communities would be among the factors to be taken into account when considering applications.

The Scottish Government and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency have a general presumption against large-scale, inefficient energy-from-waste facilities. It is not possible to comment on the proposal at Newton Mearns, which will come before Scottish ministers for determination, but I will look at the document that Jackson Carlaw referred to in his question.

In practice, the decision-making function in relation to appeals is delegated to reporters acting under delegated powers. That is the situation under the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997.

As I said in my reply to Jackson Carlaw, I confirm that, on incineration, the Scottish Government and SEPA have a general presumption against large-scale, inefficient energy-from-waste facilities. SEPA defines large scale as being more than 300,000 tonnes annual capacity.

There are no current plans to review planning regulations regarding waste incinerators. Modernisation of the planning system includes Scottish planning policy and the Scottish Government’s zero waste plan, which provide a waste and planning policy framework that includes restrictions on inputs to energy-from-waste facilities.

The Government is committed to recycling, reusing and preventing waste. The production of energy from waste is part of that. As the member knows, each planning case is considered on its merits and at a local level. The appeal decision on the Carnbroe application is final, subject to the right of any party to appeal to the Court of Session within six weeks of the date of notice, therefore it would not be appropriate for me to comment on the merits of that development at this stage. As the member knows, I made representations relating to Dovesdale in my previous role as an MSP for the South of Scotland. However, in my new position as the Minister for Local Government and Planning, it would not be wise for me to comment further on that issue.

National guidance already exists in the shape of the national planning framework, Scottish planning policy and the zero waste plan, and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency provides a level of scrutiny and regulatory functions. There is a commitment to provide further planning guidance on waste management, but there are no plans at present to develop further policy guidance.

In relation to Carnbroe, as I have already said to Mr McMahon, the decision is subject to the right of any party to appeal to the Court of Session, and unfortunately I cannot comment on the merits of the development at this stage.

To ask the Scottish Government what support it is providing to dairy farmers. (S3O-11924)

Does the cabinet secretary share my concern that, even though Scotland's dairy industry is among the most efficient in the European Union, dairy farmers still receive poor financial returns? The exodus from the industry continues. Will he outline how the Government will work with all interested parties to reverse that trend and ensure that Scotland's dairy farmers receive a fair price for their milk? Does he share my belief in Scotland's potential not only to benefit from its high-quality primary produce but to  transform the sector by developing excellent-quality processed and high-end products?

I congratulate my former colleagues on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee for the work that they have undertaken thus far on the bill. I apologise in advance for needing to nip out to a prior meeting after making my speech. The Parliament referred the bill to the committee not long before I moved to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, which meant that, unfortunately, I was unable to take part in any of the deliberations on the bill as introduced. Certainly, taking best care of Scotland's diverse and hugely important historical environment was never far from the committee's cultural considerations. I welcome the opportunity the chamber has today to move the bill forward. It is literally a year and a day since the Scottish Government hosted Scotland's first ever summit for the historic and built environment. I am sure that the summit helped to inform some of the process that has resulted in the bill that is before us today. We know that the roots of the bill can be found in the discussion paper that the Historic Environment Advisory Council for Scotland produced on the need for a review of existing legislation, which arose from wider discussion on the three main acts that the Government is seeking to build on with the bill. We might call that process the bill's legislative heritage. By taking steps to harmonise some of the processes that are involved in protecting scheduled monuments and listed buildings, the bill will help to simplify the bureaucracy for developers, planning authorities and, perhaps most important, the voluntary preservation and historical societies that have an interest in protecting their local heritage. Many voluntary groups in the South of Scotland and, no doubt, across the whole of the country—we have heard about some of them today—want to take more action to preserve and protect much-loved local buildings. However, they often find that they lack the capacity or resources to do so, particularly when they are up against corporate developers or a determined local authority. I have spoken in the chamber previously about the High mill in Clydesdale. It is a B-listed structure, which Historic Scotland defines as being "of regional or more than local importance, or a major example of some particular period, style or building type which may have been altered." In its listing of the building, Historic Scotland states that it was built in 1797 and remains the most complete surviving windmill in Scotland. Sadly, it also remains at risk of collapse, despite a  concerted campaign by the Clydesdale mills society. In recent months, South Lanarkshire Council has undertaken a desk exercise to review options for the mill. The council continues to encounter difficulties in enforcing a compulsory works notice. I am sure that the Clydesdale mills society and others will be interested to learn more about the powers in the bill to allow the Scottish Government to offer further grants for work to be undertaken on an ancient monument even when the owner has not requested such action. The increased scope for awarding grants to a wider range of initiatives that promote understanding of our historic, cultural, architectural, artistic or archaeological heritage is very welcome. The bill contains provisions to strengthen statutory protection and lower the bar for criminal responsibility in terms of the offence of disturbing a scheduled monument. Historic Scotland lists more than 8,000 scheduled monuments in its register, ranging from mottes and baileys, such as those found on Carnwath golf course and north of Abington, to industrial sites, such as New Lanark and the Wilsontown ironworks. Many of those locations are remote or isolated, and it is difficult to supervise them continually. It is therefore welcome that the bill will make it easier to prosecute anyone who mistreats such sites. Historic Scotland also holds scheduled properties in care for the Scottish ministers—for example, the Whithorn priory and museum, St Ninian's chapel and St Ninian's cave, all of which are in the South of Scotland region. I am sure that interest in the two St Ninian sites will have increased following the recent visit to Scotland of Pope Benedict and the celebration of St Ninian's day on 16 September. Protecting our historic sites effectively means that, when new opportunities arise to appreciate them or to view their significance from a different perspective, we can do so with confidence. As other members have said, doing so also promotes tourism. The bill will clarify and extend the grounds on which an area can be designated to include "any site that comprises any thing, or group of things, that evidence previous human activity". That means that areas where there may not have been any clearly defined structure can still be protected, such as a site where scattered flint tools have been found. Members may recall that one such site that may benefit from the provisions of the bill is outside of Elsrickle, near Biggar, where the Biggar archaeology group discovered the remains of the oldest human settlement ever discovered in Scotland, which the group excavated with the co-operation of the landowner. The discovery, which was made during the year of  homecoming, was a tremendous achievement for the organisation, which is a voluntary group. Members may recall the recent display of the group's work that I sponsored in the Parliament. I was interested to hear Karen Whitefield's comments about concerns that have been raised about that aspect of the bill. Although as a history graduate I am interested in finding out about our past and celebrating our history, I recognise that there are sometimes conflicts when we do so. For example, the archaeological and historical studies at the site of Crawfordjohn primary school have resulted in a delay in information getting to the parents about the future of the school, as the children have been decanted to another local school with no timescale given for the completion of the studies. That uncertainty is worrying for parents, and I hope that a decision on that can be sped up. However, improving opportunities for designation may also help groups such as Lanark community council, which is currently urgently seeking protection for the old Lanark grammar school building on Albany Drive in the town. Many local residents would wish that historic building to be retained—perhaps adapted for modern use, such as flats, but keeping the building's façade, which many know and love. Sadly, it appears that South Lanarkshire Council is minded to allow the building to be demolished, and the community council is urgently seeking advice from Historic Scotland on what options for designation may exist. I have written to Historic Scotland to add my support to those efforts. The bill will clarify and strengthen the protection of Scotland's historic environment. One of the successes of devolution in the past 11 years has been the opportunity to explore policy areas such as our heritage, refine them, allow far greater democratic scrutiny of them, put them at the forefront of our thoughts and rectify past decisions that relegated our history and culture to an afterthought. I wish the committee all the best for the progression of the bill.

Is the cabinet secretary aware that in my region, the South of Scotland, many residents suffer from poor internet connections? Although it is welcome that the area that Treasury chief Danny Alexander represents will now benefit from superfast broadband, David Mundell and Michael Moore at the Scotland Office have not been quite so successful in gaining improvements for the South of Scotland. Will the minister outline how the Scottish Government will help rural communities in the south that are not part of the project to gain better internet connections?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I add my warm wishes to John Swinney and his family. He should feel free to pass any baby tips my way. If members have a sense of déjà vu this morning, they can be forgiven, because we have already debated a Lib Dem proposal for transitional relief on non-domestic rates three times this year, and the Parliament has already voted against the Lib Dem proposals three times, for good reasons. At the risk of extending that feeling of déjà vu, I repeat what I said during the second of those debates, in April: "The first and most important thing that any of us can do to support small businesses during this recession is to be honest with them."— [ Official Report , 15 April 2010; c 23512.]  That honesty goes to the heart of the Scottish Government's relationship with small businesses in Scotland, and that is why it has been so productive and beneficial for both sides. The Scottish Government recognises the absolute importance of small and medium-sized enterprises to Scotland's economy, and that is why supporting them has been a priority since day one.

The actions that the Government has taken with the small business bonus has certainly been beneficial to my constituents. I have evidence to prove it. The small business bonus scheme has had a transformative effect on the sector since its  introduction. There is no question but that the support from the Scottish Government has helped more of our small businesses to get through the economic downturn than would otherwise have been the case. I have spoken in the chamber before about the survey that I conducted in 2008 of small businesses in the South of Scotland region to assess whether they were likely to benefit from the small business bonus scheme. Mike Rumbles might be interested in that. More than 90 per cent of respondents intended to apply for support and many of them took the time to comment on how welcome the scheme was.

The small business bonus scheme and other initiatives, such as the reduction in the poundage rate and rural business relief, combine to form the most generous package of support that is available to small businesses anywhere in the UK. It amounts to some £2.4 billion over a five-year period. However, clearly that is not evident in the approach of the Liberal Democrats, who continue to attempt to whip up unnecessary fear and confusion among small businesses in Scotland. They appear not to have learned from our previous debates on the issue. The fact is that the majority of businesses—nearly 60 per cent—have seen their rates fall or remain the same following revaluation. Transitional relief schemes are not free. The cost must be met from somewhere, and in the scheme that the Lib Dems propose, the businesses that would gain the most from the revaluation would be forced to give up those gains to offset the rises elsewhere. In effect, the Lib Dems' scheme would lead to small and medium-sized businesses throughout Scotland subsidising public sector rate payers and larger businesses. Alternatively, the costs could be met from the Scottish Government's budget, but they could be some £195 million this year alone. I do not see any mention in the Liberal Democrats' motion of how they would fund their proposal. Do they want the smallest businesses, which have benefited from the revaluation, to lose out, or do they propose further cuts to public spending from elsewhere in the devolved budget? Support for business does not simply have to come in the shape of rates relief, and the Scottish Government has taken many other practical steps since 2007 to provide assistance to our small business sector. Jim Mather also visited Biggar, in my region, and hosted an interactive session with representatives from small business communities in the South of Scotland region. Many of the participants spoke afterwards of how encouraged and enthused they felt, not least by the minister's  self-evident commitment to helping them to work together to grow the local economy. I have continued to keep in touch with those businesses and to help them in various ways, whether by ensuring that they have the right contacts at the local business gateway or by trying to solve seemingly small but important issues such as ensuring that loading bays are properly enforced so that deliveries can arrive on time. There is no doubt that the economic downturn has made things difficult for small businesses, and the savage cuts to public expenditure will not help matters. If we want Scotland and its small businesses to flourish, we need far greater powers for the Parliament and the ability to manage the economy. The Scottish Government is, has been and always will be right behind our small businesses. The vast majority of Scotland's small businesses know that. They will see through the Lib Dems' bluster and scaremongering and they will continue to benefit from the Scottish Government's policies.

To ask the Scottish Government what requirements local authorities must meet when consulting on proposed school mergers. (S3O-11618)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of plans by South Lanarkshire Council to close and merge a number of rural primary schools in the South of Scotland? Will he confirm that the council is obliged to follow the robust procedures that are set out in the 2010 act, which the Scottish Parliament passed? Is the cabinet secretary also aware that the council is proposing significant changes to the school day in some secondary schools? What consultations and procedures are councils required to carry out and adhere to on such proposals?

I, too, am pleased to participate in the committee debate. It is perhaps not the most meaty debate on the Calman commission, given that it is about the procedures and technicalities for operating recommendations but, as other members have noted, it is important. It was important that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee had the chance to scrutinise the commission's recommendations. That said, it is clear from the committee's report that the time that the committee was given to scrutinise the proposals was curtailed. I say with a brief nod to Macmillan's "Events, dear boy, events" that the election of the new coalition Government in May, complete with a renewed effort to implement the Calman commission's proposals, meant that the committee had to truncate its original timescale for consideration and reflection before producing the report that we are discussing. That was unfortunate, because it means that the committee's recommendations might not be as full as many of us had hoped. It also means that much work will still have to be done when the proposed bill is introduced this autumn.  The task has been a challenge. I put on record my thanks to the clerks and the committee support team, who have done a wonderful job in pulling together our thoughts, which were often varied and contradictory. They have taken on board our worries and concerns and produced a useful document that will help with implementing the Calman commission's processes and procedures. It is fair to say that the thoughts on Calman were wide and varied. It will come as no surprise to my non-SNP colleagues on the committee that we in the SNP want the full restoration of powers to the Parliament and that we want Scotland to be independent. That is not what other parties want to happen. Despite the deep ideological differences that we all have, the process of working together on the committee, having the chance to air our thoughts together and seeking consensus was not too painful—in fact, it was even enjoyable sometimes. The committee had to set strict parameters for itself and not stray into the Calman commission's more controversial policy proposals. As other members have said, the committee considered relations between parliamentary committees, relations between the Parliament and MEPs, legislative consent motions, intergovernmental and interparliamentary relations, a procedural review of the Scotland Act 1998 and members' interests. Fiscal powers, firearms, airguns and borrowing powers were not discussed—if those items had been included, the debate would have been much less congenial. The tenor of the committee's response is about how greater understanding and co-operation can be better facilitated and better approached. After personal reflection, I think that Calman's report perhaps sees some problems where none exists and does not give due recognition to good practice that goes on between Parliaments, parliamentarians and Governments. For example, Calman's recommendation 4.10 was: "Either the Scottish Parliament or either House of the UK Parliament should be able, when it has considered an issue where its responsibilities interact with the other Parliament's, to pass a motion seeking a response from the UK or Scottish Government", because the commission considered that a formal mechanism should be available for occasions when the Scottish Parliament wished to convey views to the UK Government, or the UK Parliament wished to convey views to the Scottish Government. The commission's report said: "We would not envisage this mechanism being subject to frequent use, and an appropriate threshold to activate it would need to be developed."  Our committee and the Scottish Government did not support that recommendation, as is right. No Government should have to justify itself to a Parliament to which it is not accountable. I do not believe that that happens in any other jurisdiction. The proposal fails to note the ways and means for obtaining input from other Parliaments without putting in place formal structures. It also fails to note that a simple letter from an MSP is one way to convey an opinion to the UK Parliament or UK Government and that such letters are sent and have been sent since Scotland's Parliament was reconvened. Another recommendation in that vein is recommendation 4.8, which suggested that "the Secretary of State for Scotland ... should be invited to appear before the Scottish Parliament to discuss the legislative programme". Again, our committee felt that a formal procedure was not necessary and, likewise, the Government felt that a formal process such as that would blur boundaries and had the potential to cause confusion. Recommendation 4.8 seems to stem from a lack of awareness of current good practice. As in many other walks of life, the positive attributes are overlooked and the negatives concentrated on. That said, if things can be improved I am sure that no one will want to do anything other than welcome proposals and engage meaningfully in discussion, debate and co-operation, if that is in the interests of the people who we were all elected to serve. I hope that there will be no unintended consequences of trying to foster, almost artificially, greater dialogue than that which exists already and goes on quietly for the greater good. The debate on Scotland's constitutional future is a healthy one to have and I hope that many people will participate in it. If the Scottish Parliament is to get more powers, we will undoubtedly have to examine the ways in which it can cope with those powers. We will need to ensure that the Parliament continues to function efficiently. I make no apology for stating that my preferred option is for all powers to be returned to our Parliament. Given the frank and adult discussion of the issues that we are having, I hope that that position is at least respected and listened to, just as I respect others and their opinions. We do not need to agree, but we should be able, in our democracy, to ensure that all voices and opinions are heard. Falling short of outright independence, MSPs on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee have a duty to ensure that we flag up any concerns and potential pitfalls that may arise when changes are made to our Parliament. It is therefore a little disappointing that the committee's time in looking at the proposals  was shortened and that fuller and franker debate and discussion was not allowed to flourish. I record my thanks to the clerks, convener and deputy convener for their work in producing the report. I look forward to observing how the journey of the Scottish Parliament continues. [ Interruption .] Whoops—I have put out a light.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it has had discussions with the banking sector regarding the provision of services in rural areas. (S3O-11444)

Will the minister join me in welcoming the expansion plans announced by Airdrie Savings Bank, Scotland's last independently owned bank, which has announced its intention to open one or two new branches in the next 18 months? Does he share my concern that that stands in stark contrast to the plans by the publicly owned Royal Bank of Scotland to reduce significantly the opening hours of its rural branch in Abington, South Lanarkshire, despite making great play of its commitment to customer service, and with what appears to be very little consultation?

I thank all members who have stayed behind for the debate and who supported the motion. I know that it has been a long day for everyone. Presiding Officer, "the sins and traumas of fathers and mothers should not be visited on their children." Those are not my words, but the words of Justice Albie Sachs, the anti-apartheid campaigner and member of the Constitutional Court of South Africa. They will be familiar to the chamber, because I also quoted them during the stage 1 debate on the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, stage 3 of which we have just completed. The words form part of the landmark ruling in S v M in 2007, in which the Constitutional Court of South Africa set out the importance of taking into account the effect of any sentence that is passed on an offender on any children of that offender. In the S v M case, the court decided to pass a non-custodial sentence on the offender, a woman convicted of fraud, because of the negative effect that a custodial sentence would have had on her four children. The report that is the subject of my motion, "Perspectives of Children and Young People with a Parent in Prison", lays out in detail the experience and effects of parental imprisonment on a child. Scotland's present Commissioner for  Children and Young People commissioned the report to provide further evidence and understanding of issues that were first raised in a report by the previous commissioner in 2008. That report, "Not seen. Not heard. Not guilty. The rights and status of the children of prisoners in Scotland", argued that "the children of prisoners are the invisible victims of crime and of our penal system". The report estimated that, at that time, 13,500 children were affected every year by the imprisonment of a parent. The figure has since been revised up to 16,500, some of whom—as my motion notes—live in the South of Scotland region. Together, the two reports present a picture of a situation in which children whose parents are locked up can become trapped in a spiral of instability, leading to stress, trauma and, ultimately, patterns of antisocial behaviour and offending. I make it clear, as I have done on many occasions when raising the issue, that I am not suggesting that offenders who pose a threat to society or who have committed serious offences should not be imprisoned or that having children is some sort of get-out-of-jail-free card. What I am arguing for—as I have since the publication of the 2008 report—is a mechanism that allows judges to take into account the whole circumstances of an offender's situation and to consider what sentences would have the best outcome for society as a whole. A non-custodial sentence that prevents the placing of children in care saves the taxpayer money both in the short term and in the longer term, if it reduces the likelihood of antisocial behaviour and offending by the children. Even the United Kingdom Secretary of State for Justice recognises that. He is quoted in today's edition of The Guardian as saying: "It is virtually impossible to do anything productive with offenders on short sentences. And many of them end up losing their jobs, their homes and their families during their short time inside." The perspectives report from Families Outside and the children's commissioner deals in some detail with the effects of a custodial sentence on a prisoner's family. Drawing on qualitative interviews with 20 individuals—children, young people, carers and one adult who as a child experienced parental imprisonment—the report presents findings and case studies that are both moving and concerning. According to the report, a carer who is a grandmother said that "everything changed in her grandson's life because previously the 'father was everything, now he is not, I am'." Another boy was described as losing all interest in playing computer games and football, which were  pastimes that he had enjoyed with his father before his father was sent to prison. The report's author found that children and carers who are directly affected agree that it is important that the court should take children's views into account. Six of the children who were interviewed "clearly believed that expressing their feelings to the judge would make a difference to the sentence". Members will be aware of the considerable work that is being done to raise awareness of the issue by the children's commissioner and interest groups such as Families Outside, Action for Children, Children in Scotland and Barnardo's. I thank the representatives of those organisations who have provided information, support and their perspectives and suggestions on how to move the issue forward. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice has taken time to meet and correspond with me and those organisations, so he is aware of the issue. Families Outside, in particular, has brought depth to consideration of the issue. Through its direct work with families, the organisation can highlight people's stories, the stresses and strains and the worries and concerns, which does more than simple statistics can do to illustrate the human suffering that children and families throughout Scotland experience. I recently chaired a conference for Families Outside and I do not think that there was a dry eye in the hall when we heard some of those moving stories at first hand. That is why the perspectives report is so important. It details and examines the human impact on innocent victims of crime. It does not have to be like that. The example of S v M in South Africa shows that justice can be served without judicial decisions necessarily having a negative impact on an offender's dependent children. New Zealand does not use the same mechanisms as South Africa uses, but its sentencing guidelines provide that a court "must take into account the offender's personal, family, whanau, community, and cultural background in imposing a sentence or other means of dealing with the offender with a partly or wholly rehabilitative purpose".

I thank Mary Scanlon for her intervention, which was useful and appropriate.  In New Zealand's judicial system there is explicit recognition of the issue, which is given due prominence in legislation. There are other examples of countries in which sentencers are required to take the family situation into account. That is the case in Fiji, and in Australia, as a result of the 1996 case, Walsh v Department of Social Security. Scotland has a long and proud independent legal tradition and I hope that international examples will help to inform our courts and, in due course, the Scottish sentencing council. I look forward to hearing what the minister will say on behalf of the Scottish Government. The current mechanisms do not always work in the way that they were intended to work. Social inquiry reports, which have been used in arguments about caring duties that have been made at the point of sentencing, are not required in most cases and are not always requested by sentencers. Even when they are requested, such reports contain little information about an offender's family. Reports concentrate on issues to do with criminal justice and focus on the needs of the offender. Indeed, a social inquiry report might be prepared while a person is in custody on remand. Families Outside is supporting a family in which four young children were taken into care while their mother served just one month in custody for breach of a community penalty for a driving offence. The sentence of one month was enough to make the children and their mum lose their home, and two years later the family has still not been reunited. That is a drastic but real example of how damaging custodial sentences can be for the wider family. It shows that the issue needs attention and that we need to put aside political differences so that we can figure out how to address it. I welcome the cross-party support for the motion, which I hope indicates a willingness to work together to take the issue forward, to ensure that in future, as the motion says: "the rights of the children of offenders, who are often the innocent and forgotten victims of crime, are respected in the legal system."

As has been said, walking and cycling are the most effective and efficient methods of recreation, exercise and transport. Both activities can fulfil all three of those purposes at the same time—a walk to work is a form of transport, but it is also exercise and can be much more relaxing than ending up stuck in a traffic jam. The committee's report notes early on the evidence from one witness who said: "Active travel ticks almost every policy box that Government would like to see ticked."—[ Official Report , Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee , 1 December 2009; c 2343.] That much is certainly clear from the rest of the report and from the experience of many of us in our daily lives. If we want Scotland to be greener, active travel cuts down carbon emissions. If we want Scotland to be wealthier and fairer, active travel is a social leveller, and fit and healthy workforces are more  economically productive. If Scotland is to be safer and stronger, huge community benefits will come from having more pedestrians and cyclists out and about. We can create a smarter Scotland if people learn more about the environment and the world around them as they travel by bike or on foot. There is no doubt in anyone's mind that more people cycling and walking will help to deliver a healthier Scotland. Consensus exists about the many and varied benefits of active travel, but it is clear from the report that good words and intentions are not enough. Practical action that is backed by leadership and appropriate funding needs to be taken to get more people walking and cycling. It is agreed that the Scottish Government's proposed target of a 10 per cent modal share for cycling in Scotland's transport profile is ambitious but worth aiming for. An ambitious target helps to focus minds and reminds us of the importance of getting this right. It is clear that we need a better culture that translates general awareness that walking is good for people into a habit that allows individuals to make a positive choice for active travel that is not swayed by the vagaries of Scotland's weather, which we have perhaps experienced in the past few days. I welcome the submission from NHS Ayrshire and Arran, which covers a large part of the South of Scotland region. It said: "High levels of walking and cycling can only be achieved when the nation views walking and cycling as the foremost means of local transport playing a central role in everyday travel activity." The wider population are willing to become more active travellers but, as the committee outlines, that needs to be supported properly. The right infrastructure and support could help us to reach a critical mass of individuals who are seen and keen, which makes involvement all the more easy for others. Throughout the South of Scotland, I have worked with constituents who want to become more active travellers but who find barriers in their way. Often, imagination and political will are needed more than hard cash is to overcome those barriers. For example, cyclists who want to travel between Biggar, Symington and Thankerton face a dilemma. They can choose to cycle on the main road, which is heavy with fast-moving traffic, or they can take the designated cycle route, which is longer, narrow, twisty, more remote and often poorly maintained. In effect, they must choose between the worst of both worlds. I was struck by the committee's finding that mothers have an important role to play in encouraging their children to walk or cycle to school. A Thankerton mother raised the cycle route issue with me, just as a mother in Lanark  raised with me South Lanarkshire Council's decision to remove lollipop people, which acts as a disincentive to walk to school. Many children travel between the communities that I mentioned to go to and from school and many end up in cars because neither route for cycling is acceptable to their parents. The committee's report talks of the need to join up policies and to take proper account of active travel in planning statements and decisions. Sorting out such issues throughout the country, for which a more joined-up policy approach can be effective, does not have to take extra funding—just common sense and imagination. Innovative use of existing or third-party resources can make a difference. Just a few weeks ago, the Heritage Lottery Fund gave a first-round pass to a £2 million bid for funding by South Lanarkshire Council and a range of partners for a project to conserve the area of great landscape value designation from Chatelherault to New Lanark, following the Clyde valley national tourist route and the Clyde walkway. I wish that partnership success in securing the funding in the final round. Maintaining and developing areas that might be used for recreational walking can provide an inspiration for people to walk more regularly as part of an active lifestyle. I certainly found that when I joined Biggar ramblers on one of their organised walks a year or so ago and when I walked the west Highland way and Perthshire's cateran trail. Building active travel considerations into policy decisions at an early stage can save on the need for costly investments later or the appearance of barriers that could otherwise have been avoided. The minister might be aware of concerns that new rolling stock on the North Berwick line, which runs through East Lothian in the South of Scotland region, has insufficient space for bikes. That problem is not dissimilar to the one that was discussed previously in relation to buses, and it probably affects train routes other than the North Berwick line. Some people would argue, probably with some legitimacy, that space for bikes on trains has been a problem ever since guard's vans were done away with in Scotland. However, that is not the fault of the current Scottish Government; sadly, nor can it be tackled without full control over all aspects of our railway system. The Cyclists Touring Club Scotland noted in evidence to the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee that the main barrier to cycling has been the lack of finance over many years. The problem is historical. The report recognises that funding must be secure for the long term and targeted at measures that produce results. We live in difficult economic times. Nowhere does the report suggest that growing the  Parliament's fiscal responsibility and powers might help to provide some of the financial flexibility that is needed for investment in issues such as active travel. The report cites international examples such as the Netherlands and Denmark. I remind members that those are both independent countries and, dare I say it, free to prioritise walking over nuclear weapons, or cycling over servicing massive public finance initiative debts. That aside, active travel ticks all the boxes. The committee is right to say that it deserves support and a joined-up approach. I welcome the Scottish Government's commitment to encouraging people in our communities to walk or cycle wherever and whenever they can and I am sure that it will take on board many of the committee's recommendations. The issue is also about giving the Parliament power—we need to go the extra mile by transforming the control that we have over our resources. That is the best way in which to transform travel in this country.

I congratulate Bill Butler on securing the debate. It is a tribute to Robert Owen's legacy that so many members from the parties that are represented in the Parliament support the motion. I have not checked to see how many members have joined the bank on Owen Facebook group, but I assure the campaign organisers that I plan to be one of them. Scotland's historic right to print its own banknotes has always been a source of pride. It serves to remind us of the distinctive banking tradition in Scotland and the principles on which many banks were founded. Perhaps we have lost sight of some of those principles in recent years—members discussed that in more detail yesterday. Prudence and balance gave way to the impulse to make a quick buck, and serving wider society gave way to the quest for never-ending growth. Perhaps it is even more appropriate in the context of the financial crisis that we should find a way to commemorate the life and work of Robert Owen and the role that the co-operatives can and do play in society. Featuring Robert Owen on a Scottish banknote can serve those purposes, and I hope that one or more of Scotland's banks can be persuaded to take up the challenge. Of course, as taxpayers, we already hold an 84 per cent share in the Royal Bank of Scotland and a 40 per cent share in Lloyds Banking Group, so there should be more ways to persuade those banks other than through petitions and parliamentary debates. The United Kingdom Government has been reluctant to get involved in their day-to-day running, but perhaps it could make an exception in this case at least. To mark the year of homecoming last year, the Clydesdale Bank launched a series of banknotes, which included a £20 note that featured an image of New Lanark on its reverse side. Our four other world heritage sites featured on the remaining denominations. Those notes are still in circulation and have attracted a lot of interest from residents in and visitors to Scotland. New Lanark is in the South of Scotland region, which I represent. It contributes much to the economy and culture of the area. Even without world heritage status, it would be a wonderful tourist attraction in its own right. The UNESCO designation has helped to raise its profile; it has also raised its ability to attract support and to develop to preserve, protect and enhance its unique historical features for future generations. I was delighted that, a few weeks ago, the Minister for Culture and External Affairs was able to visit New Lanark and see Robert Owen's legacy at first hand. As Bill Butler mentioned, the Scottish Government's decision to include the site in the  educational travel scheme will allow hundreds, if not thousands, of children to visit the site each year. Giving young people the chance at an early age to learn about the co-operative movement and to see for themselves what co-operative principles meant to earlier generations should inspire them to learn more and help to take forward such principles and practices into the future. Robert Owen was the founding father of the co-operative movement and New Lanark was its trail-blazer, but the legacy continues today, and that has proven to be as rich a heritage as the physical walls and buildings of the village of New Lanark.

I am sure that Jim Mather will, in summing up, comment on how the Government will respond. The campaign to feature Robert Owen on a banknote is not just a campaign for its own sake, of course, but a recognition that 2012 is the UN year of co-operatives. In adopting resolution 64/136, which established the year of co-operatives, the General Assembly of the UN noted that co-operatives impact on poverty reduction, employment generation and social integration. Worldwide, the co-operative sector has around 800 million members in more than 100 countries, and it has been estimated that it accounts for more than 100 million jobs. Given those vast figures, each of us can see the impact that co-operatives continue to play in our own communities. In the South of Scotland, that ranges from the familiar high street stores and banking services to the more ambitious initiatives, such as the development of Owenstown. Like New Lanark 200 years before it, the proposal for the new village in South Lanarkshire is that it will be developed on co-operative principles. It will be a model of a sustainable eco-aware settlement for others to learn from and to imitate. Many members will have seen the recent exhibition in the Parliament that promoted Owenstown, and I wish the Owenstown co-operative society well. Let us hope that there is speedy progress for the bank on Owen campaign so that it can be another lasting tribute to Robert Owen and a real legacy of the 2012 year of co-operatives.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to encourage road safety behaviour among young people. (S3O-10707)

Is the minister aware of the plans by South Lanarkshire Council to reduce the school crossing patrols in Lanark at St Mary's and Lanark primary schools? Does he agree that safe crossings near school are an important part of instilling good road safety practices among children and young people, and that such council decisions should be taken only after full consultation, ensuring that the safety of children is not put at risk?

The minister might be aware of work that I am doing to help to preserve the future of Carluke's high mill, Scotland's best-preserved example of a windmill. However, efforts to save it have been thwarted due to the fact that it is privately owned, and the owner has demonstrated absolutely no desire for the building to be maintained or restored. Does the minister agree that the private owners of buildings with significant historic value have an absolute duty to help to preserve Scotland's history and a responsibility to do all that they can to ensure that that history is not lost forever?

To ask the Scottish Government, in light of the growing up in Scotland reports, what measures are being taken to tackle child poverty. (S3O-10499)

Does the minister share my concern that child poverty—indeed, any form of domestic poverty—is not mentioned in the agreement that the United Kingdom coalition Government published yesterday? Will he and the Scottish Government reaffirm their commitment to ending the scandal of child poverty in Scotland? Does he agree that the best way of doing that is to give the Parliament the full powers of independence?

Will the minister outline in more detail the cultural benefits and connections that have been  established following her recent visit to the USA and how those relationships will be moved forward beyond the trip?

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to encourage people to eat five portions of fruit and vegetables per day. (S3O-10103)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, despite the study in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute , which found little evidence of a link between eating fruit and vegetables and reducing cancer, eating healthy, locally grown produce, such as the apples in the Clyde valley, whose trees will soon be in blossom, has a range of benefits, not only for health but for the environment and the economy, and that we should continue to encourage folk to keep eating their five a day?

The first and most important thing that any of us can do to support small businesses during this recession is to be honest with them. So, for the Liberal Democrats to try to pretend that the Scottish Government is somehow in receipt of increased funding, when everyone knows that, in fact, we face the first real-terms budget cut in the history of devolution, does not in any way suggest that they are interested in supporting small businesses. The Scottish Government, on the other hand, can and should be proud of its support for businesses of all shapes and sizes right across the country. More than 200,000 businesses in Scotland may be eligible for support under the small business bonus scheme, which has increased and expanded since it was introduced. Plenty of businesses in the South of Scotland region, which I represent, have felt the benefit of it. When I first consulted local businesses in the region about the impact of the scheme back in 2008, one local artist, whose studio had benefited from the relief, even felt moved to refer to the First Minister as the "blessed Alex Salmond" because of the difference that it had made.

As others have said, there is the opportunity to appeal in relation to such issues.  Because of the dramatically different economic situation that exists now compared with in 2007, the Scottish Government has uplifted and expanded the small business bonus scheme and rural rate relief so that an additional 3,600 Scottish business properties are eligible for relief. There has been an independent revaluation of business rates in Scotland. The valuation is carried out by the Scottish Assessors Association, not the Scottish Government or local authorities, and the independent nature of the revaluation is entirely appropriate. Of course, the revaluation takes into account the changing nature and circumstances of businesses and, in particular, takes account of increases in turnover or expansion of the business since the previous valuation. Even after all that, 60 per cent of businesses will be better off as a result of the exercise. That is before different reliefs have been applied or appeals have been processed. The appeals system means that any business that feels that its rates have been increased unfairly or inappropriately has the opportunity to have the decision reviewed. It is, therefore, disingenuous of the Lib Dems to quote rate increases that have not yet been through the full process and finalised. On top of that, businesses throughout Scotland have felt the benefit of the Scottish Government's support in other ways. I recently visited William McCafferty Butchers in Forth, in my region, which has received grants from Scottish Enterprise to replace the shop units and refresh the shop entirely. Carluke town centre is benefiting from a £500,000 injection from the town centre regeneration fund. The innovative soft play facility that that money is helping to provide will not only boost the local economy but increase footfall to the surrounding shops and local traders. A similar effect can be expected in Biggar, whose corn exchange is also receiving a boost from the Scottish Government fund. Two weeks ago, I visited Irvine to see the first tranche of small businesses receive their awards from the enterprise development fund, which was established by GlaxoSmithKline to help the local community to adapt to the loss of jobs caused by its restructuring. That is the sort of responsible corporate behaviour that I am sure the Scottish Government is keen to encourage and is another glimmer of hope among the doom and gloom that Opposition parties are attempting to spread. When the Lib Dems call for the Scottish Government to provide relief on top of the wide range of support that we have heard about in the debate, they do so knowing not only that the Scottish Government's budget is declining but that their own UK leader has called for savage cuts to public sector spending. If further savage cuts are  to be inflicted on Scotland's budget, that will leave even less money to support not only our small businesses but our schools, hospitals, police system and every other area in which the Lib Dems in Scotland continue to call for increases in spending. The fact is that the SNP Government is making sometimes difficult but absolutely necessary decisions to use the powers and budgets that it has to help all sectors of our economy get through the downturn and grow stronger as a result.

That will not be achieved by scaremongering and it will certainly not be achieved by savage cuts to our budget. That is why the business community needs SNP champions at all levels of government.

It is why our Parliament needs the full powers of independence to get Scotland out of the Downing Street downturn.

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Department of Energy and Climate Change about future extraction of oil and gas in Scotland. (S3O-9935)

Is the minister aware of recent comments by emeritus professor of international energy studies at Erasmus University in Rotterdam, Peter Odell, who said that the UK Government should follow Norway's example by setting up a hydrocarbons authority that would ensure that public interest is paramount in exploiting future offshore oil and gas production? Does he agree that the best way to ensure that Scotland maximises the potential of our natural resources is for us to follow Norway's example and have all the powers of a normal independent country?

Three weeks ago, I said: "Members have heard many times, often in education debates and often on a Thursday morning, about the importance of equipping our younger generations with the skills and knowledge that they need to succeed personally and contribute to the wellbeing of our society."— [ Official Report , 25 February 2010; c 23976.]  Murdo Fraser told us during last week's education debate that we would all have to wait patiently for an opportunity to hear more about the Tories' lessons on how to learn from Sweden and move Scotland's education forward. Here we are again on a Thursday morning, and I am again happy to put on record my support for the education system in Scotland and the role that it plays in making our country the best that it can be. I know that members from across the Parliament all support that sentiment. However, no matter how good we know much of Scotland's education system is, we can never rest on our laurels. The SNP is well known for its outward-looking and internationalist approach to policy matters, so it is right for us to have a full and frank debate about what works, what does not work and what is worthy of further exploration.  As I said, the SNP has always sought to learn from other countries that are comparable in terms of population size, geography and economy. I will not disappoint colleagues by pointing out that more often than not, the said countries enjoy the normal status of being independent. As we noted in last week's debate on global education, countries such as Finland, the Netherlands and New Zealand have recently been ranked above Scotland in the OECD's programme for international student assessment for science, maths and reading. As has been mentioned, it is interesting that in those OECD rankings, Sweden lies below Scotland for maths and science. Nevertheless, the Swedish model has caught the eye of the Tories, and it has become the foundation of the education policy that they announced earlier this month. Although I admire the proactive nature of the Tories' input to policy discussion and debate, I think that we should be cautious about some elements of the Swedish system that may not fit in well with Scotland's culture, traditions and history, and which may fail to be adaptable to Scotland's unique circumstances. In that vein, it might be useful for the debate to highlight elements of the Swedish model that may seem counterintuitive to the Conservatives and their political ideologies. In Sweden, fewer headteachers—just 5 per cent—reported that businesses had an influence on the curriculum, whereas in the UK as a whole, 15 per cent of headteachers reported that business and industry had a considerable influence on the curriculum. There is less emphasis in Sweden on keeping siblings together through school place allocations and, on the whole, entry to schools is less residentially based, which means that schools have less of a community character. Given how supportive politicians were of our recent legislation to protect rural schools, I cannot imagine that anyone would wish to erode the important community function that they fulfil by copying that aspect of the Swedish model. The Conservatives' motion refers to East Lothian Council, and I am sure that they recognise that the community trust model that that council has put forward is simply one of a number of options for the future of education in the area. I understand that the models that it has proposed would ensure that there was no selection of intake and no private funding. Membership of the trusts would consist of community representatives, teachers, parents, councillors and lay experts, and could include representatives from health, community learning, social work and local enterprises. East Lothian Council has proceeded in that way because it is having to deal with financial pressures. All councils are finding that they will need to think more creatively about how  they deliver services in the face of the cuts that Scotland faces. The cabinet secretary has usefully stated that he is open to suggestions from all sides about how to take education policy forward, and that same sentiment of seeking more dialogue and debate is, I feel, echoed in the Lib Dem amendment, the Conservative motion and even the position of the Labour Party. We should be open to investigating other systems and seeking inspiration not only from Sweden, but from New Zealand, Finland, Canada, the Netherlands and Portugal, where academic performance is good. Education commentators appreciate politicians and policy makers taking that approach, which is why many of them have been so interested in and welcoming of East Lothian Council's approach to thinking out of the box. In the spirit of consensual dialogue and allowing space for debate, we might also do well to heed opinions that might not always be as palatable, but which nevertheless need to addressed, such as whether, if headteachers are given more responsibility, we can guarantee that they will always do the right thing. I have certainly heard from teachers who work under heads and do not think that that is the case. Peter Peacock made a similar point. Another such view is that of the parents who simply think that children should go to the school that they live near, regardless of parental choice, and that striving to ensure that the local school attains good results and improves should be what is concentrated on. I hope that colleagues understand that I raise such issues because I think that they are important considerations to take on board, and so that we can all hone our arguments in a consensual manner in an effort to drive policy forward together. Education policy is one of those unfortunate topics that everyone knows is important but on which we are probably all far too guilty of dismissing ideas before we have given them a proper airing. That does the Parliament and the topic that we all care so passionately about a disservice. Whatever model East Lothian Council or any other council chooses to adopt, I hope that the Parliament can agree that there are some principled lines that we do not want to cross. For example, we do not want to return to academic selection in Scotland's schools or have a voucher system that provides direct state support to independent schools, and the idea of an internal market in education is totally at odds with the principles that have been the foundation of our school system in Scotland for centuries. Despite our many lively debates on education, the Parliament's record since 2007 has been to find common ground and consensus in many  areas. The Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010 and the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2009 were passed without division, and both will have a beneficial effect on the education of schoolchildren in Scotland. In addition, the Parliament has given its support to the curriculum for excellence on many occasions. Scotland can and will learn from other parts of the world, just as, in years gone by, other countries looked to Scotland for all their ideas and inspiration. It is in the interests not just of the Parliament but of all those who play a part in our education system in Scotland to defend those principles and to concentrate on delivering the best possible results for our children and young people.

If the member celebrates those principles, why does she want to delete them from the motion that we are debating?

Global citizenship and international perspectives on education have never been more important. We live in an increasingly interdependent world in which countries are defined and shaped by their interdependence and their relationships with other countries and international institutions. Younger generations must be equipped with the skills that they need to make the most of the opportunities presented by the globalised economy and marketplace in which we live. The Scottish Government recognises that and, as the motion says, it wants to ensure that we continue to improve our education system's performance and to apply a truly "global perspective to its approach and ambitions."

I defer to Margo MacDonald's knowledge of that. I am sure that she will explain to members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee some of her thoughts on that issue. A helpful starting point is the recent HMIE report "Learning Together: International education: responsible, global citizens", which evaluates the work that is done in Scotland on international education. It found much to be commended. It states that finding an international perspective "enhances the ethos and life of the school as a community" and "provides a wide range of opportunities for personal achievement", concluding that it is  "a key dimension of the broad general education to which all children and young people aged 3 to 15 are entitled." I am sure that every member can and, no doubt, will give examples from schools in their area that promote global citizenship and civic responsibility. In my area, I think of Larkhall academy and the group of sixth year pupils who developed a unite Scotland initiative to celebrate diversity within Scotland and the contribution that people from other countries and cultures make when they come here. As part of that project, the group aimed to raise more than £20,000 through the Prince's Trust scholars challenge, which ran during the academic year 2008-2009. However, the aim of international education, and the aim of the Government's motion, is to ensure not just that those in education learn about other countries and societies but that we learn from them. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning is right to look at best practice around the world, especially in those countries that tend to perform better than Scotland in OECD and other assessments of our educational performance. Where other countries are getting things right, it simply makes sense for us to consider how their ideas might be applied to Scotland. Other members have made that point. From that perspective, it is easy to understand the importance that the Liberal Democrats' amendment attaches to modern languages. All too often, native speakers of English take it for granted that they will be understood by people from other parts of the world. That can lead to complacency in the uptake of and commitment to the study of other languages. Learning other languages has benefits beyond simply being able to communicate with people from different countries. To truly understand a language means also to understand the culture that has shaped and formed it. It is also a skill that promotes and improves learning and cognitive functions in other parts of the curriculum and daily life, especially in the early years. It is unfortunate that Labour is not as constructive in its amendment. The Parliament rightly debated the curriculum for excellence just last week, when it supported "the full and effective implementation of the Curriculum for Excellence", agreeing that it should be introduced within a timescale that meets the recommendations of the management board. Like the cabinet secretary, I believe it is unfortunate that the Labour amendment for today's debate removes from the Government's motion so much that is positive about Scottish education. It is not just the Government's responsibility to promote international perspectives on education. I  note the range of organisations that exist to help schools to integrate global citizenship as effectively as possible into the curriculum. The Scottish Development Education Centre and the International Development Education Association of Scotland do hugely important work in that regard. Both are supported by the Government, but they bring together a wide range of individuals who have experience of international development and education. Another such organisation is the British Council, which, along with the United Nations refugee programme, Scottish Screen and others, has helped to sponsor the reel festivals series of international film screenings in Edinburgh. I have been proud to support the reel Iraq and reel Afghanistan festivals in the past two years. Although some of the material that was screened might be beyond what would usually be shown to school pupils, the festivals are another demonstration of Scotland's willingness to reach out to the wider world. They are organised by the Edinburgh University Settlement charity, whose stated goals are to enhance public provision for individuals who are disadvantaged through circumstance or disability. It aims to help local people in and around Edinburgh to bring about social change and regeneration for their communities. Many such causes are founded by people who are products of Scotland's education system and who have learned through their education in Scotland the values of citizenship and responsibility and our obligations to our neighbours at home and abroad. The motion states that young people must be given the opportunity to learn "about Scotland and its place in the world". For that reason, the Government is once again to be commended for making the Scotland's history website available not just to schools but to everyone who has access to the internet, wherever they are in the world. Far from having a narrow perspective on our nation, the website is in the proud tradition of internationalism that has always been found in people from Scotland, including those of us who believe in independence. This Saturday, teachers and members of the public from across Scotland will gather to protest against cuts to our education system. As I said in the chamber last week, I firmly believe that we should invest in teachers and not in Trident submarines. Global citizenship education will do more to bring about peace and reconciliation and sustainable economic development than weapons of mass destruction on the Clyde ever will. I congratulate the Government on its motion and its vision of a positive way forward for Scotland's  education system that builds on good practice and, of course, internationalism.

I, too, congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing the debate. I understand that my Westminster colleague Pete Wishart lodged a similar early day  motion at Westminster a couple of months back. I also pay tribute to the work of the Lord Lieutenant, Brigadier Melville Jameson, and that of Provost John Hulbert, who is in the gallery. He has been supported by Pete Wishart, the constituency MSPs Roseanna Cunningham, John Swinney and Murdo Fraser, and many people from other parties, who have done much work in promoting Perth 800 and building the case for restoring Perth's city status. That work is important. Members may wonder why, as a South of Scotland MSP, I am speaking in a debate about Perth. The reason is that I grew up in Perthshire, I have family who still live there and I went to school in what I hope will soon be the city of Perth. I echo the sentiments in Murdo Fraser's and Pete Wishart's motions, which note that Perth and Perthshire are among many great places to live, visit and do business in, among other things. There are also many places in the South of Scotland that are great places in which to live and work, including my new home town of Biggar. I was born in Perth royal infirmary in 1980. Around five years earlier, Perth's city status was removed. That was an unfortunate decision. Although Perth is called the fair city, that is not the same as its being formally recognised as a city. That is why I support the bid to make it a city. I hope that the momentum that is built up during the year-long celebrations of Perth's 800 th birthday are rewarded by the long-overdue restoration of its city status in 2012. That would make the fair city title ring true once again. There certainly has been a lot of momentum. The First Minister passed the baton of celebration on to Perth when the curtain came down on the year of homecoming on St Andrew's day last year. The celebrations for 2010 are the perfect way, I hope, to make the city bid a success and to ensure that the philosophy and popularity of homecoming does not end. I believe that the First Minister also signed a declaration of support earlier today. A successful celebratory dinner was hosted by Pete Wishart in Westminster, which allowed people who are involved with the campaign to put their case to members of Parliament and the House of Lords. The bid is impressive. The brochure that has been presented to members who supported Murdo Fraser's motion is fantastic and gives a wonderful journey through Perth's history right up to the here and now. It showcases what a modern and dynamic place Perth has become, with art trails, excellent shopping, great architecture and, of course, the wonderful concert hall. It is good to see mention of another royal burgh, Lanark, in the fair city guide, because 2010 is also a special year for Lanark, as it marks the centenary of aviation week. That was Scotland's first air show, and was  held in Lanark. I have been working with organisers in Lanark—Ed Archer and Sylvia Russell—who hope to mark that occasion in Lanark. However, because of the absence of an airfield there, they have been working with the aerodrome in Perth. The drome will be home to the centenary show, which makes up part of the Perth 800 celebrations. The 1910 version of the air show had a huge impact in Lanark, so I look forward to enjoying the show and celebrations when they happen in Perth and Lanark. Although I have not lived in Perthshire for some time, it still holds a dear place in my heart. Browsing through the brochure has rekindled fond memories: summers spent berry picking in the soft fruit capital of Scotland; going to Perth academy, which celebrates its 250 th anniversary this year; playing sport in Bell's sports centre; being dragged through McEwens by my mum; Murray's pies; playing in concerts at St John's kirk; and, of course, attending fitba matches at McDiarmid Park. I hasten to add that those latter memories are not all fond. I am impressed by the events that have been drawn together to showcase Perth and Perthshire, which illustrate how modern and forward-thinking Perth is. I see that my old classmate the incredibly talented Alasdair Beatson is performing several concerts as part of the programme of events. I am sure that 2010 will be an exciting year for Perth. No doubt, the whole place will have a buzz about it and the events will entice many visitors from throughout Scotland and the world. I hope that the icing on the cake will be success in the bid for city status. The work that has been put into the campaign by many people is to be commended. The campaign acts as a useful blueprint for what other local authorities can do if they choose to be proactive in the same way. I hope to highlight the project to local authorities in the South of Scotland region to show them what can be achieved to boost tourism and profile. I wish everyone in Perth and Perthshire all the best for Perth 800 and I hope to pop up the road soon to enjoy some of what is on offer.

To ask the Scottish Executive what importance it attaches to Scotland's built heritage. (S3O-9638)

The minister will be aware of many historical monuments and buildings across the South of Scotland, including the world heritage centre at New Lanark. Does she agree that Scotland's world heritage sites are not only historically important but culturally and educationally important as they provide useful places of learning about Scotland's past? Will she accept my invitation to visit New Lanark to see for herself the impressive work that is carried out by the dedicated team of educationists and conservationists?

The curriculum for excellence is designed to do exactly what it says on the tin: to provide excellent education for every single school pupil in Scotland. Members have heard many times, often in education debates and often on a Thursday morning, about the importance of equipping our younger generations with the skills and knowledge that they need to succeed personally and contribute to the wellbeing of our society. We all want the curriculum for excellence to take root in our schools and deliver its goals of relevant, inspiring and engaging education for every pupil. I welcome the Liberal Democrats' support for the full and effective implementation of the curriculum, and they are right to say that it is important for the implementation process to be given enough time to have maximum effect. That is precisely why the cabinet secretary wrote to every teacher in Scotland at the start of this year to outline the road map for the next stages of implementation. Schools have already been provided with an additional year for implementation, and I know that the Government will always take advice from the curriculum for excellence management board in implementing changes, as the motion suggests. The cabinet secretary's letter also confirmed that teachers will be provided with an additional in-service day focused on the implementation of the curriculum for excellence, on top of the three additional days that have already been held. In addition, the Scottish Government is providing £4 million towards the recruitment of 100 extra teachers who will provide support for implementation. Those 100 teachers will be employed in classrooms across the country and will free up 100 experienced colleagues to support curriculum for excellence implementation at national and local level. Of course, it will take time for all the impacts of the curriculum for excellence to come into force. From August, we expect that pupils will be learning under the new curriculum, but it is clear that the first qualifications under the curriculum will not be offered until 2013-14. The Liberal Democrats' motion mentions literacy and numeracy, and I hope that they will have been reassured by the debate on the report of the literacy commission last month, when the Parliament united to support the development of a literacy action plan in the context of the curriculum for excellence. Literacy is embedded across the curriculum, and every teacher is responsible for literacy because, as the commission recognises, literacy is acquired not just in English classes but in interaction with others and in applying cognition  and communication skills in a range of situations and environments.

It is a question of taking forward best practice and ensuring that what is happening now is embedded in the new curriculum. That is why the plan gathered support from parties throughout the chamber. Delivery of the curriculum for excellence is a key part of the concordat and the national performance framework that was agreed between the Scottish Government and local authorities. I have every confidence that local authorities of every colour take their responsibility to Scotland's education seriously, and I am sure that they will use the resources that they have been provided with to implement the curriculum for excellence. As we all know, it is local authorities that are responsible for hiring teachers, and I am sure that all members will be disappointed if they hear of local authorities that appear not to be taking that responsibility seriously. There is some suggestion that funds are not in place to ensure the appropriate delivery of the curriculum for excellence. In fact, the Scottish Government has provided increasing resources to local authorities in the face of the most difficult spending round since devolution began. Indeed, returns to the Scottish Government in July 2009 showed that local authority education budgets were set 4.1 per cent higher in this financial year than in 2008-09. I agree that Scotland should not have to deal with budget cuts imposed on it by the United Kingdom Treasury. In the coming weeks and months, people in Scotland will have important choices to make about the future of education and public services in this country. Will it be teachers or Trident, workbooks or illegal wars, ideas or identification cards? There is at least one party in this chamber, led by Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling, that does not seem to prioritise education and public services in the way that the Scottish Government does. The people of Scotland will decide what the priorities should be.

I state my whole-hearted support for the local newspaper industry in Scotland and my firm belief in the important contribution that local papers make to our democracy and society. It is perhaps disingenuous of the Labour Party to present its motion in a way that suggests that the entire future  of our newspapers rests on a consultation by the Scottish Government. Labour members are wrong to suggest that those of us who do not support their motion somehow also do not support our local newspapers. We support our newspapers and will always continue to do so. I was happy to attend yesterday's NUJ briefing. I make my comments from a point of view where I completely understand the peaks and troughs of being a journalist, as I was made redundant from a newspaper that could not survive in a very crowded market. That situation was awful, and I know that it was tough for many of my colleagues to find alternative employment, as there simply were not the same number of journalism jobs available. I am one of the thousands of regular readers of the Carluke and Lanark Gazette and the Lanark & Carluke Advertiser , where I can find out about what is happening in the part of the South of Scotland region where I live. I also pay particular attention to the Irvine Times and The Irvine Herald and Kilwinning Chronicle , as I hold surgeries in the towns of Irvine, Kilwinning and Stevenston. Both papers are an excellent source of information about goings-on in North Ayrshire.

It is not a question of "If" I was at the meeting yesterday—I was at the meeting yesterday. The consultation is being conducted by the Scottish Government, and I hope that they feel free to contribute to it. The best way for us all to support our local newspapers is to buy those that are available. Local newspapers are about more than just public information notices. To be honest, I am not entirely surprised that only about 2 per cent of people get their public information from such notices. People buy their local newspapers for a variety of reasons: to get the football results and local sports round-ups, to find out about their local groups and organisations, to see who has been in court and, generally, to find out what the craic is in the towns and villages that they live in. However, there is absolutely no denying that the newspapers' relative decline is worthy of discussion, investigation and concern. The Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee thought the same, and took evidence on the issue just last week. The session was illuminating and I encourage members to have a look at the Official Report . The evidence painted a  picture that was much broader than the stark terms of associating the potential folding of local titles with a decline in advertising money from public information notices. Of particular note was the evidence from David Hutchison, visiting professor in media policy at Glasgow Caledonian University, who told us: "even in these difficult times, if you look at the percentage of revenue that goes to profits, you will see that the chain newspaper companies are doing not too badly. Only a few years ago, 30 per cent of revenue was profit. Marks and Spencer had a very good year three years ago when 9 per cent of its revenue was profit. Even today, the latest figures that I have seen suggest that some of the companies, some of whose representatives you have spoken to, are still making rather good returns."—[ Official Report, Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 20 January 2010; c 3064.] Newspaper sales might be declining, but it seems that a healthy profit can still be made. Stuart McMillan mentioned the dilemma that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee faced following questions from Ken Macintosh. We heard about profits, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, about the desperate need for local efficiency savings. That is a valid point. While newspapers are still in receipt of advertising revenues at the moment, journalists are being laid off, journalist posts are being scaled back and sales are still declining. [ Interruption .] We might disagree on some issues this morning, but there can be no argument that the nature of the media and of how we get our news and information is changing. We need to find the trick of dealing with that rationally and to identify ways in which local and national newspapers can respond and react to this rapidly changing climate. The internet will never uninvent itself. It is fast becoming the first port of call for anyone looking for information. One success of 21 st century communicative technology has been myjobscotland, which contains information about more than 12,000 vacancies. It is instantly available to people who are looking for work in these difficult economic times. Furthermore, anyone who looks up a job advert in a local paper is almost always directed to a website anyway. Caledonian Mercury , an online newspaper, was launched recently. [ Interruption .] It aims to provide quality reporting and analysis—

It is interesting that the journalists involved felt that there was a gap in analysis and quality reporting. Why is that? The Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee heard from the NUJ about the strain  and frustration that journalists have been under as they are given more and more tasks, with more copy to deliver, more instances of cut-and-paste stories, more desk-based research and less time to develop properly constructed, analysed and considered stories that engage with the readership. That is where the real democratic deficit lies. If the high heid yins in the newspapers are putting their dividends and bonuses before the quality of their product, it means that the people who have been loyal to their local and national titles are not being adequately served with balanced and accurate reporting. Those people are simply not getting the information that they deserve and if they are not being provided with the facts, their ability to make informed decisions for themselves is being eroded. Perhaps some companies need to consider the emphasis that is being put on staffing arrangements. They should perhaps help their journalists, sub-editors and designers piece together newspapers that are vibrant, fresh, responsive and, importantly, relevant to 21 st century Scotland. There is a practical side to the debate that Pauline McNeill's motion does not wholly reflect. For a start, the Government is still consulting on the draft order that Labour is calling on it to scrap. The order itself is not a death knell for some local newspapers. It is a response to requests from local government, and it is the continuation of a policy process that began under the previous Administration to streamline and to provide choices about the way in which public information is communicated in the 21 st century. I have faith in Scotland's journalists and newspapers to survive and adapt to the changing local, national and global media environment. If PINs remain with newspapers, I hope that there is some way in which the big chain companies can demonstrate that they will invest in journalism and that they can show us just how much they value the papers that they own and the staff who do so much for them.

The member said that she does not care about young readers of the newspapers. The people who gave evidence to the committee said that newspapers cannot take it for granted that young people will go on to read the newspapers. We have to look at people who are potential readers of newspapers.

I join other members in congratulating Christine Grahame on securing the debate on a topic that is of increasing importance to people throughout the country, but particularly, as the motion states, those in the Scottish Borders and the wider South of Scotland region that I represent. There are 1,464 post offices in towns and villages throughout Scotland, including our branch in the Holyrood village, which does a sterling job not just for MSPs, but for all users of the Parliament building. The network offers an unrivalled geographical reach across the country that still exists despite post offices being hit by the network change programme—or, as it is known to many of our constituents, the closure programme.  The South of Scotland region, which I both represent and live in, experienced some of the cuts. They were devastating blows to the communities that the post offices served. Many people relied on their nearest post office to get their pensions or child benefits, and many small businesses relied on them, too. In addition, people valued their post office as a venue in which to meet friends and neighbours for a blether. It was no surprise that, when I conducted a survey among constituents who had been affected by the closure of post office branches in Lesmahagow, Lanark, New Lanark, Larkhall, Irvine, Stevenston and Kilwinning, an average of more than 98 per cent of respondents said that they disagreed with the proposals. The post office is important because it has a social value that many groups, businesses and organisations can only dream of. It is a widely recognised brand that, in today's credit crunch times, is trusted and respected, as members have said. It is also a place where customers are served by someone face to face. I agree with Cathy Jamieson that the post office is as far removed as possible from the emotionlessness of direct debits, distant call centres and annoying automated responses that tell people, "Press 1 for advice or 2 for assistance." To tell the truth, the only really annoying thing about post offices is their extra-long queues, but not everything is perfect and the fact that the services are in such high demand suggests, in itself, that post offices are doing something right. Of course, there is a serious and commercial side to the post office. According to the National Federation of SubPostmasters, for every £1 transacted in the UK, 14p is handled through the post office network. The Federation of Small Businesses said that small businesses are heavily reliant on post offices, with nearly nine in 10 small businesspeople visiting a post office to buy stamps and send mail and 25 per cent depositing cash, collecting change and using the banking service at the post office. The importance of the post office network cannot be overstated, which is why we need to think imaginatively about its future. My South of Scotland colleague, Christine Grahame, recently hosted an event in Parliament on behalf of the National Federation of SubPostmasters, which outlined its six steps to a sustainable post office network proposals. Those proposals highlight the actions that all levels of government can take to increase the viability of the network, including making better use of post offices and considering ways of creating a post bank. Those are exactly the kind of initiatives that a post office diversification fund could help to support. Indeed, the FSB's report highlights the impact that the  diversification fund in Wales has had since its implementation. Although we all recognise the severe pressures on the budgets of the Scottish Government and local authorities, I hope that some consideration can be given to ways of supporting the sustainability and diversification of our post offices. Of particular interest to me was the idea of encouraging the sharing of post office facilities with tourist information services or with facilities by which people could access the services of local authorities and organisations such as credit unions. Given that the post office network has an unrivalled geographical spread and that not every part of Scotland has tourist information centres or access to credit unions, those combinations could be marriages made in heaven. Support to develop such important services could help to provide a boost to local economies during this time of recession. If there are ways of providing tourism spin-offs and giving people access to banking facilities that they can trust while retaining important and much-loved post offices across Scotland, it seems sensible for all levels of government to consider those possibilities.

I congratulate Nanette Milne on securing the debate and echo many of the sentiments that she expressed in her motion and her opening speech. I preface my remarks by declaring that I am a patron of the Youth Cancer Forum Scotland, which is a partnership venture between the cancer charities CLIC Sargent, Tak Tent and the Teenage Cancer Trust. I base my contribution on my experience of and involvement with the Youth Cancer Forum Scotland. Its work is relevant, as the forum was set up in recognition of the need to help young people throughout Scotland "keep up with their ordinary lives", as the motion says. The forum, which was the first of its kind in Scotland, aims to provide support for young cancer sufferers and their families. It was launched in Perth a year or so ago. At the launch, several of the aforementioned charities attended, as did the local MSP, Roseanna Cunningham, and other interested MSPs, including Mary Scanlon. More important, many of the young people who were to benefit from the scheme were present. It was good to hear from them their stories and their excitement about and enthusiasm for an online network that would allow them to connect with other young people who were going through similar experiences. The young people's stories were incredibly moving. Young cancer survivors spoke about the difficulties that they faced, the physical and mental effects of treatment programmes, the loneliness and isolation that illness can cause and the social and educational impacts of missing school. One speaker, who had lost his young sister to the disease, told a deeply emotional story about the impact on him of her illness and death. That highlighted an issue about cancer in young people that I had not previously considered—the impact on the siblings. Mary Scanlon mentioned that, too. That young person spoke about how their education suffered and how they struggled to come to terms with the devastating impact that the disease had on his wee sister. It pained him to admit it, but he said that he was also a bit jealous of the focus on his wee sister and the attention that she got. He was very brave to be so candid and he showed that those helping and supporting a cancer sufferer should not forget that the brothers and sisters suffer, too.  Behind the tears and the tragic tales, there was an uplifting energy in the way in which the young people spoke at the forum's launch. They were absolutely committed to making a success of a youth-led network that provides peer support. It is that youth-led approach that makes the network so special. The young people who are behind the scheme want to help others and to provide a bit of normality for youngsters who are suffering from cancer, when otherwise they would be stuck in their bed and unable to go out or interact with other people their age, as Nanette Milne pointed out. Those youngsters know what it is like to have their lives limited by cancer and to be scared about what the future holds. They know how it feels physically when going through treatment. Instead of just thinking about it, they have used modern technology proactively so that other young sufferers can go online and find a ready-made support network. I thank Nanette Milne for raising what is an incredibly important topic that is definitely worthy of debate and discussion. I hope that, like me, the minister congratulates the youngsters in the Youth Cancer Forum, who are doing what they can to support their peers, and the other organisations and groups that support youngsters and their families at what is a most difficult time.

I also congratulate Jim Hume for securing the debate, and have enjoyed listening to what members have had to say. I thought that I would return the favour that Jim Hume did me when he spoke in my members' business debate last week.  I will keep my comments brief and declare an interest, as a member of my family is an employee of NHS Dumfries and Galloway. I understand, from my South of Scotland colleague Mike Russell, that there has been a strong community campaign on the matter. I congratulate all those who have been involved, as, I am sure, would Mike Russell. We all agree that local services need to stay local. Indeed, it is when such local services are under threat that communities come together and look to retain the local focus. They quickly become informed and involved in the decision-making processes. In any situation like this, it is important that people are listened to; they need to be confident that the NHS is for them and is responsive to them. I know that that is fundamental for the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and the Minister for Public Health and Sport in how they approach their brief. It is important as well, however, that issues are discussed up front with local people so that they are informed and made part of the decision-making process. Rural areas are very important to Scotland and we need to look after them. Post offices and transport links have gone from rural areas, schools in such areas are often closed and other services are often quick to leave rural areas or are considered surplus to requirements. We all agree that rural areas need our support, as do the people who live in them and make those areas vibrant. I congratulate Jim Hume for securing the debate and I congratulate the campaigners who have been so important in involving local people in their campaign to ensure that services remain local and focused on their area.

Groups that are trying to use the alternative proposed sites are finding it difficult to get used to them. There are difficulties with accessing the schools in the village and groups believe that the Fountain hall does not have the facilities—for example, a stage for the male voice choir, the young farmers' pantomimes and all the other amateur dramatic groups—that they need.

I wonder whether the member realises that what I got back from my FOI request showed that South Lanarkshire Council had identified more than £1 million to refurbish the Fountain hall.

Many folk from Lesmahagow have been unable to get to Edinburgh today because of the snow, but they are watching the debate online. The Jubilee hall in Lesmahagow is a fine old building that was completed around 1830 and sits proudly on a brae just off the main thoroughfare through the town. The hall is geographically and symbolically at the centre of the community, and the fight to save it has been one of the most significant local campaigns in which I have been involved since being elected in May 2007. I am proud to have the opportunity to bring the issue to the Scottish Parliament chamber today. The issue of the role and future of community halls throughout Scotland is not unfamiliar to the chamber. Indeed, in 2006, my colleague Andrew Welsh led a members' business debate on the challenges that are faced by village community halls. Many members will be aware of the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations halls for all campaign and petition to the Parliament following the 2007 election. The points that have been made on those and other occasions about the role of community halls in general apply specifically to the situation of the Jubilee hall in Lesmahagow. Local halls provide a focus and location for all kinds of events and services that give an area its character and sense of community. Indeed, my recent wedding reception was held in a village hall, which provided a characterful backdrop to my celebrations. The Jubilee hall is no different, and the huge range of groups and societies that use and meet in the hall include the young farmers group, the mother and toddler group, the badminton club, the  drama group Class Act and the male voice choir, to name but a few. In mid-2008, South Lanarkshire Council undertook a review of all its community facilities. As a result of that review, the council's executive committee decided to declare the Jubilee hall surplus to requirements and invest instead in the nearby Fountain hall, which has lain mothballed since before it was acquired by the council at a cost of more than £500,000. As far as I am aware, the council's review made little or no effort to discuss with community groups in Lesmahagow and users of the Jubilee hall their requirements or their opinions about the future of facilities in their town. Many of the user groups that I have spoken to since feel that way. Given the long list of groups that currently use their local facility, I am sure that members appreciate why the community and I find the council's conclusion that the hall is surplus to requirements a bit odd. It was at a concert by Lesmahagow's male voice choir in March 2009 that the impact of the hall's closure began to hit home. The choir genuinely feared that their performance, which had been held annually in the Jubilee hall and enhanced by its wonderful acoustics for many years, would be the last to take place in the venue. As a result of the growing sense of unease among the various user groups and the community council about the hall's future, I decided to carry out a survey of local opinion on the proposals. The results were overwhelming in every sense of the word. Out of 2,071 surveys that were distributed, 361 were returned—a rate of more than 17 per cent, which can be considered very good for that type of exercise. Eight-five per cent of respondents said that they disagreed with the proposal to close the hall, and 86 per cent said that they did not believe that the Fountain hall was a suitable replacement. Perhaps the most important responses to my survey were the individual comments and memories that more than 200 respondents took the time to share with me. Those testimonies demonstrated not only the affection in which the hall is currently held but the role that it has played throughout the town's history. One respondent had memories of using the hall on various occasions stretching back over 55 years. It has been the scene of wedding receptions and anniversary celebrations, dances and parties, and sports tournaments and village shows. Some of the respondents responded with comments such as these: "The council will leave a huge void if the closure goes ahead"; "please do not tear the heart out of our community"; "my mother and father held their wedding in the Jubilee in 1982"; "the Jube is a huge part of this village and I don't feel it is up to the council to disregard the villagers' feelings on this matter"; and "closing the Jubilee Hall could threaten the very existence of the Male Voice Choir". That is emotional stuff—and no wonder, because members of the community feel helpless, ignored and upset that the hall that they use and love is deemed to be surplus to requirements. Perhaps one reason why the hall occupies such a special place in the hearts of so many people is that, although legally the hall is owned by the council, many feel that it belongs to the village. However, the Jubilee hall is different from the many community halls that are in the hands of trusts or charities in that it is owned by the local authority. That ownership is what has led to the current predicament. Although constructed in the mid-1800s, the hall was to all intents and purposes gifted to the village in the 1950s. A freedom of information disclosure to my office from South Lanarkshire Council confirms that the trustees of Lesmahagow public hall—as it was then known—gave part of the site to the district council of number 2 district of the county of Lanark on 1 January 1951, with provisions in the title and previous deeds requiring the site to be used as a public hall. Irrespective of whether those deeds are still legally enforceable, South Lanarkshire Council has a moral duty to respect what is an important part of the town's heritage. When the town's amateur dramatics group, Class Act, brought down the final curtain of its annual pantomime show late last year, there were tears both on stage and in the hall as many realised that that could literally be the final curtain if the closure goes ahead in the next few months. The hall's stage, lighting and back-stage facilities are much valued by all the groups that use it as a performance space. There is no guarantee that viable alternatives exist. It would be a tragedy if a hall that is so well used was closed, essentially on a whim, at a time when such facilities are so badly needed and are lacking in many other parts of the country. Indeed, in recent months, the hall has been the venue for an informal football academy that has been set up by a young local man with coaching skills who was otherwise unemployed. Ironically, he struggled to find evenings to fit in his football academy, as the hall was so busy. He is providing recreation and exercise for local young people that keeps them off the streets and keeps his own skills in top condition while he looks for more permanent work.  It is only fair to acknowledge that 13 per cent of respondents to my survey agreed with the council's proposal to close the hall. They expressed concerns about the accessibility of the hall and its current state of repair. However, I believe that neither of those problems is insurmountable. A solution is certainly well within the funds that are currently spent or budgeted for the proposed alternative facility. My motion refers to the fun day that was organised on Hallowe'en last year. That was a superb event that provided another example of how well used and loved the hall is, and it served as an opportunity to raise further awareness among local groups about the closure plans. During the day, each of the different user groups ran a stall or activity, which was attended by families and individuals of all ages. I was delighted to spend some time talking to the folk at the event and to hear at first hand some of the stories and memories that were reflected in my survey responses. I know that it can be difficult for other members to participate in members' business debates when the motion refers to such a local and particular issue, but I believe that the story of the Jubilee hall contains lessons for the maintenance and development of community halls throughout Scotland. I hope that the future of the hall is not settled and that South Lanarkshire Council can be persuaded to rethink its decision to close the hall. If not, I hope that, at the very least, the community will be given the opportunity to see whether it can play some role in the hall's future, whether through a community buyout or some other alternative. It would, I repeat, be a tragedy if the facility was lost, especially if the building was demolished or converted for another use beyond recognition. The middle of a recession during a property slump is not the time to dispose of such an impressive asset, but the building is more than simply an asset. It was a gift to the council. Although the council might believe that it has the legal right to sell the building, it certainly has no moral right to do anything other than maintain the site for its original purpose: a community hall that is still at the geographic, social and cultural heart of the community that it serves.

Sometimes we politicians like to use words or language in a way that softens the difficulties we face; we talk of concerns instead of complaints, and of challenges instead of problems. However, as the Scottish Parliament was founded, the talk was of finding Scottish solutions to Scottish problems, and there can be no doubt that illiteracy is a problem in Scotland. The extent of the problem and the challenges that we face as a result are made clear in the literacy commission's report, and I am happy to join members in welcoming the publication of the report and the initiative that led to it. As members on my side of the chamber will know only too well, Opposition is about more than simply saying no and disagreeing with everything proposed by the Government of the day. Constructive policy development and seeking to find consensus in the best interests of the people who have sent us here are part and parcel of the role, and the fact that we can unite today to support the work of the literacy commission is an example of that. The report deals with issues surrounding the definition and measurement of literacy, especially identifying the functional or basic levels of literacy that will enable an individual to function in an adult society. It is worth noting that it is not only the Scottish Government that uses a range of indicators rather than one strict definition to measure illiteracy; that is true internationally and in countries where different cultural and linguistic traditions have an impact. We should also recognise that the Scottish survey on attainment will now measure literacy performance every two years, which will allow a much clearer picture to be  built up of the state of literacy in schools in coming years. It is clear, however, from the report and the wide range of source material upon which it draws that Scotland can and must do better in raising literacy rates. We owe it to the individuals who struggle with poor literacy to give them the best opportunities in life, and to Scotland as a whole, which stands to benefit from an active, confident and literate society that contributes to our economy and culture. We must therefore examine how best to tackle illiteracy and cultural disadvantage at all levels of society, including in the family unit. The concept of a zero-tolerance approach, which is suggested in the report, demonstrates the kind of focus and effort that will be required to achieve the goal of eradicating avoidable or unnecessary illiteracy. In its programme for government and key strategies, the Scottish Government does not shy away from the challenge of tackling low literacy rates. Indeed, reducing the number of working-age people who have severe literacy and numeracy problems is a key national indicator. That is also recognised in the curriculum for excellence, which seeks to embed the fundamental principles of literacy and numeracy across the curriculum and in all aspects of learning. That means that all teachers are responsible for literacy, because, as the report recognises, literacy is acquired not just in English classes but in interaction with others and through applying cognition and communication skills in a range of situations and environments. The Scottish Government has also recognised that with the big plus adult literacy programme. Last year, footballers from every team in the Scottish Premier League—although before my team, St Johnstone, secured its place in the SPL—selected their favourite adult and children's books, which were made available in libraries and learning centres to inspire a love of reading among adults and children, especially those who might not naturally pick up a book for leisure or enjoyment. Familiarity with books and literature can only help to build a more literate and fluent society. The cabinet secretary will know that I am very supportive of an Edinburgh Napier University project that gives third year publishing students the opportunity to manage the process of publishing by printing new editions of Scottish classics that are out of copyright. The books are then given free to secondary schools, so that great Scottish literature is made more available to pupils. It is a wonderfully simple scheme, and it can only help to promote reading and familiarity with Scottish literature among the younger  generations. It will go some way to filling the libraries that Kenneth Gibson spoke about. This year's publication is James Hogg's "The Private Memoirs and Confessions of a Justified Sinner", which the cabinet secretary described last week as "one of the ... great unfilmed books in Scotland", although I recently heard that a screenplay has almost been completed. As he said: "If it is read by a much wider audience in Scotland, there will be a much better understanding of our dual nature in Scotland."—[ Official Report , 7 January 2010; c 22564.] Next year's publication, complete with a foreword from the First Minister and Christopher Harvie, is "The Thirty-Nine Steps", and I am sure that it will go on to inspire a new set of youngsters to pick up a good book. While at university, I did a bit of studying on bothy ballads, which provided a huge insight into just how important a good story and song have been to Scotland over the centuries. It is no wonder that this small but multiform and infinite country has produced far more than its fair share of literary greats, but with that talent comes responsibility. The literacy commission's report has focused the mind on Scotland's poor literacy rates, and it is the responsibility of us all to ensure that we give every young person the tools to appreciate our history, culture and literature, and to spread their wings to appreciate those same things in other countries around the world. Later this month, people throughout the world will celebrate the life and work of Robert Burns, one of the greatest literary talents ever to emerge from Scotland or anywhere else. The literacy commission considered in detail the impact of socioeconomic circumstances on literacy and educational attainment, so it is perhaps worth bearing in mind the humble background from which Burns came and the relatively youthful age at which he produced his works. Burns received little formal education but was taught by his father, who was self-educated. That speaks of a belief in the power of education and learning to improve one's sense of fulfilment and wellbeing. Today, 251 years after the death of Robert Burns, and in the spirit of our bard, who despised unfairness and sought equality, it is our turn to tackle head-on the scourge of illiteracy, inequality and poverty that has plagued Scotland for far too long. I know that the cabinet secretary and the Scottish Government have been doing all that they can to ensure that that happens and will continue to do so.

Will the First Minister confirm that it is still the Scottish Government's intention to find a way to allow 16 and 17-year-olds to vote in the referendum on Scotland's future, unlike that of the Opposition parties, which are refusing to let any voter in Scotland have a democratic say on the constitution?

I join colleagues in welcoming Mike Russell to his new role, and I look forward to seeing him in his new guise at the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. I also join colleagues in paying tribute to the excellent job that Fiona Hyslop did in sometimes difficult circumstances. As others have said, Fiona Hyslop reintroduced the principle of free education to Scotland, reformed school closure procedures to give communities a stronger voice in the future of their schools and presided over the lowest class sizes ever. I look forward to working with her in her new job.  Later today, the Parliament will debate the principles of getting it right for every child. No matter what we agree or disagree on in the course of this morning's debate, we must keep in mind that that must be our aim. We need to get it right for every single child at every point where people rely on local or central Government, whether that is in social care, in the justice system or in education. The Scottish Government has said that, with the appointment of a new cabinet secretary for education, it wants to introduce a fresh perspective on school education and to find ways of working with local government and all the relevant stakeholders—including the Opposition parties—to deliver the best possible outcomes for children in Scotland. It has been suggested that the Government is considering centralisation of school education services. What the Government in fact said in the light of the statistics—which we all recognise are unacceptable—is that all options should be on the table. That means that greater decentralisation within education authorities is an option as well as greater Government intervention. It remains the case that the concordat with local government includes a commitment to year-on-year progress towards lower class sizes, on the maintenance of teacher numbers and on the delivery of free school meals. Real progress has been made in some areas. East Ayrshire Council, part of whose area falls within the South of Scotland region, has increased teacher numbers and delivered an average class size of below 18. That shows that, where there is a political will, a way can be found to make such goals a reality. Of course, in other areas there has been less progress, and everyone involved—both local government and national Government—must ask themselves why. For example, why have local authorities saved £110 million as a result of falling teacher numbers? What has that money been spent on? Why are both the Scottish Government and local authorities burdened with massive private finance initiative and public-private partnership payments because of poorly negotiated contracts from before 2007? Why have the previous Administration's predictions on teacher retirements failed to materialise? The sky did not fall in on Scotland's education system on 4 May 2007. First mandated by the pre-union Parliament in 1633, Scotland's school education eventually became renowned as being among the best in the world, and we should be proud that we continue to measure our progress against, and constantly strive to achieve, that standard. We are now two and a half years into Scotland's first minority Government and, despite our minority status, we have achieved a  remarkable degree of stability, consistency and delivery in the education sector. Within its first two years, the Government has announced a new school building programme, whereas it took Labour six years, under the Scottish Office and then under devolution, before it even looked at the school estate. The fact remains that the SNP Government is building more schools—we have lifted 100,000 pupils out of unsatisfactory school accommodation. Since May 2007, 236 school projects have been completed, so we are well on track to complete 250 projects over the parliamentary session. In its last four years, Labour completed just 205 school projects. In the South of Scotland, Carluke high school enjoyed its official opening ceremony just this week and Larkhall academy will be officially opened in the not too distant future. At the end of the day, new schools belong not to any political party but to the communities that they serve. The schools are paid for by those communities through their taxes. Thanks to the SNP, people are getting better value for money wherever alternatives to the discredited PFI/PPP system can be found. A fortnight ago, the Parliament united to pass the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill, which will be vital legislation in protecting school communities especially—but not only—in rural areas. During that debate, I said: "Parents, local businesses and community members can play a hugely positive role in such schools and ensure that they are more than just bricks and mortar."— [ Official Report , 19 November 2009; c 21429.]  I stand by that comment. Schools are the incubators of the next generation of citizens and leaders. The young people whom we educate today will become the innovators, scientists and business leaders—and even the teachers and politicians—of tomorrow. We owe it to them to ensure that they have the best possible start in life. Indeed, we owe that to ourselves, because we will depend on those nurses, doctors, mechanics and builders in years to come. We should start by setting the best possible example in the way we debate education policy. Rather than seeking to score points by claiming school building starts—

No. Unfortunately, the Lib Dems and some others have chosen to use this morning's debating time not to outline positive ideas on how education policy might be taken forward but—in Margaret Smith's words—simply for "nat bashing". That  approach needs to change if we want to build an education system of which we are all proud.

To ask the Scottish Government what the next steps will be for the national conversation. (S3O-8609)

I welcome the Scottish Government's willingness to take forward the national conversation, and the fact that it has a preferred timescale for letting the people of Scotland decide their future. Does the minister share my disappointment that, perhaps not surprisingly, the Secretary of State for Scotland and the United Kingdom leader of the Opposition have, in effect, kicked the Calman proposals into the long grass? There is no guarantee that they will ever be implemented, despite the fact that parliamentary procedures exist to implement them now.

The Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill gives the Parliament an opportunity to take Scotland closer to being the safer, fairer country that we all want to live in. I welcome the wide-ranging consultation by the Scottish Government on the various aspects of the bill and the thorough scrutiny that was carried out by the Justice Committee. I made submissions to both the Government and the committee on aspects related to the legislation and will return to that shortly. I endorse the general principles of the bill, as well as the wide range of specific measures that will help to tackle so much of the crime and its consequences that blight too many of our communities. I am particularly interested in how the bill will affect the youngest members of our society. The Government is right to use the bill to reinforce the importance of ensuring that younger children who offend will continue to be dealt with in the hearings system and will be held, when that is necessary, in secure accommodation and not in adult courts or prisons. The approach is important, because it protects the rights of young people and meets their needs appropriately. It also has the effect of minimising contact with adult criminals and thereby reducing the risk of reoffending. However, it is not just young offenders who are affected by the justice system. The children of adults who commit offences are also affected by sentencing decisions. Scotland's Commissioner for Children and Young People published the report "Not Seen. Not Heard. Not Guilty: the Rights and Status of the Children of Prisoners in Scotland" in February 2008, and in June that year the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee discussed issues that were raised in the report with the then commissioner, Kathleen  Marshall. In the report, the children of offenders were described as "the innocent victims of their parent's offending". That sums up the situation in which so many of those children find themselves. In 2002, a report by the Scottish Prison Service, "Making a Difference", revealed that about 13,500 children in Scotland had a parent in prison. Families Outside, a Scottish charity that works with families who are affected by imprisonment, points out that, given the rise in the prison population since 2002, the current number is likely to be significantly higher. Kathleen Marshall said: "At least as many children are affected by the imprisonment of a parent as are looked-after children in Scotland".—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 25 June 2008; c 1257.] Each case gives rise to costs of alternative care arrangements, problems for the parent when they try to get their children back after serving a custodial sentence and wider societal costs of depriving a child of a parent. Children who have a parent or primary carer in prison often exhibit regressive behaviour, such as bed wetting, or display emotional and behavioural problems. Families Outside noted that even having a parent who is remanded in custody can have a disproportionate and negative impact on a child. The SCCYP has highlighted a ruling by the Constitutional Court in South Africa, which introduced child impact assessments, to be carried out by lower courts at the point of sentencing. Earlier this year, I was privileged to hear more about the system when I attended a moving lecture by one of the members of the court, Justice Albie Sachs. I congratulate Tam Baillie, the current children's commissioner, on organising the lecture, which made a powerful impression on everyone who attended. Justice Sachs quoted from the judgment that he had given in the case S v M, in which a woman who would otherwise have been jailed was kept out of jail because of consideration of the rights of her three sons. He said: "Every child has his or her own dignity. If a child is to be constitutionally imagined as an individual with a distinct personality, and not merely as a miniature adult waiting to reach full size, he or she cannot be treated as a mere extension of his or her parents, umbilically destined to sink or swim with them ... the sins and traumas of fathers and mothers should not be visited on their children." The Cabinet Secretary for Justice is familiar with the issue, because he kindly met me and other interested parties to discuss it. Other members will be aware of the issue, thanks to the helpful briefings that Action for Children and others provided in advance of the debate. I make it clear that I am not advocating that convicted criminals who are also primary care  givers should not be properly punished. Any person who poses a threat to the public should be incarcerated, whether or not they have children. Nor am I suggesting that it is always in a child's best interests not to lock up their parent or carer. In my submission to the Justice Committee, I argued that imprisoning low-level offenders who have children has a wider social impact as families are broken up. If we punish such offenders in the community, justice will be served and Scottish society will not have to deal with the long-term social consequences of family breakdown. I hope that the approach will also break the cycle whereby the children of prisoners are more likely to offend. The presumption against short-term sentences will help to achieve that outcome to some extent, but there might also be a role for the Scottish sentencing council, which the bill will establish. In my submission to the Government's consultation on the sentencing council, I suggested that, when the council is established, it might review the effectiveness of social inquiry reports, which can be carried out as part of the sentencing process, and consider whether a specific family impact assessment should be carried out whenever an offender has caring responsibilities for children or other dependants. I hope that the cabinet secretary and the Government will consider my suggestion as the bill continues through the parliamentary process. I hope that there will be support for the bill in the Parliament and I look forward to supporting it at decision time.

In the stage 1 debate, I pointed out that it had not been long since the summer holidays. The Christmas break is now on the horizon and I am pleased by the speedy progress made in taking the bill through its final stages. Once again, I thank the wide range of organisations that gave evidence to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, the ministerial team for its helpful contributions at all stages and my fellow committee members for the constructive and consensual way in which we have engaged with and progressed the bill. Murdo Fraser and Karen Whitefield have already alluded to the fact that we do not often use "consensual" and "Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee" in the same sentence. In the few short months since the stage 1 debate, the bill has become even more important and necessary. The impact of the recession and budget cuts are being felt across Scotland, and there is a danger that many local authorities could look to their school estates for what might seem like quick and easy ways to reduce overall spending and institute a school closure and consolidation programme. We have already heard in the debate—and will no doubt hear more—about closures that are planned or have happened across the country. Education authorities should be aware that, although they do not yet have the force of law, the bills' principles represent a high standard of good practice, and communities affected by school closure proposals should rightly expect councils to make every effort to meet such standards. As Ken Macintosh pointed out and as the committee made clear in its stage 1 report, some education authorities do follow these standards; however, we must avoid the perception of councils rushing through closure programmes to escape the added protections of and principles behind this legislation. In my South of Scotland area, parents, pupils and teachers in Coulter and Lamington primary schools are waiting to hear the outcome of a consultation on the future of the two sites and the possibility of a merger. Throughout the consultation period, I encouraged South Lanarkshire Council to bear in mind the principles behind the bill, even if it is not yet law. The council is well known for being quite inclusive in its approach to any school consolidation or closure programme and I welcome the steps that it has  taken to consult widely on this proposal. I hope that it will thoroughly consider the responses to its consultation—and the principles of this legislation—before reaching a final decision. That said, the most worrying aspect for parents is the uncertainty of a school's future, along with the Chinese whispers that can sweep through communities as speculation and rumours run riot and further fuel the panic. If the legislation can stop any unnecessary anxiety and strain, it can only be welcomed. The importance of rural schools to their local communities and economies has been discussed at length during the bill's passage and in the debate and I warmly welcome the strong protection that the legislation will provide for such schools and the communities that they service. Like other members, I benefited from early education in a small rural school—which is still going strong and achieving very good HMIE reports—and have first-hand experience of such schools' valuable contribution to rural Scotland and the country as a whole. After all, we should note not only the good quality education that small rural schools can provide, but the added extras that often allow them to give an enhanced educational experience. Parents, local businesses and community members can play a hugely positive role in such schools and ensure that they are more than just bricks and mortar. Some aspects of the bill are particularly welcome, such as the requirement for the consultation period to include at least 30 days of the school term, and the importance of consulting the pupils as part of the process. The right to be heard is enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, and the bill ensures that that right will be recognised if a school is threatened with closure. Of course, we should always try to find appropriate and sympathetic ways, taking their age into account, of engaging with children and young people about the future of their school. The bill is just one aspect of the Government's ambitions for Scotland's education system. When it is combined with the legislation to reduce the legal maximum class size in the early years, and make progress towards class sizes of 18 in primaries 1 to 3, as well as the introduction of free school meals for the early years, we can see the importance that the Government attaches to every young person in Scotland and that it wants to enable them to achieve the best possible start in life. Regardless of the political parties that we represent, I am sure that we all share that aspiration. Those ambitions are good for the individual child and for the country as a whole  because these young people are the leaders and innovators of tomorrow. As has been said, there will sadly be times when a school closure is unavoidable, but I believe that the bill will help to reduce those occasions to a minimum. However, when it is necessary, I hope that the bill will help with the process of understanding and acceptance among the affected communities. Full transparency, genuine consultation, and a willingness to respond are the hallmarks that will help to ensure that any final decision is made in the best possible interests of the pupils whose education is at stake, and all those who interact with the school in any way. I hope that the bill will attract support across the chamber when we come to decision time because, at its heart, it is about strengthening Scotland's education system and recognising that schools are more than just their buildings. They are often at the heart of the communities that they serve, and they deserve all the support that we can give them.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it  had an input into the Welsh Assembly Government's All Wales Convention. (S3O-8467)

Will the minister join me in welcoming the publication of the All Wales Convention's final report? He will be aware of the consensus in Wales in favour of a referendum to decide the country's constitutional future. Does he agree that it is untenable for politicians such as David Cameron to support a referendum on the constitutional future of Wales while opposing a referendum in Scotland?

I had not intended to speak in the debate but, having heard other speeches, I wanted to highlight some of the things that are going on in the rural parts of the South of Scotland. I congratulate Jamie Stone on securing the debate. In particular, I wish to highlight the international youth games in Lanarkshire. I hope that there will be a legacy and role for some rural parts of South Lanarkshire, which could benefit from the games when they take place in 2011. Rural South Lanarkshire and places further afield could also benefit, I hope, from any legacy to arise from the Commonwealth games, which Glasgow will hold in a few years' time. Some individuals in Clydesdale, in the South of Scotland region, have acted in a way that we should encourage. One chap in Lesmahagow who realised that there was no football coaching in the area, and who had a coaching badge, decided to set up some coaching there—and 60 kids from Lesmahagow showed up one night to play football. They used a local hall and facilities, and it was a success. He is even trying to encourage girls to play football—buying pink balls and using other innovative ways to encourage youngsters from the area to take up sport. That is the kind of initiative that we should encourage. We should encourage parents to take responsibility for encouraging their children to take part in sport. Biggar rugby club is working with parents to encourage folk from the area, including the small villages around Leadhills, to take part in the sport. The club has held youth championships, which have attracted rugby clubs from throughout the South of Scotland. People have shown up to take part and be taught how to play and how to display good sportsmanship. When parents take responsibility, they will travel far afield to enable their children to take part in sports. An issue sprung up for me not long ago when a youngster approached me because she wanted to get access to skating rinks. Because she was not one of the top three skaters in the country, she could not access local authority initiatives that would have helped her to get access to rinks in the area. She could not break into the top three because the national governing body for skating is UK based. Youngsters in Scotland can have a difficult time trying to break through to UK level. Perhaps we should consider having a Scottish arm of governing bodies, so that youngsters can get the access to facilities that they need and become the best that they can be in their sport.  I know that all members, regardless of their political party, want to ensure that people in Scotland become a wee bit healthier and more active. Individuals who are committed to the same outcome are doing much good work on the ground. It is important to link up the initiatives that are being taken across Scotland and, in so doing, provide a platform on which we can all build.

Our history and heritage are hugely important not only because of what they tell us about the past, but because we can learn lessons to help build a better future. That is why I start by welcoming the launch of the Scotland's history website by Learning and Teaching Scotland. It is a wonderful website that gives people from around the world the chance to explore 5,000 years of our country's heritage. It is a welcome demonstration of the Government's commitment to ensure that people in Scotland have the opportunity to learn about and learn from our history and to understand the importance of preserving our heritage for future generations. The built and historic environment summit, to which the motion refers, was an historic first: it was the first event of its kind to be organised by a devolved Scottish Government, but it is not likely to be the last. I declare an interest, as I am one of the people for whom the minister said that Bute hall holds many memories. Some are good, and others—sitting my final exams—are not so good, but it is testament to the foresight of previous generations and of the university authorities that the building has been so well developed and maintained that it can still be used for such wide and varied purposes. Each of us, representing our constituencies and regions, has done well in the debate to highlight historic landmarks and locations that demonstrate what the motion calls "the valuable resource" that our heritage provides to our country's people and our economy. In the South of Scotland, we are lucky enough to have one of this country's five world heritage sites, in Robert Owen's model village of New Lanark, as Karen Gillon mentioned—I agree with a lot of what she said. We pay tribute to those who have been involved in decades of painstaking restoration work to make the village a source of pride for the wider area and an important tourist attraction, as well as a thriving, working, living community in its own right.  As a world heritage site, the village sums up many different aspects of the role of heritage, which the motion touches on. The buildings of New Lanark are there not simply to be looked at; they are there to be lived in, worked in, visited and explored. Inside the public spaces it is possible to learn about the ideals of Robert Owen and the co-operative movement, the emphasis on education for the young and the fair treatment of workers. Those ideas are as much a part of the heritage that New Lanark helps to protect and preserve as the buildings or factory workings. It is fitting, during the year of homecoming, that New Lanark and the country's other world heritage sites were chosen to appear on Clydesdale Bank notes, along with important figures and trail-blazers from Scotland's past.

I agree and I thank the member for saving it. Our historic environment is not simply about buildings and places; there is also the concept of intangible cultural heritage. I was fascinated recently to hear about a new project that is being developed at Edinburgh Napier University in conjunction with local authorities, to seek out and record examples of aspects of our society's history that are difficult to preserve in a traditional museum setting. The aim is ultimately to tie the records into the efforts of the United Nations to record and preserve global examples of intangible cultural heritage. Throughout the south of Scotland there are many important traditions, such as the Lanimer procession through the county town of Lanark, the annual whuppity scoorie event and the galas and marchings that take place in towns and villages. I hope that the Edinburgh Napier University project is a success and can be rolled out throughout Scotland, and that communities throughout the country participate enthusiastically, to ensure that local traditions are recorded and preserved. Sometimes, buildings and places are an important link with the past. For example, in Carluke stands the best-preserved historic windmill in Scotland. It is perhaps no coincidence  that from the site of the Carluke high mill visitors can see modern windmills harnessing the power of the natural environment to provide clean, green energy for our homes and businesses. The high mill, sadly, remains at risk, and I commend the work of South Lanarkshire Council and a range of local interest groups to secure a future for the building. There must be the potential to link the wonderful old mill with the modern wind power that is generating electricity and jobs in the area. I recently visited the remains of the Wilsontown ironworks near Forth in South Lanarkshire. The site is a link with the area's past, and children from the local primary school have been helping with preservation work. At that site and at the Carluke high mill there are problems to do with private ownership. Landlords' lack of sympathy for the cultural significance of what they own can be a barrier to people who want to preserve the built heritage, as Christine Grahame said. How such interests can be reconciled is worthy of further investigation, so that buildings do not fall into such disrepair that there is little point in saving them and they are lost for ever. Monument watch is an innovative scheme to protect historic buildings that has worked in a number of European countries. I have written to the minister about that scheme, which is aimed at owners not just of heritage buildings but of tenements and small houses such as Ted Brocklebank talked about. The aim of the scheme is to survey properties and provide guidance on how to maintain them appropriately and engage with reputable contractors. When I discussed the scheme with people who are involved in it, they told me that the lack of Scotland-sourced stone and slate, due to a decrease in the number of quarries, is a problem. I am not saying that we should open up quarries, but we should consider how we maintain and renovate our historic buildings by sympathetically using materials, so that new stonework and slates match existing materials and weather in the same way. It is worth mentioning the campaign to reduce VAT on repairs and maintenance, especially for listed and historic buildings. Because new buildings are exempt from VAT, it can be cheaper to demolish an old building and build afresh than to preserve and protect historic architecture. The European Union recently allowed national Governments to reduce VAT on repairs and maintenance to 5 per cent, but it will be for the UK Government to implement such a change until the Scottish Parliament regains the power over the financial controls that it needs. The debate has allowed us to focus on the importance of Scotland's historic environment to our economy and society. Whether we are talking about things that we can see and touch, such as  places, buildings and monuments, or about things that we cannot see, such as ideas, arguments and memories, our heritage is undoubtedly the foundation on which future generations will build.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to improve the health and wellbeing of communities in rural areas. (S3O-8309)

Will the minister join me in acknowledging the excellent work of Healthy Valleys, which works to improve the health and wellbeing of communities that are affected by rural deprivation in the Clyde valley, and Clydesdale Community Initiatives, which supports young people at risk and adults with learning difficulties in rural South Lanarkshire? Both organisations are finalists in prestigious award ceremonies next week. Will she join me in wishing them and all the finalists the best of luck?

The cabinet secretary noted that there has been a 42 per cent increase in the uptake of ILAs compared with last year. Will she elaborate on the groups that are benefiting from that?

How have authorities, police and partners reacted to the new powers that they have under the 2007 act? How have they responded to the fact that closer co-operation to address harm is expected of them?

What are the principles behind supporting independent students, who are a group that has never previously had direct financial support?  What benefits will such support bring for many who are retraining through the recession?

Everyone agrees that today's debate has been a useful opportunity to examine in the round some of the challenges and possible options for the future that face rural housing in Scotland. I commend the committee for its thorough report and the Scottish Government for its equally robust response. It is encouraging that there are many areas of agreement and that, in other areas, the Government is prepared to enter into dialogue and discussion with the committee. Appropriate housing in rural areas—what the Government calls "the right type and tenure in the right places"— is a key piece of the jigsaw that makes up life in rural communities across Scotland today. The committee and the Government agree that there is no doubt that many more houses need to be built in rural Scotland, if many communities are to be sustainable in the long term. Attractive and affordable homes are an important factor in encouraging people to settle in the countryside. That is why I welcome the steps that the Government is taking to increase housing supply and the support that it is providing to local authorities and registered social landlords. The fact that the Government's pilot programme to fund the construction of new rural homes for rent was so heavily oversubscribed is surely a vote of confidence in its methods. Although that means that some areas are necessarily left disappointed at this stage, I am pleased that the project is delivering £5 million to provide 75 new properties in rural Scotland. As Elaine Murray said, some of those will be in the South of Scotland region. I welcome the Government's commitment to ending the right to buy for new-build social housing, which will improve availability of housing stock in both urban and rural areas. The Government is also consulting on ending the right to buy for new tenants entering the social rented sector and on reforming pressured area status, which has the potential to make it easier for housing authorities to plan with confidence for the future. For the first time since devolution began, the Government is investing serious money in the construction of council houses. In the South of Scotland region, East Lothian, North Ayrshire and  South Lanarkshire are all set to benefit from that investment. In total, those areas will receive more than £5 million, with the construction of 201 new houses. There are a number of exciting and ambitious proposals in the South of Scotland region that could help to boost housing supply. Particularly interesting is the proposal to develop a brand new community in rural South Lanarkshire, Owenstown, named after Robert Owen, the founder of New Lanark. Now a world heritage site, as well as a thriving community in its own right where people continue to live and work, New Lanark was an innovative model village when it was first established in 1785. More than two centuries later, it is proposed that Owenstown, too, be developed on co-operative principles, as a model of a sustainable, eco-aware settlement for others to learn from and to imitate. I look forward to seeing how the proposals develop in the future and wish the Owenstown Co-operative Society well in developing its ideas. A range of factors, beyond simply cash and numbers, influences the availability and quality of rural housing. The committee has dealt with a number of those in its report. I was particularly interested to read its recommendations on support for unplugged housing and facilitating connections to the national grid and mains supplies, where appropriate. I was interested in the points that were made on the issue; the committee was correct to highlight the need for it to be addressed. As Rob Gibson explained, for many people in the South of Scotland, lack of mains connections to electricity, gas, sewerage systems and, sometimes, even water supply is not an uncommon experience. A parliamentary question that I lodged back in May revealed that, after the Highlands and the north-east, the South of Scotland region has the highest number of domestic fuel oil users, each paying an average of £900 in the years between 2004 and 2007. The other day, answers to parliamentary questions lodged by my colleague Maureen Watt, the convener of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, revealed the staggeringly high cost of transmission charges for use of the national grid in Scotland compared with the rest of the UK. Such prices are hardly an incentive for companies that may wish to invest in and, therefore, attract jobs and housing demand to our rural areas. The committee also dealt with the issue of renovation, maintenance and repair of rural homes. I join the Scottish Government in highlighting the need to support landlords who want to expand or maintain their range of properties. There is an on-going campaign for reductions in VAT for repair and maintenance charges. Like Alex Neil and Christine Grahame, I  hope that, until such time as the Parliament acquires the full fiscal powers that it needs to make a difference in those areas, the UK Government will listen to the committee, our ministers and all who support that campaign. There is an important cultural aspect to preserving and developing rural buildings. That is recognised by a scheme called monument watch, whose work I would like briefly to highlight. Monument watch exists to ensure that old historic buildings are maintained and preserved properly by people being trained in traditional methods and traditional materials being used. That is important for the long-term stability of older buildings. If old country houses or hospitals can be transformed into multiple dwellings in a sensitive and appropriate manner, that is surely to be encouraged. The committee's report notes that, and highlights the importance of getting planning guidance right in the areas concerned. I was interested to read that the committee believes that there is something of an inherent conservatism, and often a presumption against development on the part of rural planning authorities. That might come as a surprise to residents of Douglas in South Lanarkshire, who face the development of a new opencast quarry in their area, and to the residents of Biggar, Lamington and the surrounding area, who are trying to stop plans for a sand-and-gravel quarry at Overburns farm on the banks of the Clyde. There is scepticism about the number of jobs that such developments will generate, and there is genuine concern about the impact not just on the environment and the landscape, but on health, the roads and other infrastructure in the area. If too many such developments put people off the idea of moving to the countryside, or make rural areas less attractive places to live, then all the good work that is being done to improve housing supply will come to very little. The point about appropriate infrastructure is worth developing. A few weeks ago, I spoke in the state 1 debate on the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill, and I highlighted the importance of small rural schools to the communities that they serve, not simply through the education that they provide to the next generation, but as the focus for community events and facilities. If we are to increase and improve the housing supply in rural areas, we must ensure that the necessary amenities and facilities are there. Good-quality, attractive local schools make the possibility of setting up a home in the country much more manageable for young families. Therefore, I once again welcome the steps that the Government is taking to protect rural schools from inappropriate closures and mergers, and I encourage local authorities that are consulting on plans for  closures and mergers to bear in mind the wider impact that such decisions can have. The future of rural housing is crucial to the future of our rural communities, and indeed to that of the country as a whole. I therefore commend the work of the committee and its recommendations—and the interesting debate that the committee's report has prompted.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to support rural development during the economic downturn. (S3O-7979)

I welcome the Government's decision to invite representatives from all rural areas in Scotland, including Clydesdale in the South of Scotland constituency, to last week's rural gathering. How will the outcomes of the event help rural communities to fight the recession?

Every child in Scotland deserves the best possible start in life and the best possible education. We owe it to teachers and support staff—the dedicated professionals who deliver education—to debate teacher numbers in a fair and rational manner. We must be clear about the goals that we want to achieve and the challenges that exist in achieving them. The SNP Government knows the value of education in Scotland. In the face of the global recession, supporting our education system at every level is an investment in skills and knowledge that will allow Scotland to grow in the future. That is why we reintroduced free education in universities and why we are committed to getting things right in the earliest years of primary education, especially through free school meals and lower class sizes. While the Scottish Government continues to look with confidence at what Scotland can achieve and how best to achieve that in the face of the tightest budgets that any devolved Administration has had to deal with, the Labour Party continues its relentlessly negative carping and criticism. It has no new ideas and no positive outlook for the future. We are all scunnered with hearing the cry of broken promises. [ Interruption. ]

No. I want to make progress, please. The cries that we hear are simply a broken record that Labour members play over and over again, irrespective of the content of any Scottish Government announcement or any policy that it brings forward. Only in the Labour Party's eyes could figures that show year-on-year progress towards lower class sizes be seen as evidence that class sizes are not falling, or a commitment to reduce the legal maximum number of pupils in primary 1 classes from 30 to 25 be seen as an announcement that we are not serious about cutting class sizes. Karen Gillon may be interested to know that, in South Lanarkshire in 2006, when her Government was still in charge, fewer than 7 per cent of children in P1 to P3 were in class sizes of fewer than 18 pupils. In February this year, under the SNP, that figure had almost doubled to 13.7 per cent. Of course, Labour is still trying to deflect attention from the record low class sizes. There is an average of 23.2 pupils per primary class.

No. You did not take an intervention from me. You might have been interested to know that—

Okay. I will make some progress. Labour is trying to deflect attention from the record low class sizes by focusing on teacher numbers. However, once again, the broken record spins around to reveal that, in fact, the SNP is dealing with a mess that was bequeathed to it by a Labour Administration that got its sums wrong. It takes time to train teachers. It takes four years to complete a bachelor of education course and one year to complete a postgraduate diploma in education course. Either way, teachers who finished their probationary year in June 2009 would have studied on a course as part of a cohort of trainees whose numbers were set in either 2003-04 or 2006-07 by the previous Administration. We accept that planning to provide teachers is not an exact science. That is why the cabinet secretary established a workforce planning task force. It was established so that future plans can be made with confidence, irrespective of which party is in charge. Even with such challenges, the SNP has achieved an historic low in the pupil teacher ratio. There is now one teacher for every 13 pupils in Scotland, compared with one teacher for every 17 pupils in England and Northern Ireland, and one teacher for every 18 pupils in Wales. The situation is open to sudden and not easily predictable change. There are almost 10,000 primary and secondary teachers in Scotland who are over 55 and could retire at any time. If that happened, I have no doubt that the Labour Party would be the first to howl that we had failed to provide enough trainee teachers to fill the gap. That is not enough to stop the Labour Party simply trying to apportion blame to the current Administration for the number of newly qualified teachers who are looking for work. Of course, it is not the Scottish Government's job to recruit or employ teachers directly—that is, rightly, the role of local authorities. Perhaps it is just coincidence that most of the local authorities that have seen fit to cut the number of teachers that they employ are run by the Labour Party. SNP-majority councils have, on average, increased spending on education by 3.5 per cent this year; for Labour-majority councils, the figure has been only 2.5 per cent. In national and local government, the SNP puts the interests of Scotland's children first.  People in Scotland may hear the noise that is being made by Labour's broken record about broken promises, but they will pay attention to experience on the ground. Many children throughout the country are benefiting from our investment in education, and many more will continue to do so in years to come. I am confident that the Scottish Government will do all that it can to get the right number of teachers in the right place at the right time. That is the difference between getting on with government and the simple complaining from hapless Opposition members.

Will the member give way?

Can the cabinet secretary confirm that the support for Scotland's students that was set out two years ago is part of this year's budget? Can he confirm that the investment that is needed to support students in training is a vital part of the economic programme?

Sport is never far from the minds of many people in Scotland. It is often said that only in Scotland do people start reading their newspapers from the back. However, as other members have recognised in this debate, there is a gap between the amount of sport—particularly football—that is watched in Scotland and the amount of sport in which people actually participate. The committee is to be congratulated on producing a thorough report that provides a useful analysis of the challenges in increasing the number of young people who take part in sport and physical activity. Although we may debate some specifics in the report's recommendations, I am sure that we all agree with the broad themes and overall aim of getting young people active. As the report notes, regular physical exercise is hugely important not only for the physical wellbeing but for the mental wellbeing of youngsters and, by extension, for society as a whole. Jamie McGrigor mentioned that. The report acknowledges some of the challenges in inspiring young people, particularly girls, to take part in sport. As a woman, it is alarming—yet not entirely surprising—that two thirds of teenage girls are reported to be physically inactive. There are high drop-out rates among girls once PE becomes optional in the school curriculum, with peer pressure, low self-esteem and physical changes no doubt taking some of the blame. Why is that the case? Why does PE become so unattractive? The traditional games and activities that are taught in PE lessons may have something to do with it. I note that the report highlights successes where schools have branched out into offering gym-style equipment and dance classes—no doubt the dance classes benefit from television programmes such as "Strictly Come Dancing",  which raise the profile of dance and encourage people to take up the activity. PE teaching needs to be fleet of foot in order to evolve in ways that keep it relevant to youngsters.

There are initiatives to encourage young girls to get involved in PE. For me, it was more a question about of what was on offer, and less—as is probably evidenced by my hairstyles of late—about not wanting to get my hair out of place. I recently spent some time in Iceland, where I saw many prominent adverts backing the country's women's football team, which had qualified for the Union of European Football Associations women's championships. In Scotland, it is rare to see women's fitba mentioned on the back pages of the papers that we all are so keen to read. We have to do more to promote role models and success stories to make sport more attractive to girls. It is important that we get this right. Even if every school meets the two-hour target—which we all want—the impact will be small if children continue to particulate reluctantly in classes or feel that they are being forced into something they do not want to do. We can also take a positive outlook. Progress has been made towards the target of two hours of good quality physical education every week and we should welcome the fact that the target is included within the curriculum for excellence. Indeed, a number of local authorities have chosen to include it in their single outcome agreements with the Government. For example, North Ayrshire Council, in the South of Scotland region, aims to have 80 per cent of primary schools and 82 per cent of secondary schools providing two hours of PE per week by 2012, with an eventual target of 100 per cent. Under the terms of the historic concordat, it is right that each authority should decide how it wants work towards the target. We should also remember that the target was inherited by the present Scottish Government and that the previous Administration accepted that it would take time to achieve. Important though the target is, Government policies will not, by themselves, bring about the culture shift that is needed to get Scotland active. If children are to learn at school how to get active, PE lessons will need to be easy and attractive; children should  want to put into practise outside of school the skills that they learn in school. At the weekend, I spent time at the Biggar Rugby Football Club's annual mini-tournament, where teams from primary schools across Scotland came to compete against each other over the course of a day. What makes the tournament such a success is the crucial role that parents and guardians play in supporting the teams and helping the event to run smoothly. Such parental involvement is essential. Engagement of the whole family and activation of parental responsibility are very important in getting kids active. Jamie McGrigor may be interested to know that Biggar RFC has a successful programme in which it reaches out to the primary schools that feed the area's secondaries, including Biggar high school and Lanark grammar school. The programme helps to raise the profile of the game and to create teams of youngsters, some of whom may eventually go on into the first XV. I am pleased to say that Biggar RFC received funding from the Scottish Government's cashback for communities programme—funding that helped it to establish midnight rugby leagues for young people in some of the more deprived areas of the county. The investment of well-targeted cashback for communities funding shows what can be achieved with relatively modest amounts of money. Burnbraes park in Biggar has been transformed in recent years thanks to the work of Janet Moxley and other community activists, who have won grants from a range of sources to maintain the park and to install new play equipment that is suitable for, and attractive to, different age groups. Other areas could learn from their work. I have passed on information about it to Lanark play parks action group. In a recent survey by the group, 60 per cent of respondents rated the condition of the town's play parks as "very poor". Even the nicest play park can seem miserable on a cold, dark winter's evening, so we must ensure that Scotland has the facilities to enable people to take part in sport all year round. When preparing for this debate, I was reminded of a report that was published by my colleague Kenny MacAskill back in 2005, which showed the massive success of Norway in investing in all-weather pitches throughout the country. In recent months, we in Scotland have learned only too well the effects of Norway's investment in sport. Of course, the fundamental difference between Norway—which has a surplus of $70 billion and is not facing £500 million-worth of cuts—and Scotland will not be lost on my SNP colleagues. I was interested to see that the committee report mentions the lack of ice rinks. From my work in Cunninghame South, I know that parents are  concerned about the closure of the Magnum leisure centre in Irvine. Ultimately, if we want Scotland to do well in sport at international level, we must get it right for youngsters at the earliest opportunity. For as long as I can remember, we have been scratching our heads about how to improve Scotland's international footballing performance, although I remember that years ago the question was why we had not made into the later rounds of the tournament, not why we had not got there in the first place. The committee's report is useful as we move forward, outlines many of the challenges that we face and suggests a range of solutions. I am glad that we have had the opportunity to discuss those today.

Will Rhoda Grant congratulate the Scottish Government on managing to get a 50m pool in Aberdeen, which the Labour Party did not achieve?

Will the member give way?

It has not been long since Scottish schools came back from their summer holidays, and now we, too, are back from our summer recess. No doubt many schoolchildren are writing up their reports and essays on what they did during their holidays. In Parliament, however, we have the opportunity to look at what we hope to achieve in the coming parliamentary year. I am glad that among the various important topics that Parliament is discussing this week we have this chance to debate the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill at stage 1. We might disagree on some of the other business that is before us, but I hope that we can reach a consensus on the importance of consulting communities on decisions about the future of schools. As far as the bill is concerned, a constructive spirit has certainly been evident in the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, of which I am a member. I, too, thank the wide range of organisations and individuals who gave evidence to the committee as we began our deliberations. In particular, the Scottish rural schools network's submissions were very helpful, and I congratulate the group on its efforts over many years to bring a grass-roots perspective to the debate on the future of our rural schools. The bill sets out procedures that urban and rural local authorities should follow in considering the possible closure of schools in their areas. Bob Doris has already told us about the devastating impact of the poorly handled consultation and brutal closure programme that has affected so many of his constituents in Glasgow. However, as a representative of the largely rural South of  Scotland region, I want to highlight the impact that the bill will have on rural schools. I should declare an interest, in that I am a product of a rural school system. My primary school, in Collace in Perthshire, was a very small school with a maximum roll of no more than 30 in the time that I was there. I am glad that the school is still there, playing an important role in the community. The community role of schools, both urban and rural, is often the most important role, but it is perhaps often the most overlooked aspect when a closure programme is implemented. Rural schools are centres of education, and it is often very good education that produces well-rounded and high-achieving children. The schools prepare our young children for the future, while helping them to learn about and maintain respect for the environment and the communities of which they are part. The schools form part of the community, as meeting and function places and as social hubs for the areas that they serve. Therefore, when a rural community's school is threatened with closure, the concern is not just about the loss of an educational facility and the hassle and disruption of moving children to an alternative establishment; there is a real concern about the loss of a community hub, and the coffee mornings, after-school clubs, social events and meeting places that rural schools provides. Not just the teachers and pupils and their parents or guardians but the whole local population and the local economy are affected. The issue is not a new one for the Parliament—we have discussed it many times—but the bill gives us the opportunity to do something to help protect schools and the communities that they serve. The bill will provide protection for schools by demanding that local authorities show the educational benefits of proposed changes and by ensuring that authorities go through a much more rigorous process than currently happens in some areas. That process will include the local community scrutinising the basis of decisions, which I hope will mean that if, at the end of the process, a school, sadly, has to close, the trauma and difficulties will be lessened as a result of the process of consultation and scrutiny. One key aspect of the consultation proposals is the introduction of an adequate amount of time for consultation with the whole community, even those who do not have a child at the school. The consultation will have to take place over at least six weeks of term time, so it will not be possible to sneak it through during a holiday period, when people might be away or their attention might be elsewhere. That will help to mitigate the effect of whispers and rumours, which in themselves can be disruptive and unsettling for the community.  I have direct experience of that in the South of Scotland region. Last winter, word started spreading among schools in the upper ward area of Clydesdale that South Lanarkshire Council was considering closing or merging a number of small primary schools. I raised the issue in Parliament and held several special surgeries to listen to the concerns of parents, so that I could pass them on to the local authority. Because the council raised the issue only informally with some parent councils, many local people felt that they were not getting the full story about what the local authority had in mind. The council has now announced that it plans to undertake a full formal statutory consultation on options for Coulter and Lamington primary schools. As Malcolm Chisholm and others have said, I hope that, in doing so, the council will adhere to the best practice that is outlined in the bill, even if it is not yet law. As the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee convener did, I welcome the proposal in the bill to ensure that children who would be affected by a closure are involved in the consultation process. I raised that issue in the committee. Scotland's Commissioner for Children and Young People is keen to raise awareness about the importance of consulting children in an age-appropriate manner. As the commissioner has pointed out, the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child enshrines a child's right to be heard in all decisions that affect their life. The convention also includes a right to education and states that the child's best interests must be a primary consideration in decisions that affect them. I am glad that the cabinet secretary has given that evidence a sympathetic response in the bill. We are at an early stage in the legislative process so, no doubt, further refinements will be made to the bill before it becomes law. However, given the debates that we have had and the evidence that we have heard in the committee, and given the broad welcome for the principles of the bill from across the chamber, I believe that we can reach a consensus decision at the end of the process. If we get the legislation right, in future, when children come back from their summer holidays, perhaps fewer of them will do so in a new or merged school, and more will be able to write about how their local school continues to benefit their education and the wider community that it serves.

To ask the Scottish Government what structures are in place to monitor the transportation of nuclear material in Scotland. (S3O-7463)

The concerns of constituents in my region about nuclear convoys passing up and down the M74 have been reinforced by the recent screening in Lanark of the documentary "Deadly Cargo". Does the minister share my disappointment that the Calman commission saw no need to devolve further powers over nuclear materials to the Scottish Parliament? Does he agree that, far from frustrating United Kingdom Government plans for nuclear power stations and a new generation of Trident, the Scottish Government's opposition to those plans represents the views of the overwhelming majority of those who live close to the M74 and of people across Scotland who want our country to be nuclear free?

Town centres are, almost by definition, at the very heart of many of Scotland's communities. Often, they are literally and geographically central to an area and provide an economic and social focus for local activity. With the right support, our high streets and town centres can help Scotland to find its way to economic recovery. For that reason, I am grateful both to the members who have given their support to allow us to debate the motion tonight and to those members who have stayed behind to participate in the debate. I am pleased to welcome a journalist from the local newspapers that serve the towns of Lanark, Carluke and Biggar in the South of Scotland region who is following our debate from the media gallery. I will focus on the South of Scotland region tonight, although the issues that I will raise are, of course, relevant to the country as a whole. Since being elected to Parliament in 2007, I have made my home in Biggar. As anyone who has read some of my recent motions will know, Biggar is a town full of good news stories. Its High Street benefits from the presence of an award-winning chippie, an ice-cream shop and an Indian restaurant. The town's youth project, which is supported by the cashback for communities fund, provides healthy lunches and a safe environment for local schoolchildren. The town is thriving with many small independent shops, where folk can meet for a coffee and a chat. Biggar is a place that people are proud to be part of and to do their bit to maintain. Biggar demonstrates the positive contribution that town centres can make to our economy and society during the economic downturn.  Like many towns in rural South Lanarkshire, this very week Biggar is celebrating its annual gala, with traditional ridings and marches. The town's Fleming queen is a local primary school pupil by the name of Aileen Campbell—I wish her the best of luck. Tomorrow, the county town of Lanark celebrates its Lanimers festival. I look forward to joining the crowds on Lanark High Street and I hope that the sun shines for all. The Lanimers procession shows the High Street at its very best: full of young families cheering the lorries as they go past and demonstrating a civic pride that media commentators often think is lost nowadays. Although I have no doubt that Lanimers provides a boost to the local economy, I want to work with colleagues to ensure that, for the other 364 days of the year, Lanark town centre gets the help and support that it needs. I understand that the community council and the local council-led town group have put aside their differences to examine how best they can apply to the Scottish Government's town centre regeneration fund. That is very much to be welcomed. Indeed, the Scottish Government's town centre regeneration fund itself is to be welcomed. The fund has been welcomed by members from across the parties, as is evidenced by the many motions and parliamentary questions on the fund since it was announced. Members on all sides recognise the importance and significance of the Government's finding £60 million to invest in our town centres just as the downturn begins seriously to take hold. Despite the examples that I have given, there is no question but that many of our high streets are struggling. The most obvious example is the closure of Woolworths. It is not uncommon to see people shaking their heads sadly as they walk past a closed and forlorn-looking former branch of Woolworths on their high street. Lanark, Irvine, Ayr and Dumfries are just some of the towns in the South of Scotland that lost a Woolworths branch. Such closures can have a knock-on effect on the rest of the town centre, as smaller shops lose passing trade and boarded-up shopfronts deter visitors—as, perhaps, do the takeaways that are open at night but closed during the day. Many constituents have contacted me about the perilous state of other town centres in the region, plenty of which never had a Woolworths. For example, Carluke has been hit by various closures in recent times and a number of its residents have expressed concern about the possibility of a new supermarket development outside the town's traditional central shopping area. Instead of being downbeat, however, plenty of local residents and businesses have positive ideas about how to develop the town centre. I have met representatives of the town's development trust  who are interested in finding ways of making the town centre regeneration fund work for Carluke. Local entrepreneurs have also enthusiastically outlined their plans for a children's activity centre that would entertain younger residents while their parents made the most of the town's shopping facilities. Many similarly imaginative initiatives are taking place across the United Kingdom. For example, England's Local Government Association has called for artists and other community projects to be allowed to take over disused shop spaces. Even simple steps like that can help to brighten up an area and keep a town centre attractive during the downturn. Another successful initiative from which we in Scotland can learn is the renaissance town movement. The movement places local empowerment at the heart of work to redesign and improve town centres. Towns in East Renfrewshire have been exploring the possibilities that are offered by that idea. In doing so, they have been supported by Architecture and Design Scotland, which is funded by the Scottish Government and is a partner in the initiative. A conference to discuss the ideas involved will be held on 25 June. I hope that many local authorities will participate and learn more about how those creative ideas can be applied to their areas. Such ideas help to give local residents and visitors a reason to spend time—and to enjoy doing so—in their local high streets and, importantly, to have a say in what their town looks like. During this year of homecoming, we can also be creative about how we raise the profile and tourism value of our town centres. Recently, I was delighted to be contacted by the civic government of Irvine, California, which suggested that the city establish formal friendship city ties with its namesake in Ayrshire. I am actively pursuing the suggestion with the local council, as it is exactly the sort of shot in the arm from which many of our smaller towns and high streets could benefit. Not every application to the town centre regeneration fund will be successful, but I believe that the Government's criteria are fair and that, if local stakeholders get their act together and co-operate properly, there is a level playing field and all to play for. One criterion is the definition of a town centre. For an area to be defined as a town centre, it must be described as such in the development plan. That means that some communities that have high streets and an array of different shops that face some of the challenges that I have outlined may miss out on part of the fund; Lesmahagow and Carnwath in South Lanarkshire are examples. I am working with the community councils in those places to see how they can be supported outside the regeneration  fund process. One important step would be for the local authority to reverse its decision to close Lesmahagow's much-loved Jubilee hall, which was opposed by more than 80 per cent of respondents to a recent survey of mine. I am glad that the Parliament has this opportunity to raise awareness of both the challenges facing our high streets and the examples and initiatives from which others can learn. I am sure that other members will be able to offer interesting examples from their areas. I look forward to hearing the minister outline how the Scottish Government will continue to invest in and develop town centres in the South of Scotland and throughout the country.

The minister will be aware that I have been a strong supporter of the Government's action on food and drink and that I have been pursuing some ideas of my own on how to incentivise the purchase of quality local produce. Will he join me in welcoming the launch, in the headquarters of South Lanarkshire Council on 15 June, of a new guide to food and drink in the Clyde valley, which the Scottish Government has supported through the LEADER programme? Does he agree that, in tough economic times, local producers need all the help that they can get?

The minister will be aware of the serious local concern in the Douglas area of South Lanarkshire at the prospect of a new opencast quarry at Mainshill. Will the minister confirm that the Scottish Government's decision not to call in that proposal means that the final decision on whether to proceed rests with South Lanarkshire Council and not with the Scottish ministers?

As we reach the final stage of the bill's consideration, it is fair to say that it has been through the legislative wringer to a greater extent than some of us might have expected at the outset. That is not necessarily a bad thing, as the Parliament was designed to ensure rigorous scrutiny and debate. In a Parliament of minorities, it is important that all sides of the argument are heard. However, now that we have reached the final stage of the bill's consideration, I hope that the Parliament can come to a consensus about the best way to ensure that some of Scotland's most vulnerable children and families get the support and advice that they need. As a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee—the lead committee for scrutiny of the bill—I had a degree of sympathy with the policy direction of some of my committee colleagues. We might not all have agreed about how best to use the bill to travel in that direction, but it was clear to me that we had to be sure that its implementation would focus on ending the many problems that were raised in the evidence that we took, which was highly compelling. As I said in my speech in the stage 1 debate—a debate that was notable for the degree of cross-party consensus—witnesses told us that the 2004 act does not always meet the needs of the parents, families and children who are in desperate need of support. I was aware from my constituency casework of the difficulties that parents faced when trying to do the best for their child with additional needs. Unfortunately, much of the evidence we heard did nothing other than to confirm what many of us have experienced in our casework. The committee heard about parents struggling to get the help that they needed, about cases dragging on for long periods, and about parents being pitted against teams of lawyers representing the council.  Those examples were of children lucky enough to have parents to care for them. We heard about the plight of looked-after children, Gypsy Traveller children and children with parents in the forces. It was clear that, despite the good intentions of the 2004 act, changes needed to be made. In response, the Government was clear that it was committed to improving the quality of life and support available to those with additional support needs and those who care for them. It was also clear about the financial implications of the bill. Parents of children with additional support needs would be given extra protections when making placing requests, the tribunal system would be extended, and mediation and dispute resolution responsibilities would move to the authority responsible for education rather than the home authority. Through the course of the committee's deliberations, the minister made it clear that he was committed to a suite of initiatives that would complement the bill. The Government wants to ensure that adequate levels of information are provided for parents and that looked-after children are not hindered or held back. The minister told us that he was actively working with the parents of disabled children to listen to their views and experiences at first hand and that he was committed to looking to help young carers, among a plethora of other measures. That clearly illustrated the SNP Administration's desire literally to get it right for every child. We all have the opportunity now to ensure that we, too, do our best to get it right for every child and get the best possible piece of legislation, which is tailored to suit the needs of some of the most vulnerable families and children in Scotland. For that to be achieved, we need to have level heads and to put party politics to the side. It has been regretful that some members, in their contributions, have sought to change the tone of today's debate. Now that we have come through the legislative process, the debates and the scrutiny, I am confident that Parliament can unite behind the bill. Once again, I express our commitment to providing the best possible support for Scotland's children with additional needs and their families. I thank the minister for his contribution to the committee's deliberations on the bill.

There is an old saying that England and America are two countries separated by a common language. My experience of visiting the States is that the version of English that we speak in Scotland often sounds like a completely different language to American lugs. Indeed, I am sure that many of the interns who work for members throughout the chamber will testify to that. However, they will also testify that, while it may sound impenetrable at first, the common denominator is not so much the way in which our common language is spoken, but what is said. For many decades—indeed, for centuries—Scotland has been lucky enough to speak a  language of friendship with the peoples of North America, in both the US and Canada. That language of friendship extends to the principles of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness that are mentioned in the American declaration of independence and in the bills of rights that have been adopted in Canada over the years. As with many such declarations around the world, Scotland's declaration of Arbroath and its assertion of the right of the people to choose who governs them inspired those documents and charters. For that reason, 6 April—the date on which, 689 years ago, the declaration of Arbroath was signed—was picked as the date for the first US tartan day in 1998. It is worth noting that several Canadian provinces marked tartan day before the idea was adopted in America, but that is just more evidence of the close relationships among our three countries and the benefits that come from working and learning together. Tartan day has grown and evolved to become what we now know as Scotland week. I believe that we can all be proud of the Parliament's achievements in building on that relationship and in strengthening the dialogue between our countries. This year's Scotland week events built on the success of those of previous years, with official events taking place in 10 cities across the US and Canada. There was an amazing amount of formal and informal activity, both in North America and in Scotland, to make the most of the week. The Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution recorded his experiences—as Charlie Gordon noted—in an exciting blog, which includes some impressive pictures of his time representing our country. As the minister said, Scotland week is just one very visible and high-profile manifestation of the relationship between Scotland and the US and Canada, but links of all kinds take place on a daily basis. Anyone in Scotland who traces their family tree back through a couple of generations is likely to find links to North America. We often refer to Americans and Canadians as our cousins, and many families in Scotland literally have cousins or relatives who live across the Atlantic. Scotland's online national archives are well-known to American genealogists, and the popularity of TV programmes such as "Who Do You Think You Are?" and of Radio Scotland's "Digging Up Your Roots" testify that the interest and curiosity work both ways. Indeed, roots often go deeper. In my family, my father tells the legend that some of our ancestors moved to Canada, where they invented the McIntosh Red apple. I am not sure whether that is true, but I hope that it is. Having mentioned the success of television programmes on genealogy, I should point out that  TV entertainment is also shared by our countries. I happen to know that Scotland's own celebrity interior designers, Colin and Justin—whom I met at the Young Scot awards—are hugely popular in Canada. The culture minister will be delighted to know that they have offered their services to promote the year of homecoming in whatever way they can. It is appropriate that today's debate on the success of Scotland week and on our relations with the US and Canada takes place during the year of homecoming. No one visiting Scotland this year, or with an affinity for Scotland, can fail to notice that we have opened wide our country's doors to welcome anyone and everyone who wishes to learn more. We want people to visit Scotland to enjoy what we have to offer the world, and we want to learn from them. Such an initiative would be good and commendable at any time, but it is especially welcome now as the world experiences economic recession. Leisure travel and tourism often suffer early and seriously as disposable incomes diminish, so the year of homecoming will help to insulate Scotland by making an extra case for visiting this country at a time when people need to choose carefully where and when they wish to travel. The 200,000 potential visitors who are included in VisitScotland's loyalty programme receive monthly updates about homecoming, as do more than 2,400 diaspora organisations around the world. Tourism from the US and Canada is worth hundreds of millions of pounds to Scotland's economy—almost £1 million per day, or some 22 per cent of the total spend by overseas tourists in 2007. We do not yet know how those figures will be affected during the economic downturn, but it is clear that such tourists will continue to remain of huge importance. I know that many of us in the Parliament have done our own bit to promote homecoming. I have written to municipal representatives in towns and cities—such as Biggar, Saskatchewan, and Irvine, California—that share place names with towns in the South of Scotland, which I represent. I have also been involved in trying to make it a little easier for people from Scotland who wish to travel to the US, especially those who wish to make an impact that will benefit Scotland in the long run. As members will be aware, the US consulate in Edinburgh stopped issuing visas several years ago so the recent understandable tightening of visa restrictions has resulted in more and more people from Scotland finding that they must travel to London to acquire a visa. That can prove particularly expensive for bands that wish to travel on tour. Bands such as Mogwai and representatives of other bands have told me about  the high costs of travelling to London in order to play in the US. Such costs might have a negative impact on the cultural exchanges to which the minister referred, so I have had a meeting with the US consul, Lisa Vickers, to discuss the issue. Of course, independent countries such as Norway, Ireland and even Iceland have a full US embassy with all the associated visa and diplomatic services that are attached to such institutions. There is much that Scotland, the US and Canada can learn from one another. Just as an aside, perhaps one important lesson is that deciding to have a Parliament whose purse strings are not controlled by London is no barrier to success in the modern world. However, even under devolution, Scotland continues to improve and develop its relationships with countries around the world. As today's debate has shown, our relationship with North America is among the most important and historic of them all.

Will the minister explain how the number of retirals by schoolteachers can skew statistics for workforce planning?

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it provides to local authorities to maintain and develop community halls in rural areas. (S3O-6679)

The cabinet secretary may be aware that South Lanarkshire Council has decided to close the Jubilee hall in Lesmahagow, in the South of Scotland region. A survey that I am conducting shows that that has caused extreme disappointment among the local community. Does the cabinet secretary agree that such halls represent more than simply local facilities and can play a role at the heart of their communities? Does he also agree that any decision to close or change the use of such halls should be taken with full transparency, consultation and accountability?

In his discussions with the students, did the member remind them that, if Labour had won the 2007 election, they would still be having to pay for their tuition?

Over the two years of this Parliament, I have been delighted to support the massive steps forward that the SNP Government has taken to improve the quality of education that is available to every level of Scottish society. The Government reinstated free higher education, has legislated for free school meals for our youngest children and is making real progress on reducing class sizes. I am happy to defend the SNP Government's strong record on education. On the other hand, the Liberal Democrats' motion is like a broken record, endlessly repeating the same old complaints with little to back up its claims and even less in the way of positive suggestions.

I believe that you delivered 1,100 fewer teachers than you said you would, so I am quite happy to stand here and defend the Government. Perhaps more than any other sector, investment in education is investment in the future. It takes time for the full rewards of any particular policy or funding decision to be seen, because time spent in education is about preparing learners for what they will do afterwards. That is as true for youngsters entering P1 as it is for mature students in one of our colleges or universities. As a result, the Scottish Government has invested in the full spectrum of our education services in order to  benefit not just individual learners but, ultimately, society as a whole. Some of this Government's education legislation is among its finest and most important achievements. Having as a student campaigned for the restoration of free education, I am proud to have been able to vote here in Scotland's Parliament for the legislation to reinstate that policy. The Liberal Democrats might not understand the egalitarian principles behind the introduction of free school meals, but that move was one of the Parliament's most progressive acts. Tavish Scott might dismiss it as feeding "rich kids", but that does a disservice to a policy that reduces inequality in the playground, improves concentration in the classroom and is, in itself, educational by teaching kids from all walks of life healthy eating habits that will last a lifetime. The Lib Dems complain that progress on reducing class sizes has been neither fast nor significant enough. They might want to tell that to the nearly 14 per cent of P1 to P3 pupils in South Lanarkshire who are now benefiting from being in a class of fewer than 18. In 2006, under the previous Administration—of which the Liberal Democrats were a part—only 6.9 per cent of young primary pupils were in small classes.

I want to make progress. Of course, the motion says nothing about the previous Administration, which, after all, formulated the plans for training the current number of teachers now entering the workforce. If the Liberal Democrats believe that there are more trained teachers than there are places available, they should perhaps have thought of that when their ministers were signing off workforce planning models before 2007. As the minister made clear, the Government has taken steps to reshape those models for the future to ensure that the right number of teachers are in place to give our children the education that they need and deserve. There is also a responsibility on councils to spend the funding that they have been given through the concordat in a way that helps to reduce class sizes. February's statistics show that 18 out of 32 councils are making progress and that more than 75 per cent of pupils in the early years are in classes of fewer than 25 pupils, which is an improvement on the figure of 60 per cent in 2006, under the Lib-Lab Administration. The motion, like most of the motions that the Liberal Democrats bring to the Parliament, could simply read that they are still shocked that the voters of Scotland had the bare-faced cheek not to vote them back into government in 2007. However, two years ago, people voted for a different kind of government, because they were  fed up with the lack of ambition and the steady-as-we-go managerial complacency that was the hallmark of the previous devolved Administrations. People in Scotland voted for the SNP Government and Alex Salmond as First Minister because they were ambitious about the future of the country. People believed that the devolution settlement could deliver more than it already had and they were ready for the boundaries of the settlement to be pushed. That is what people voted for and that is what is being delivered. Opposition members might not like it, but that does not mean that the SNP Government is not making real and tangible progress on the ground. Of course, more can always be done, and the task will become more difficult in the face of the cuts that the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer are imposing on the Parliament. The Liberal Democrats might be happy to live with a union dividend of £500 million-worth of cuts to public services, including education, but I believe that the best future that we can build for our teachers and the children whom they teach is in an independent Scotland. If the Liberal Democrats were prepared to concede to the people of Scotland the liberal and democratic option of a referendum, we might be prepared to take some of their arguments a bit more seriously.

Will the minister explain how holiday homes are taken into consideration as part of the affordable homes strategy?

I, too, welcome this Scottish Government debate on hospital waiting times. I know that the issue is important to many of the constituents who come to see me at my surgeries across the South of Scotland. The broadly consensual nature of this morning's debate, which acknowledged past achievements, shows just how important we all know that the NHS is for communities throughout Scotland and why it is important for us to work together in a positive way to make it the best that it can be. Today's debate shows the Scottish Government's commitment to ensuring that our NHS works for the people and responds to their needs. The Government's commitment to delivering a maximum whole-journey waiting time of 18 weeks by 2011 is just one aspect of its work to ensure a healthier Scotland and an improved NHS. I am heartened by the moves that the Government is making to ensure that people are placed at the centre of the health service, because when people come to me with problems relating to the health service it is often because they do not understand what is going on, who has made decisions and why things are happening to them in a particular way. It is distressing for people to have all those emotions when they at their most vulnerable. I hope that equipping people with knowledge of their rights will go some way towards removing remoteness, be reassuring and re-engage them with a service that they love. As the motion states, the improvement that we seek is partly about valuing the work of the thousands of dedicated staff throughout the country who believe in the principles of the NHS, as well as delivering commitments to reduce waiting times. I have seen first hand how hard my sister, who is a podiatrist in the south of Scotland, and her colleagues work and how important their role and that of other allied health professionals is; Margaret Curran made that point in her speech. We are all aware of the huge health problems that Scotland faces: rising obesity levels, heart disease and our drinking culture. Our lifestyles put an enormous amount of pressure on the services that the NHS provides.

My sister would not forgive me if I did not commend podiatrists on their work. I know first hand that they work incredibly hard throughout the country. The fact that there are lower waiting times is testament to the work that NHS staff do, and their achievement is even more incredible given the pressures that all of us place on them. Reduced waiting times, more staff and the fact that people are being placed at the heart of the NHS suggest a healthy prognosis for the service's future. However, as with everything, improvements will always be necessary, and the Government will need to strike the correct balance on the challenges that lie ahead. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing made that point in her opening speech. The most immediate and important benefit of shorter waiting times is for individual patients. Faster treatment helps them to return much more quickly to health and a full and productive life. That has a wider benefit for society as a whole, especially in these times of economic difficulty. If we can treat people quickly and enable them to return to work once they are ready to do so, that will have knock-on benefits for the economy and society. We should also hope that less time spent on waiting lists will mean that there is less chance of people developing complications or of conditions deteriorating. In turn, that will mean that NHS resources are spent much more effectively and can benefit more people. We should see a virtuous circle, as waiting lists reduce and more people can be treated much more quickly. In that way, reducing waiting times helps us towards the badly needed goal of moving the NHS away from being a national sickness service to being a health service that promotes prevention and overall wellbeing, which is good not just for individual patients but for society as a whole. Since the Government came to power in 2007, there has been a clear, strong commitment to improving the level of care that is provided to people in Scotland. As Alasdair Allan said, £270 million of funding has been provided to NHS health boards between 2008 and 2011 to help them to meet pledges on waiting times. That funding has helped the NHS to take great strides in tackling waiting times in important medical areas such as cancer, drug use and mental health. Figures show that those requiring access to mental health services already receive treatment well within 18 weeks and that 70 per cent of those  who are offered an appointment for a drug use assessment are offered a date within 14 days. Those figures, and the abolition of availability status codes, which—as has been mentioned—kept people languishing for months or even years without treatment, demonstrate that the Government has provided the support that allows the NHS to operate in an even better way. The task of creating an even better NHS will be made much easier if we ensure that the NHS has the appropriate number of staff. I was pleased to see that the total number of staff who are employed by NHS Scotland increased by 2.1 per cent in the previous year, that the number of clinical nurse specialists is at an all-time high—as has been mentioned—and that the number of allied health professionals has increased. As we all strive for a healthier nation, it is imperative that we support the Government in its work to provide the health service with the capacity to treat patients within guaranteed timeframes and to provide wide-ranging services that meet the needs of the people of Scotland. Although the move to reduce further the cost of prescription charges, with a view to getting rid of them altogether by 2011, is not the sole topic of today's debate, it has caught the imagination of my constituents. The move, which will ensure that people are not financially penalised because they suffer ill health, is especially welcome during tough economic times. The approach reunites the NHS with its founding principles and makes the service fit the needs of the people. I hope that such moves, along with the reduction in hospital waiting times and increased staffing levels, will create a healthier and fairer Scotland.

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to support children and young people who may feel depressed or suicidal. (S3F-1586)

The First Minister will be aware of the recent report from ChildLine Scotland that indicates that Scotland has had a sevenfold increase, in five years, of calls from children who are reporting suicidal feelings. Indeed, the Scottish rise is steeper than that of the United Kingdom. Does the First Minister share my shock and concern about those disturbing and upsetting figures and my concern that, while those who call ChildLine receive expert help and advice, there may be many more distressed children and young people who do not make the call and cannot be reached? Will the First Minister confirm that the Government will consider how best it can make information available to young people, parents and, particularly, carers, on spotting the signs of depression and potential suicide, which is one of ChildLine's key recommendations?

To ask the Scottish Government what arrangements are in place to ensure the safe delivery of medicines for patients who receive them by post. (S3O-6333)

Recently, a constituent of mine in Lanark reported delayed receipt of medicine in a parcel that was damaged. Does the minister agree that the public service aspect of the Royal Mail must be maintained, especially where the delivery of medicine is concerned, and that that is threatened by the United Kingdom Government's determination to press ahead with privatisation of the Royal Mail?

I want to alert the cabinet secretary to the dire state of the roads in Clydesdale, in the South of Scotland region. Does he agree that, to stimulate economic growth during a time of recession, everything must be done to ensure that the infrastructure of rural areas is improved? Does he also agree that South Lanarkshire Council should do all that it can to maintain the roads in Clydesdale?

To ask the Scottish Government what importance it attaches to the 2011 international children's games being hosted by South Lanarkshire and North Lanarkshire Councils. (S3O-6135)

Can investment that is being made in the run-up to the Commonwealth games also be made to benefit the international children's games? Is the minister willing to meet me and relevant local councillors in the near future to discuss some of the issues?

He is not in the chamber now.

I am pleased to be taking part in this debate, largely because I am a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, which is the lead committee for scrutinising the bill, but also because, like many of us, I have constituents who will benefit from the proposed changes. I would like to put on record my thanks to all the organisations that provided excellent briefings ahead of this debate and who eloquently put forward their ideas about how they want the bill to progress. It is fair to say that we in the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee have had our fair share of disagreements, political differences and quibbles. However, the situation with regard to the bill was different, I believe because we all want to help the Government to move the bill forward, as it is the right thing to do and will help families the length and breadth of the country. As Karen Whitefield and Liz Smith said, the issue is above party politics. I do not believe that the bill will change the spirit of the 2004 act; rather, it will expand the provisions so that parents of children with additional needs get more rights and protection. During our scrutiny, many witnesses told us that the 2004 act does not always meet the needs of families who need help or support. We heard about parents being pitted against teams of lawyers representing the council, about parents having to struggle to get their child the help that they need, and about cases dragging on for long periods of time. It was vexing to hear about parents who already have to cope with the added life pressures that having a child with additional needs places on them also having to fight to get the help and care that they require. What we heard, unfortunately, confirmed what many members of the committee had encountered in the regions and constituencies that we represent. Constituents of mine wanted me to attend meetings with the social work department because they were scunnered—scunnered of having to fight for their rights, scunnered of having to face more and more delays, and scunnered of not being given the support that they deserve. That is why I am pleased that the Government will try to rectify the legislation so that it adopts an approach that is more about common sense and less about the letter of the law.  The bill covers a lot of issues to do with additional support for learning and needs, so I will limit my comments to the areas that particularly interested me during the course of the committee's scrutiny. One recurrent theme was parents' lack of awareness about their rights. Despite there being an obligation on local authorities to inform people of their rights, it appears that some local authorities are often not very forthcoming with relevant information. It was, therefore, pleasing to hear the minister's thoughts about amending the information provisions in the 2004 act and working with Jackie Stewart and Muriel Gray. ISEA noted that about 75 per cent of parents are unaware of the fact that they can request mediation and that 80 per cent have no or poor information on their right to request dispute resolution. Furthermore, ISEA's questionnaire, which gave rise to those statistics, showed that parents do not know that when they attend a meeting, they can get papers, agendas and reports. It is regrettable that such knowledge is limited, as that no doubt severely curtails parents' abilities to play a full and informed part in discussions about their child. Lorraine Dilworth told us during an evidence session that some councils are good at getting literature to parents and directing them to websites where information is easily accessible, but that one local authority's website was so poor that she could not find the name of the director of education on it. It is clear that the Government should do all that it can to improve the way in which parents are informed about their rights, to ensure that there is consistency throughout the country and that basic methods of sharing information are followed. I hope that the Government will also consider the specific problems that are faced by Gypsy Traveller children, children whose parents are in the armed forces and looked-after children. The convener of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, Karen Whitefield, mentioned those groups. A particular issue for Gypsy Traveller children and the children of army personnel is that they experience interrupted learning and access. I can only assume that my point about the lack of parental knowledge of rights is exacerbated for those families, which have to deal with many more local authorities. We should also be aware of looked-after children, who do not have a diligent parent fighting their corner. I welcome the moves that the Government has taken so far, such as the launch of the guide "These Are Our Bairns: A guide for community planning partnerships on being a good corporate parent", to ensure that looked-after children are not disadvantaged. I know that the  minister intends to continue to develop policies to ensure that that remains the case. Local authorities told us that they are aware that they need to take responsibility for ensuring that all families get equal access. That is encouraging, and I hope that that approach will continue. I am pleased that the Government is looking to reclaim the ethos of the 2004 act. We all have a duty to ensure that no child is failed by any system and that all children are treated fairly, regardless of their background, culture or need. It is clear to me that many parents feel let down, are bewildered by procedure and jargon, and do not get the information and support that they so desperately need. Of course, that is true in relation to children who have parents, but we must not forget looked-after children, who depend on us to get the legislation and rules absolutely right. There is a wiIl throughout the Parliament to get things right for our children. I hope that we manage to work together to ensure that we do what is right for our bairns and for parents and young people. I want to be able to tell my constituents who have scars because the 2004 act let them down that no one intended it to be that way. I want to let them know that we are on their side and that we want to support and help them to make the situations in which they find themselves as stress free as possible. Not everyone will be entirely happy with the changes, but if we start to improve things now, the benefits will last forever. I am happy to support the principles of the bill. I look forward to hearing what others have to say in the debate and as the bill makes its way through the parliamentary process.

Why then did anti-poverty groups whole-heartedly welcome the measure? Why were children in poverty not being caught by the system and not taking up their entitlement to free school meals?

We have never before understood more clearly the difference that early support and intervention can make in the lives of children, especially—but not only—those who are born into poverty. Families and communities have known for generations that breast is best, that an apple a day keeps the doctor away and that there is nothing quite like a breath of fresh air but, in the modern world, we have the evidence to prove it. There are countless studies—some have already been mentioned and, no doubt, will be later—that demonstrate exactly those points. As a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, I have heard evidence to that effect from many witnesses. It is not only ironic but worrying that, despite all the knowledge and research, one child in four in Scotland is born into poverty. The Children's Society has just published a report claiming that the lives of children throughout the United Kingdom may be more difficult than they ever were before. The scandal of child poverty and the chances that too many of our young people miss are among the major motivating factors that got me involved in the campaign for Scotland's independence and brought me to Parliament. In welcoming the Government's early years framework, I add my voice to those of many civil society organisations, local authorities, individuals and families throughout Scotland. No one disagrees that we need to ensure that the most vulnerable children in Scotland have the best  possible start in life, so I am glad that political parties are, for the most part, willing to work together and to find consensus. I am also glad that yesterday's passing of the budget will release the funding that is needed to allow Scotland's local authorities to implement some of the key elements of the framework. Much of the framework's focus is on the SNP Government's ambitions to introduce free school meals, to reduce class sizes and to increase nursery provision. I have said before in Parliament that provision of free school meals is one of the most socially progressive policies that Parliament has the power to introduce.

Anti-poverty groups have shown that it is the best way to catch them all. The fact that major anti-poverty groups throughout Scotland support universal provision of free school meals shows how effective it will be in reducing poverty. I am glad that Parliament has continued to support the policy, despite the best efforts of some members to undermine it. Free healthy school meals will improve classroom concentration, reduce playground stigma, and can improve the health of each child who receives them. In the same way, increased contact time with a teacher through smaller class sizes also helps to build confidence, knowledge and understanding among children, even at a young age. Like the free school meals policy, the class size policy prepares our youngsters for the future by instilling good behaviour and positive life skills. Although those policies are vital, they are but the headlines of the framework: much else in the document stands to make a real difference to the younger generations. I particularly welcome the commitment to protect rural schools and safeguard the role that they can play in offering wider services to the local community. Having attended a rural school myself and now representing many areas that depend on such schools throughout the South of Scotland, I know how important local schools can be to our rural communities and how special an education in such an environment can be. In a similar vein, the commitments to protect open space and plan for future needs are also welcome features of the document. South Lanarkshire Council, part of whose area is in my region, and North Lanarkshire Council have been chosen to host the international youth games in 2011, which will be an important staging post to the 2014 Commonwealth games. It is important that today's young children, who we hope will be  the athletes and medal winners of tomorrow, have access to the open space and fresh air that will allow them to train most effectively for the games. Many briefings have noted the importance of play and expressed pleasure that it is mentioned in the framework; indeed, the Scottish centre for intergenerational practice highlighted the need to provide something to do for more than just younger people. I think Robert Brown made that point earlier. Outdoor education is hugely important, so I was interested to read in the excellent briefing from Children in Scotland about nature kindergarten initiatives, which are commonplace in Scandinavian countries. I know that there are one or two such initiatives in Scotland—Fiona Hyslop mentioned them—which are the kind of exciting and different approach to learning and child care that is often stifled in Scotland by the restrictions and constraints of our budgetary process and Parliament's limited powers. I have said previously in the chamber that research from the Work Foundation estimates that, for every pound that is spent on helping families and young people at risk, up to £17 of public expenditure can be saved. That kind of evidence, which some people might seek, demonstrates starkly the business case for investing in our youngsters. However, I believe that the debate is not only about financial worth. It is also a moral debate about the obligations that we as citizens have to those around us, especially the poorest and most vulnerable people. The theme throughout the framework document—as, indeed, it has been throughout this debate—is that the early years is the key opportunity that society and the family have to influence the future life chances of children. A good childhood means a much greater likelihood of a healthy, active and positive future that contributes to the wellbeing of society as a whole. We in modern Scotland have far too often ignored, or forgotten, the basic steps and simple common sense that should extend opportunities to all our children. As I have said, it is a scandal and a disgrace that so many of our children are born into poverty. That not only shames our society, but actively damages it, because it will cost us more in the later lives of such children through the health service, the justice system and the need for other specialist interventions. I believe that what the Government outlines in the framework maximises Parliament's powers to give our children the best possible start in life. However, Parliament is also in its early years and will continue to grow and develop to the point where it assumes all the powers of a normal independent Parliament. At that point, we will truly  be in a position to build the future that our children deserve.

Scotland's forests are among our most precious natural resources. They are an integral part of the landscape in many parts of the country. Those of us who have a personal, political or geographic rural hinterland might sometimes take the forests for granted. For those with a more urban perspective, there is always the possibility that more can be done to make sure that they have access to, and an appreciation of, our woodlands, which are so healthy for body and soul. I know how popular with tourists from across the country and around the world some of the Forestry Commission land is in my South of Scotland region. Those forest spaces include smaller areas, such as the West Forth woodland near Lanark, which are popular with day-trippers from the cities because they are within easy reach of major population centres and provide important opportunities for outdoor recreation, fresh air and exercise. The Forestry Commission plays an important role in managing those tracts of land; in total, it manages about one third of Scotland's woodland. The land that the commission controls is much  loved and well used. Therefore, it is a little bit disappointing that the motion on our forests is so negative, offering, as Roseanna Cunningham noted, little constructive vision for the future of Scotland's woodlands. There is no doubt that Scotland's forests face a challenge. The previous Administration set a target of increasing forest cover by 25 per cent, and we all accept that an ambitious target is necessary if we are to protect our natural heritage and ensure that we get the full benefit of the carbon emission reductions that forests can provide. That is why the Scottish Government has embarked with an open mind on the consultation, which outlines the different options for managing and growing our forests in the years to come. Members will be aware of newspaper reports of plans to sell off to private hands publicly owned forests for ever as a way of earning a quick buck for the Government. However, the Labour Government in London is consulting on proposals for private involvement and ownership of Forestry Commission land in England that are far more radical than those of the Scottish Government. The Labour Government is giving far fewer assurances and guarantees than our Minister for Environment has given about jobs, access and biodiversity, which are mentioned in Labour's motion. These days, the default Opposition tactic seems to be to scaremonger rather than to promote any positive or constructive alternative approach. Labour claims that jobs are at risk under the Government's proposals. However, the effect of allowing the Forestry Commission Scotland to enter into joint ventures for the development of renewable energy projects could generate up to £30 million per year by 2020, and leasing the land could generate up to £200 million, which could be reinvested in woodland. We know that the Labour Government likes to pump cash into banks and businesses so that they can turn round and lay off staff, but here in Scotland, the investment proposed by the Scottish Government will safeguard and most likely generate jobs in the forestry industry. There are practical jobs to be done on the land, as well as a range of important management and promotional functions, such as those that are carried out from Braidwood house in Lanarkshire. That work could also benefit from the investment. I will address the leasing issue in a bit more detail because it is perhaps on that issue that the scaremongering of most Opposition politicians has been extreme. In 1998, the National Audit Office explicitly recommended leasing over privatisation, citing the success of the New Zealand model in guaranteeing public access under the new management arrangements. The Woodland Trust  Scotland has indicated its support for that option, subject to safeguards, and Scottish Environment LINK has not rejected it. I am pleased to hear that Mike Russell will continue to keep an open mind throughout the consultation, and I hope that he will continue to work with others as he seeks a way forward. I am tempted to accuse the Labour Party of not being able to see the wood for the trees in its motion. Labour members claim to be outraged at consultation options that will safeguard jobs, access and biodiversity through continued public interest in land that is owned and operated by the Forestry Commission Scotland, but they are content to let colleagues in London consider outright privatisation of forests elsewhere in the United Kingdom. They seem to reject everything that the Government's consultation suggests, but offer nothing constructive as an alternative. Scotland's forests are far too important to be turned into sticks for political parties to beat one another with. I support the Government's attempts to find sensible and viable ways in which to manage and grow our woodlands, and I encourage members of all parties to do likewise.

I congratulate my South of Scotland colleague Christine Grahame on securing the debate. She has been a vocal campaigner against the proposals to build on the playing fields of Cuiken primary school and I will lend her my support in any way I can. The motion states: "there should be centralised data on the current provision of school playing fields, including location and acreage ... sportscotland would add benefit as a mandatory consultee in any development plans that impinge on school playing fields and public open spaces." That part of Christine Grahame's motion highlights  the fact that building on, and a lack of, playing fields is not just a problem in Penicuik or the south of Scotland; we must be mindful of the fact that the issue affects the whole country. That is why the work of Fields in Trust is so important. Why should we be so vigilant about protecting playing fields in Scotland? As has been stated, Scotland has horrific obesity levels among children and young people, yet, incredibly, as the waistline of the country continues to expand, the acreage of our playing fields seems to contract. I do not think that the irony of that will be lost on anyone in the chamber tonight. We must do all that we can to protect playing fields so that Scotland's children and young people have somewhere to play and the freedom to run around, to play a game of fitba, or simply to enjoy being outside. They need the freedom to get muddy and scrape or graze the odd knee from time to time. If they do not, we will have a generation of people who are very risk averse. My next suggestion is perhaps a little left field, for want of a better expression. If schools had more space, they might be able to cultivate gardens in which they could grow their own food. As a by-product, they could encourage children to eat what they have produced, to eat more healthily, to learn about the seasonality of food, and to improve their palate and their health—but that will not happen if playing fields continue to be sold off to raise a quick buck. As well as expressing concern about the loss of playing fields due to planning decisions, we must be mindful of the quality of the playing fields that we seek to protect. FIT said recently that three out of four pitches are not fit for purpose due to poor drainage, inadequate changing facilities and poor maintenance. If that is the case, the situation is terrible. I believe that FIT is trying to secure lottery funding to rectify the situation—if the money has not already been spent on the London Olympics.

My preference is that kids have space to play in and have adequate pitches that are properly protected and maintained. It is not a case of either/or. We have to ensure that playing fields are properly maintained. Otherwise, folk will not play on them. A wee while back, before the election and before he became a minister, Kenny MacAskill conducted some research to compare the number of third- generation Astroturf pitches in some Scottish cities with the number in cities in small, independent, Norway. It is no surprise that the information that he got showed that there are more pitches in Norway and that, as a result, Norway benefits from having more teams of youngsters, men and women playing on them. It is amazing what that small country can do. Its work in the area is certainly something that we would like to replicate. Constituents in my area—Carluke—have expressed concern about the provision of multi-use areas that are made of tarmac that is painted green, rather than Astroturf. I support my colleague's efforts to save the playing fields of Cuiken primary school and nationwide efforts to improve and protect playing pitches and to encourage more sport so that, one day, we will become a healthier nation.

To ask the Scottish Government how the seized proceeds of crime are reinvested in local communities. (S3O-5630)

The minister is aware that a recent beneficiary of cashback for communities funding was the Biggar youth project in the South of Scotland. The money is being used to provide healthy meals and activities for school students at lunch times. Does the minister agree not only that that initiative has an immediate benefit for the kids involved, but that it will help them to grow up healthier, fitter and less likely to take part in antisocial behaviour themselves?

Does the minister share my concern that haulage companies are a type of small business that is particularly hard hit at present? Will he assure my constituents in the South of Scotland who have been affected by the recent closure of the Eddie Stobart Ltd depot in Larkhall that the partnership action for continuing employment team will offer them as much support as possible to quickly find alternative employment?

One of the Scottish Government's first acts after the May 2007 elections was to establish the Council of Economic Advisers in recognition of the importance of developing and growing Scotland's economy in meeting the Government's other targets, including eliminating poverty, respecting the environment and building the best possible future for our children. Scotland's Government is not alone in seeking independent advice on how best to develop its economy. For example, the Executive Office of the President of the United States has had a Council of Economic Advisers attached to it since 1947;  indeed, in recent days, it has been rebooted with fresh faces and new thinking to take forward the changes in American policy that we have all been hoping for. In 1997, Ireland established a National Competitiveness Council to advise on how to draw together a diverse range of sectors and experience to build the country's economy. Even Gordon Brown has his own—albeit not wholly independent—national economic council, which comes complete with Peter Mandelson. The Scottish Government has not set up the council to be a talking shop; it is offering the Government real, practical and concrete advice, and the Government is responding positively to its views. The council's report is perhaps even more important in an era of economic uncertainty that is very different from the situation when it was established in May 2007. Unfortunately, we are now hearing regularly of bankruptcies and job losses. In the South of Scotland region that I represent, the haulage industry is just one area that is beginning to feel the pinch—last week, for example, the Eddie Stobart Group announced the closure of its Larkhall depot. This will be a worrying time for all the staff at the site and their families and I am sure that, through PACE, the Scottish Government will do it all it can to help them and the other businesses and industries throughout Scotland that are trying their best to survive. I am particularly pleased by the commitment in the Government's economic recovery programme to strengthen not only PACE, as Fiona Hyslop made clear in her opening remarks, but links between Skills Development Scotland and Jobcentre Plus "to minimise the time for which people who are affected by redundancy are out of work". The Government is right to highlight its recovery programme at the beginning of its response to the council's report, because the strategy will help to ensure that Scotland meets the present economic challenges as best it can and emerges stronger as a result. That is one of the themes of the council's recommendations, and I welcome the fact that the Government has accepted 18 of the 22 recommendations in full and the remaining four in part. The wide-ranging recommendations join up the different sectors and factors that affect—and are, in turn, affected by—our economy. As a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, I was particularly interested in the council's recommendations on education and skills. Perhaps controversially, the report recommends that the Government consider introducing a two-tier approach to the standard four-year honours course. The Government is right to accept the recommendation containing that  proposal only in part, because it is important that we respect our higher education institutions' autonomy in this area. Any significant changes to the structure of degree courses in Scotland will need the academic community's full support. The Scottish Government has also accepted only in part the recommendation that a range of stakeholders, including businesses and students, contribute to the funding of higher education. Access to education based on the ability to learn, not on the ability to pay, has been a long-cherished principle in Scotland, and its having re-established free education with the abolition of the graduate endowment, I can well understand the Government's reluctance to accept that recommendation. The recommendations that the Government has accepted only in part are a small minority of the overall report, which, on the whole, is ambitious for Scotland's economy and confident about the steps that we can take to face economic difficulties. It is not surprising that, in its response, the Government accepts all the recommendations regarding growing the powers of the Parliament and the potential difference that greater fiscal autonomy could make to the country. I welcome the growing strength of feeling in Scotland in favour of greater financial powers for the Parliament and the Government. Despite what some members have said, many people now view the fact that the Parliament does not possess the borrowing powers that our local authorities, the Northern Ireland Assembly and Network Rail take for granted as, to use Keith Brown's words, highly anomalous. Like the Scottish Government, I want Scotland to have all the powers of a normal independent country. Despite all the challenges that it faces, we have not heard that Ireland is seeking to return to the bosom of London to cure its economic woes; nor has Norway declared itself insolvent, despite some people's predictions. The Government has accepted many other welcome recommendations. I particularly look forward to seeing how the advice on developing the planning system is taken forward. One of the issues that constituents raise with me most regularly is the difficulty that they face getting through the planning process. Any steps that the Government can take to make the process streamlined, transparent, consistent and focused on good-quality outcomes will be warmly welcomed. The fact that the Government has been able to respond so positively to the report of the Scottish Council of Economic Advisers demonstrates the wider ambition that it has to help Scotland flourish. Nowhere is immune to the global economic  downturn but, with a Government that is prepared to listen to the sound advice of its economic advisers, Scotland can prove more resilient than it might do otherwise. I congratulate the Government on its positive response to the report, and I am confident that future reports will continue to help strengthen and develop Scotland's economy, no matter the global circumstances in which we find ourselves.

Will the member give way?

I congratulate the Government on bringing this debate to the chamber at a time of year when drink driving becomes more of an issue than it is at other times. Although we will all, no doubt, enjoy a few sherries over Christmas, we should, quite simply, not drive if we have been drinking. However, as Alasdair Gillies of the Scottish Police Federation noted, under the current legislation, many thousands of drivers are still prepared to take a chance. That is unfortunate because, on the whole, people find drink driving to be unacceptable and contemptible. As Alasdair Allan said, attitudes have thankfully come a long way over the past few decades. Before I was born, my mother and father were involved in a car accident in which a drunk driver ploughed into them. My mum told me that she was very badly injured and had to spend months in callipers—she still has the scars from the crash. There was no talk of compensation back then and no real moral outrage, because it was regarded as being just one of those things. Thankfully, things would be very different if such an incident happened now. However, according to the police and others, the cavalier attitude to chancing it persists, so we must do all that we can to stop it. The current limit  in many ways encourages people to take a chance, because no one is really sure how much is too much to drink and when they can safely and legally drive. Key messages about drink driving are often confusing and blurred in the public's mind. There is a view that a pint is okay, but the stark reality—as Margaret Smith noted—is that, depending on a number of factors including a person's size, weight, sex and tolerance of alcohol, the effects vary tremendously between individuals. Scottish Government figures show that, in 2005, 30 people died and 990 were injured on Scotland's roads as a result of drink driving. Despite a fall in the number of drink-driving accidents and casualties over the past 10 years, the numbers are still far too high and represent many innocent families who have had their lives needlessly affected by drink driving. Even more worryingly, senior Scottish police officers have expressed concern that the prevalence of young drivers and people in rural communities who drink and drive is still too high. I do not think that any member in the chamber disagrees with the principle that clearer messages must be sent out to curb the incidence of drink driving. The legal limit needs to be lowered to 50mg per 100ml of blood, as the Scottish Government proposes in its motion. Other members have spoken about research that shows that the risk of an individual having an accident while driving increases tenfold when they have a blood alcohol content of 80mg per 100ml of blood—the current UK limit—compared with the risk that is involved in driving with a zero blood alcohol level. The risk that is associated with a level of 50mg per 100ml of blood is markedly lower than it is with the current UK limit.

As other members have said, reducing the limit to 50mg significantly reduces the risk. Throughout Europe, the incidence of drink-driving accidents has been reduced by having a 50mg limit in place, so it is a sensible way to move forward. We need to send out a clear message to help people to stop drink driving. The BMA briefing said that a level of 80mg of alcohol per 100ml of blood would bring about a significant deterioration in someone's driving ability, which would be manifested in slower driver reaction times, increased stopping distances,  reduced field of vision and—in the unfortunate case of many young drivers—overconfidence. Additional methods will be necessary to curtail the scourge of drink driving. Many of the briefings that members have received for the debate call for stricter enforcement to deter drink drivers, including the implementation of random breath testing, which is advocated by the BMA and was mentioned today by Dave Thompson. Research in Australia found that highly visible random testing can have a sustained significant effect in reducing levels of drink driving, alcohol-related road traffic crashes and associated injuries and fatalities. RBT is currently common practice in all other nations throughout the EU with the exception of Denmark. However, that is not the only difference between the UK and Europe. Tackling drink driving has been handled very differently on the continent, with 23 out of the EU's 27 member states having a legal alcohol limit set at 50g per 100ml of blood. Only the UK, Ireland, Luxembourg and Malta have an 80mg limit. The BMA noted that Britain has lost its place at the top of the EU road safety league, and that the Netherlands and Sweden now have lower road death rates and have been more successful in reducing drink-driving crashes. It might come as no surprise that the limits in those two countries are 50mg and 20mg respectively. The European Commission recommends that member states should reduce the legal drink-driving limit to 50mg, and it has encouraged member states to increase RBT, particularly in trouble spots. In fact, I understand that one of the main reasons why the Commission did not propose Europe-wide legislation on the matter was that it was taken for granted that member states would implement measures at their level. I welcome the work that the Scottish Government and my colleague Dave Thompson are doing to lobby the UK Government, as well as moves to tackle drink driving in the early morning, as folk who have drunk the night before forget the lingering impact of alcohol in their system. I raise a wee concern about the availability of personal breathalysers, often in the form of key-rings, as I am not sure that that sends out a good message. I understand that there is no regulation of the effectiveness of those devices, which can be bought freely over the counter. Other members have stated that, in its road safety compliance consultation document, the UK Government does not address directly the current drink-driving limit or RBT. That would have been a good opportunity to rethink the limit and to recognise that Europe is doing things differently. I favour lowering the limit because I think that that is the right thing to do and it has been proven to work. I hope that the spirit of consensus and of  Christmas will allow us today to support the work of the Scottish Government and those MSPs who are working to reduce the limit.

To ask the Scottish Government what importance it attaches to the role of rural schools. (S3O-5208)

The minister may be aware of proposals to merge rural schools in Clydesdale's upper ward in the South of Scotland region, which I represent. Many parents have expressed concerns to me about how those proposals are being handled. Does the minister agree that local  authorities that seek to alter rural school arrangements should fully consult in the way that she says they should—in the most open and transparent manner possible—so that Chinese whispers and rumours do not unnecessarily scare parents in rural communities about the future of their schools?

Members have mentioned the timeliness of today's debate. As Linda Fabiani, Ken Macintosh and other members have said, it is unfortunate that it has become timelier—it is timely not only because Ofcom's consultation is drawing to a close but as a result of yesterday's announcements on restructuring and redundancies at the Herald newspaper group and BBC Scotland. As members have said, those announcements will be a body blow to the broadcast and print media in Scotland, and they must be disappointing news to staff as the Christmas holidays approach. The recent Producers Alliance for Cinema and Television report, which Stuart McMillan mentioned, shows that there were "deeply disturbing" falls in independent network television production in Scotland in 2007. According to PACT, only two hours of independent drama produced in Scotland were broadcast to the whole of the UK during 2007. In comparison, across all the major broadcasters, 10,661 hours of programmes were made in London. On top of the situation being "deeply disturbing", it is dismal, disappointing and desperately London-centric. It is against that backdrop that we must debate our aspirations for Scottish broadcasting, what we see as the broadcasting future in Scotland and how we can protect what exists at the moment and ensure that Scotland does not fall further behind. That is a pity, given that there was so much excitement about the publication of the Scottish  Broadcasting Commission's report and so much enthusiasm about what new technologies and new, fresh ideas could bring to the important Scottish broadcasting industry. I do not need to remind members that broadcasting has enormous socioeconomic and cultural importance and that it is an important tool that informs, teaches and allows us to develop our imaginations. The programmes that we watch often bind society together through providing shared cultural experiences that enrich our lives. Unfortunately, however, Scotland has been and continues to be almost marginalised from having an appropriate level of coverage. The Scottish Broadcasting Commission noted that the BBC remains the cornerstone of public sector broadcasting but found in the evidence that it gathered that there was a perceived lack of ambition in BBC Scotland productions—although that cannot necessarily be said of the First Minister's Reverend I M Jolly performance during "Children in Need". The commission also heard that BBC Scotland's output did not accurately reflect the energy and vitality of modern Scottish life, and that its cultural and creative content was limited. I do not want to sound overly negative about BBC Scotland, because I thoroughly enjoy much of what it puts out—most notably "A History of Scotland", which has already been mentioned; I and, I am sure, others find it compelling viewing. However, despite the BBC being the backbone of public service broadcasting, Ofcom's review noted that people want broadcasting to continue beyond it. It would be great if that could be done via STV, but I would be keen to explore options outwith Ofcom's proposals, which seek to find ways to move forward into the digital era and are being regarded as the only game in town. The commission suggested that there should be a new Scottish network to provide Scottish viewers with more high-quality Scottish programming, to create opportunities to be innovative with content and to nurture talent on and off screen, among other things. It is essential that we achieve those aims if we want programming to reflect our communities properly, whether in news output, sporting events, dramas or documentaries. Whether or not members agree with the proposals for a Scottish network, it is clear that we must work together to get a broadcasting industry that is fit for purpose in the 21 st century. The industry should realise the potential of a country whose brightest and best talents often move to London to pursue their careers. We need an industry that is capable of producing programmes that do not have to be twee or kilted to tick the "Scottish made" box and that can make programmes and documentaries that are not  always about Scotland but which can be about absolutely anything, with no limit to what is achievable. If Scotland aspires to having a broadcasting industry that is fit for purpose, it needs to aspire to being a normal independent country that is fully in control of its broadcasting and which can respond to and reflect the unique needs and wants of the people who live here. Countless other small nations do that. With the digital age upon us, it is time for Scotland to switch on to its potential and get tuned in.

Can the member remind the Parliament of the last western country to go to the International Monetary Fund? I think that he will find that it was the UK under the Labour Party.

At this time next year, the year of homecoming will be drawing to its official close, on St Andrew's day 2009. At this time in two years, I hope that the treaty of union will also be drawing to a close, given the First Minister's stated ambition of holding an independence referendum around St Andrew's day in 2010. St Andrew's day has always had significance in Scotland. I expect that historic significance to grow over the next few years. Today's debate takes place not only on St Andrew's day but, coincidentally, on American thanksgiving day. Many parallels can be drawn between the two celebrations: both are distinctive traditions that have evolved over time and become associated internationally with the countries in which they originated. Of course, as others have said, Scotland does not have a monopoly on St Andrew. In addition to the countries on David Whitton's list, Russia and Greece have St Andrew as their patron—as do fishermen, singers and rope-makers—but we have a claim not only to his patronage but to his relics, which were in the town of St Andrews, as Ted Brocklebank's amendment reminds us. St Andrew and the flag of St Andrew have become key symbols of Scotland and what it stands for. Again, we can draw on the American thanksgiving day tradition of celebrating cultural diversity and the common humanity that draws us together. I am proud that Scotland's egalitarian traditions find expression in such days of national celebration. Just as the American holiday season begins with thanksgiving and ends with new year, so Scotland's winter festival is increasingly seen as starting with St Andrew's day and ending with Burns night. Those are two hinges on which so much that Scotland has to offer the wider world can hang. I have already touched on one way that that can happen with the 2009 year of homecoming. The Scottish Government initiative promotes a welcoming image of modern, inclusive Scotland and invites everyone who has an affinity with our country to come home, whether they see Scotland as their ancestral home or a spiritual home, and share in the enjoyment of our culture, heritage and environment. Of course, the year of homecoming and our national days—St Andrew's day and Burns night, with hogmanay resting in between—are not just  about the feel-good factor. There is a clear economic and social benefit to making the most of those opportunities. Global marketing and the unique series of events that are associated with the year of homecoming will significantly boost our tourism industry during these tough economic times. Interestingly, Wendy Alexander's paper "Change is what we do" referred to people aspiring to two foreign holidays a year, as well as a second home and car ownership. Maybe that is how Labour thinks that people will spend their way out of recession, but perhaps the option of holidaying at home will become more attractive and economically beneficial to Scotland. I hope that the year of homecoming will inspire many people in Scotland to stay at home for their holiday next year and take part in the range of special events that are planned, or just enjoy what our multiform and vast Scotland has to offer. As the minister said, the pupils of Larkhall academy are doing their bit to promote a positive image of Scotland with their unite Scotland campaign. The south of Scotland will have plenty to offer participants in the year of homecoming. Throughout Ayrshire and the Borders, celebration of Burns, golf and traditions such as the common ridings are being promoted not just to the usual suspects but to audiences in Scotland and around the world who might not be so familiar with those aspects of our heritage. In addition, I have spoken in the chamber several times about the importance of world heritage sites, such as New Lanark, to the year of homecoming as a focus for activity and for attracting visitors. St Andrew's day, along with Burns night, acts as a hinge for many of the opportunities that we have for promoting Scotland and celebrating our diverse culture and heritage. Today's debate also gives us the opportunity to think about how we can build on the potential of our national day. I welcome the Scottish Government's moves to formalise the day as a holiday for its staff and to encourage more employers throughout the country to offer the day as a holiday. This year, St Andrew's day falls on a Sunday, which offers families and workers an opportunity to have an extra long weekend. I hope that many people will be able to take advantage of it. Unfortunately, as Christine Grahame said, the Parliament still does not have the power to do something as simple as institute St Andrew's day as a full public holiday to which everyone has legal entitlement. Scotland already has a different public holiday schedule from the rest of the UK, despite UK ministers' attempts earlier this year to promote a Britishness day on a public holiday that does not exist in Scotland. We also still have the lowest number of public holidays in Europe. That is one  way in which St Andrew's day differs from American thanksgiving: our friends in the United States of America are enjoying a well-earned rest and a day off work. Even the stock exchange is closed. However, here in Scotland, unionist politicians stand in the way of giving the Parliament the power to give our population an extra holiday as the winter closes in. Indeed, despite some folk proclaiming to be democrats, they still refuse to accept the democratic right of the people to choose independence as a route for Scotland. That is why I hope that, come St Andrew's day 2010, the people of Scotland will be in a position to reclaim that power for their Government, and all the powers that a normal, independent country enjoys. Greenland has just taken a step closer to independence from Denmark in a democratic referendum. Even in these tough economic times, with a population of just 57,000, the people of Greenland are confident in their ability to play a bigger role on the world stage and manage their own affairs more directly. St Andrew's day is already a popular chance to celebrate all that Scotland has to offer. The Government's work to develop its potential is commendable and will make a lasting difference to the way in which we mark the day in future. St Andrew's day is one of the hinges on which Scotland's cultural calendar rests. I hope that all members in the chamber and people throughout Scotland have the chance to take a bit of a rest this weekend, and I wish them all a very happy St Andrew's day.

The British-Irish Council has grown in importance and stature since it was established formally in December 1999—a few months after the establishment of our own Parliament here in Edinburgh. That is no mere coincidence. The council is part and parcel of the historic constitutional changes that have taken place across these islands over the past 10 years. The establishment of the council was a key plank of the Good Friday agreement and contained within  its vision the foundation of a new kind of relationship between the nations and peoples that share what Roman historians called the islands of the northern ocean. The council's role has become even more important in the past 18 months as new parties have come to power in Scotland and Wales, and as Northern Ireland's Executive has adapted to major changes of personality and leadership. It is appropriate for us to hold this debate in light of the most recent summit of the council, which was held here in Edinburgh last month, as John Swinney said, and which was chaired by our very own First Minister, Alex Salmond. As the motion before us indicates, the council has discussed a number of important and constructive topics, and I wish to examine some of them in a wee bit more detail. I was particularly interested in the council's work on demography—the Scottish Government is taking a lead in that area. Societies across western Europe are facing major challenges as the population ages and patterns of migration change. Such trends begin to affect every aspect of public policy, from education provision to pensions and social security. I welcome the fact that the council is examining the effects of our changing demographics and that it is able to pool the experience of its member countries so that we can learn from one other. I am always impressed by the way in which Ireland has inspired many of its citizens, who left the country many years ago for one reason or another, to return and make hugely valuable contributions to its economy and society. I commend the Scottish Government's efforts to reactivate our own diaspora, and I look forward to the role that the year of homecoming will play next year. The council has begun to consider the common challenges and opportunities that are presented by the changing demand for and supply of energy. Again, the Scottish Government has sought to lead on that for the council. Contrary to what others think, I believe that that is very appropriate, given our huge contribution to traditional fossil fuel industries and to emerging renewable energy markets, across not just the UK and Ireland but Europe. I hope that the Government and the council will work closely together on finding ways to improve the ability of small-scale renewable energy producers to connect to the national grid. Many exciting opportunities and projects in the South of Scotland area that I represent and across the country fall at the first hurdle because the cost of connection is so high at present. The recent summit discussed the global financial situation, which has changed rapidly even in the  few weeks since the summit was held. As the First Minister pointed out recently, Ireland, one of the council's members, has an economy that is 40 per cent better off than that of the UK. Despite what others may think, it is in many ways better prepared to cope with the effects of the global economic downturn, and I hope that members across the chamber will condemn posturing from UK Government politicians who have recently sought to insult Ireland and other small, independent countries in Europe by somehow declaring them insolvent.

I refer to gross domestic product performance. I add that Scandinavian countries have not experienced the levels of poverty that we have experienced, and we should learn from all our independent small-nation neighbours. Ireland is certainly one of those. Ireland is not insolvent, nor is it too poor or too small to stand on its own two feet. When we debated the Scottish Broadcasting Commission in the Parliament, we spoke about how Scotland could be better served in that area, whereas Ireland's RTÉ is going from strength to strength. Scotland has to ask permission from the UK Government to sit in the room during European negotiations, whereas Ireland's representatives are at the top table of the European Union, the United Nations and all the other international bodies that it chooses to co-operate with, including, of course, the British-Irish Council. As a young student nationalist, I was lucky enough to attend—along with my friend and colleague, Jamie Hepburn—a meeting of the inter-isles forum, which was established by St Columb's park house in Derry and which brought together the youth wings of the major political parties in the UK and Ireland. It was useful for us to learn first hand about the pressures experienced by political activists in the north and the south of Ireland and, at a youth level, it brought together into one room people who were sworn enemies at the time—the Democratic Unionist Party and Sinn Féin. The nature of that inter-isles forum was to break down barriers and to provide participants with the chance to learn from one another and to acknowledge their different approaches to politics. I welcome the opportunity that we have had today to discuss the role that the British-Irish Council plays in our politics and society. It undoubtedly provides a welcome forum for exploring areas of common interest between the  many Governments and jurisdictions that are represented on it. I am confident that the council's role will continue to evolve and strengthen, especially as the devolved Administrations of Wales and Scotland continue on their respective paths to greater powers, autonomy and independence.

The First Minister will be aware of the London-centric nature of broadcasting. Can he reassure Parliament that, in implementing the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's recommendations, lessons will be learned so that that centralisation is not replicated in Scotland and broadcasting and  production reflect the whole country rather than being concentrated in one area?

Today's debate has been a useful opportunity to thrash out what happened during last year's foot-and-mouth outbreak and to examine ways of ensuring that, if another outbreak occurs, measures are in place to deal with it swiftly. I am heartened to hear the cabinet secretary's thoughts on how we can take forward some of the Scudamore report's recommendations. I am sure that all members agree that we cannot afford to let the farming industry experience any more heartache. For that reason, we must guard against future outbreaks and ensure that, if there is an outbreak, what Government does is appropriate. Only a fortnight ago, we debated in the chamber the plight of Scotland's hill farmers, many of whom are retreating from the hills because of the industry's precariousness. We heard that incomes are down but feed bills are rising. Because of that fragility, we need to ensure that everything that is within the powers of the Parliament is done to protect Scotland's food producers. As we noted in the debate on hill farming, it is not just farmers who suffer; the web of industries that rely on producers—abattoirs, butchers, float drivers and marts—is also affected. The foot-and-mouth outbreak had significant pertinence to the South of Scotland region that I represent. In September last year, there was a suspected scare at Lanark mart after one sheep was found to have lesions inside its mouth. Thankfully, the results of tests came back negative. However, after testing, the complete shutdown of the mart and delays in sales, buyers went home leaving many lots unsold. The mart was praised for its efforts, but the impact on  incomes was felt by farmers not just in Clydesdale but throughout the country. We all remember the sinking feeling of reading about the outbreak in Surrey last year. My sister, who is a member of a young farmers club in Dumfries, told me that folk in that group were in tears, as the news brought back memories of the previous time that the area suffered an outbreak of foot-and-mouth. As Jim Hume indicated in his personal account of what happened in 2001, the images of the mass cull of millions of sheep and cattle in that year remain fresh in the memory of people in the South of Scotland. If news of the outbreak were not bad enough, reports of what the UK Government had said were a sucker punch too far. As Alasdair Allan indicated, there was utter disbelief at the actions of Hilary Benn, who said in one breath that the UK Government would help Scotland's farmers but in the next that it would help only the English livestock sector. Not only were Scotland's farmers penalised for an outbreak hundreds of miles away, through no fault of their own, but they had to hear that they were being abandoned by the UK Government. It is clear from the Scudamore report that such mishandling and lack of communication cannot be replicated and that better communications and relationships need to be established between the two Governments. I know that the Scottish Government did everything that it could to force Westminster's hand at this awful time for rural Scotland, but co-operation needs to be two way. The UK Government needs to work constructively with the sector here and to realise the error of what happened last year. I hope that the Scudamore report will serve to focus the mind. One Clydesdale farmer told me how he was affected by the foot-and-mouth scares, how his income fell, how his day-to-day business was interrupted, and how he could not get lambs to the butcher or to other grazings. He also said that, in light of the messages that he heard from London, it was a bizarre anomaly that the Scottish Government has the policy tools to deal with foot-and-mouth disease but not the direct funding. It is clear from what he and others have said that what happened last year cannot be replicated. That is why I am pleased that the report was produced. The report praises the Scottish Government for the way in which it handled the foot-and-mouth outbreak and notes that it acted in the best interests of the Scottish industry to ensure a return to normal conditions as quickly as possible. It is important that it also acknowledges the work of the stakeholders who attended meetings at short notice and contributed their expert knowledge and advice in working with the Government to ensure a speedy recovery from the crisis.  Although the report praises the Scottish Government, we cannot afford to rest on our laurels. Instead, we must ensure that the recommendations and thoughts that are included in it are considered and acted on in a sensible and appropriate manner. I am pleased that there will be a consultation in November. The co-operation of the UK Government will be needed to implement the recommendations fully. I hope that that Government takes heed of what the report says and considers devolving budgets for service delivery to the Scottish Government so that it is responsible for the delivery of disease control. I think that farmers want that and that the NFUS backs it. A fortnight ago, many of us spoke passionately in the hill farming debate about how we must protect rural Scotland and how different and special our rural economy is. Areas that cover 85 per cent of Scotland are recognised as less favoured areas; that means that there cannot be a homogeneous, one-size-fits-all policy operating centrally. Ideas about isolating Scotland from certain disease controls in order to protect itself and its export markets must be explored. Given the ever-increasing amounts of international exports, it is clear that Scotland will not always be free of disease in the future. Therefore, we need to be clear about who will support our farmers and who will compensate them if another disaster occurs. Our Government must work with the UK Government and the EU—that is important—so that our distinctly Scottish voice is heard loud and clear. My preference is for the Scottish Government to have full control; it should look after Scotland's rural communities and agricultural interests. Indeed, it may come as no surprise that I can think of a simple way to end the blurring of lines that separate which Government is responsible for which area of disease control policy: one layer of Government could be taken out of the equation. Until that happens, I hope that the Calman commission will, as Sarah Boyack suggested, look closely at the Scudamore report and realise the real and tangible merits of devolving more powers to the Scottish Parliament.

I acknowledge the cabinet secretary's reply to David Whitton. Does the cabinet secretary agree that local food should play a major role in the implementation of the free school meals policy that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning outlined today? Does he also agree that that policy gives us a huge opportunity to learn lessons from Finland, which used local food, where possible, to help it to shake off its sick man of Europe tag?

My region in the South of Scotland boasts the world heritage site of New Lanark, which the minister knows well and visited last year. Does she agree that we should be proud of our world heritage sites? How much importance does she place on, and what role does she see for, sites such as the one at New Lanark in the year of homecoming next year?

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to monitor the impact of the Post Office network change programme. (S3O-4234)

Surveys that I have conducted among affected towns and communities in the south of Scotland show that there is overwhelming opposition to the closures. Does the minister agree that the present round of closures must be the last? What steps will he take to communicate that message to the UK Government and Post Office Ltd?

Like many in the chamber, such as John Scott and my South of Scotland colleague Jim Hume, I have an interest in agriculture: my grandfather was a shepherd and my father was a tenant hill farmer. Unfortunately, my father might be one of the statistics that the RSE and NFUS highlighted, as he retreated from the hills and gave up the farm. Sadly, the farmhouse is now a holiday home because, realistically, that is more profitable than my family holding the tenancy, and the fields have been amalgamated and enlarged, meaning that the traditional, small, family hill farm is no more. No doubt a similar story can be told elsewhere in  the country. That is a pity given that we all agree that sustaining smaller, family hill farms is vital. As the cabinet secretary and others said, today's debate is timely. It happens against the backdrop of the SAC and RSE reports and during Scottish food fortnight, which celebrates Scotland's food. Many in the chamber will have enjoyed sampling last night the fruits of Scotland's larder and the delicacies that came straight from the farm gate to the plate. Such food is internationally renowned. One stall described its produce as "well-hung and tender"; it was also nutritious, fresh, healthy, local food. As Roseanna Cunningham said, we should not forget that farmers are essentially food producers—they want to produce food and make a decent and fair living. The Government's motion recognises the importance of Scottish hill livestock farmers to food production but, as others recognised, that vocation is under threat because of drastically falling prices. The Blackface Sheep Breeders Association said recently that falling prices are a serious concern for the industry and argued that the hill sheep sector has not made a reasonable profit for at least 12 years. Indeed, the association claims that the industry has suffered losses and that the impact of the falling price of lamb is exacerbated by the rising cost of fuel and feed. That will mean that more sheep will come off the hill, with dire repercussions for the rest of rural Scotland. It is all very well for us to extol the virtues of Scotland's larder and ask, "Wha's like us?" when it comes to the quality of our food. No one in the chamber would dare to criticise the quality of Scotland's produce. We need to be aware, however, that those who produce what we cook in our kitchens deserve to make a living. No one can afford to work at a loss. There are serious reports about the problems that banks and insurers are facing during the credit crunch, but farmers have been affected by the dreadful, wet summer that we have just had. Lambs are lighter and the cost of feed has further increased. As Dan Buglass put it, cash flow is well and truly "sunk in the mud". What will happen if Scotland's hill farmers retreat? The NFUS's briefing recognised that it is not just the hill farmers who would be affected by such a retreat. They are part of a complex web that helps to support abattoirs—wherever they are left—butchers, agricultural merchants, marts and farmers markets. We found it delightful to have a farmers market in the Parliament last night; just think how sad it would be if it and others like it were not to continue. A retreat from the hills would also affect tourism. The NFUS noted that tourism and recreational activity is highly dependent on open and grazed farming systems. If no animals graze, the systems will deteriorate and become  less attractive to any visitor. Moreover, seeing sheep on the hills and watching new lambs is a big attraction that will also be lost. The debate cannot be allowed to descend into doom and gloom. We have to try to solve the imminent problems faced by Scotland's hill farmers. It will not be easy. I spoke to a farmer at the farmers market last night who told me that the problems are complex and will not easily be fixed. The answer should not be about political point scoring, but requires much consideration. I have to admit that, given the UK Government's inadequacy in serving Scotland's hill farmers, it is hard not to be political. Nevertheless, we have to work together to ensure that solutions are found. Becoming more market orientated and diversifying have been offered as part of a list of solutions that have worked to increase the profitability and viability of some farms. A woman I spoke to last night told me that her farm, albeit not a hill farm, had to diversify by packaging its beef smartly and making its product unique. They attracted London restaurants and those farmers are experiencing something of a renaissance. Furthermore, a farmer in the south of Scotland who produces Lanark and Dunsyre blue cheeses began production because his hill farm was becoming less and less profitable. Diversification cannot be the only answer, however, and that is why I am glad that the SNP Government has stood by farming communities since its election in 2007 and has a genuine understanding of the issues affecting hill farmers. It would be easy to think that I was saying that as a patsy, but I heard it at nearly every agricultural show that I went to this summer. Jim McLaren wrote in The Scotsman, in response to McCrone's findings, that all those who have an interest in farming should be pulled together to find a solution and to take action. He also said that a clear signal must be sent to those who eke out a living in remote parts that active livestock farming is wanted and valued. It is clear from the Government's motion that hill farming is valued. Richard Lochhead said that the Government wants to work in partnership with all interested parties as part of its LFASS consultation. I hope that that marks the start of genuine action. I have faith that the cabinet secretary will consider issues raised as part of the consultation and I hope that hill farming can become a more sustainable industry with people working the land no longer simply eking out a living, but instead being rewarded fairly for the crucial part that they play in our rural communities.

Peter Peacock is correct that the RSE report's recommendations are wide-ranging. Does he condemn the UK Government's decision to continue with the network change programme for post offices, as the RSE report says that rural post offices closures, "should be halted"?

As a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, which only yesterday considered post-probationary teachers, I am glad to have the chance to debate this important issue further. As others have said, the education of our children is of fundamental importance. As parliamentarians, we owe it to them to ensure that the system works and that each child has a good-quality learning experience and is taught by motivated and accomplished teachers. I am pleased that that is the case for the large majority of Scotland's children—it was, on the whole, the case under the previous Administration and it will continue to be the case under the Scottish Government. I would not be so petulant as to fail to acknowledge the achievements in the past few years. As those who gave oral evidence to the committee confirmed, the post-McCrone set-up for new teachers is recognised internationally as being one of the best. The committee heard yesterday from a new teacher that her probationary year was essential in making her a good teacher. It gave her confidence that she had much to contribute in her chosen profession and to the children whom she will teach. Of course it is upsetting to read stories about probationers who have not yet secured jobs. No member, regardless of their political colour, wants anyone who has dedicated time to achieve the necessary qualifications to become a teacher—their chosen vocation—not to get a job. Likewise, I have never liked to hear about graduates of the history, economy, physiotherapy or engineering departments in universities the length and breadth of the country ending up in temporary employment in call centres or similar while they pursue their dreams and aspirations for employment in their chosen fields. However, we all accept the importance of teachers, which is why the Government is doing all it can to help probationary teachers. As a result, as we heard from the cabinet secretary, in June 2007 the Government provided an additional £9 million to local authorities, which has provided 300 more teaching job opportunities. Furthermore, the cabinet secretary has formed the teacher employment working group, which has the remit of examining workforce planning, finding out where improvements can be made and  considering whether better matches can be made between student numbers and employment opportunities. That is surely a positive and proactive approach to finding out how things can be improved. It is easy for people to say that something should be done, but until we know where the weaknesses and potential hurdles are, we can only stick on plasters, which is not a long-term or proper solution. As Kenny Gibson does, I welcome that sensible move and wish the cabinet secretary well with it. I hope that the group identifies not only where the problems may or may not lie but, crucially, that it recommends solutions. For those who are seeking employment, I understand completely how difficult it is to cope without a job. However, it has never been the case that every single post-probationer has obtained a job immediately. As the Deputy First Minister said in Parliament last week, it has always been the case that new teachers have gained employment as vacancies have arisen during the year. That happened under Labour and will continue to be the case under the present Administration. We must heed Murdo Maciver's comments to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee in May, when he said: "the prospects of obtaining a teaching job are bright, even if some appointments will not be made immediately. We are approaching the targets. Probationers will be employed on a permanent basis sooner or later."—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 28 May 2008; c 1099.] It is not responsible politics to create a culture of fear and to scaremonger on the issue. I accept that opposition parties have a duty to hold the Government to account, but I do not accept that negativity should be allowed to prevail to the extent that it begins to put off people from embarking on careers in teaching.

I accept that scaremongering is not responsible politics. We heard in committee yesterday that the negative environment surrounding teaching and probationers is making people decide not to follow that career. I am confident that the teacher employment working group will make suggestions to improve workforce planning, and that the Government will consider them carefully. I hope that Parliament supports efforts to give all our post-probationary teachers the very best chance to flourish in their chosen profession, and that we realise quickly that finger pointing and negativity are not the way to  ensure that our Scottish education system retains its international acclaim.

I welcome the Government's indication that it will implement the areas of the Gould report for which it has responsibility. Does the First Minister agree that it is unfortunate that we do not have responsibility for our Parliament's elections and that, if we did, one way to improve democracy would be to lower the voting age to 16?

As everyone else has said today, it gives me great pleasure to speak in today's debate. After a lot of patient waiting and talk, we finally have the  opportunity to discuss the formation of creative Scotland. As Pauline McLean, the BBC's arts correspondent said, when reminiscing about Jack McConnell's St Andrew's day 2003 speech, "Fast forward four years and three months, three culture ministers, and a change in government, and we're only just at the start of the culture bill's ... journey through parliament." So, at long last, after much debate and consultation, the prospect of creative Scotland seems to be in sight. There is much to be pleased about in the bill. It is a short bill that is designed to establish creative Scotland and allow it to operate in the best interests of our country. I am a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, which was the lead committee scrutinising the bill and which had the pleasure of listening to the thoughts and concerns of Scotland's cultural community. Most of those who responded, regardless of whether they represented a local authority or were from the arts world, were happy, on the whole. They were breathing a sigh of relief that there is to be no more prevarication and that the new Government is taking action and heeding the advice that was presented to the Scottish Executive by arts organisations in response to the previous incarnation of the bill. I will not pretend that there was no criticism of the bill. It would have been strange if no concerns or issues requiring further examination had been raised. After all, this is the stage 1 debate. However, I hope that any concerns will be put to good use and not used to score political points. We all need to look at the bill and realise its potential for allowing creativity to flourish, as well as allowing our artists to explore their media. That requires us in Parliament to trust those in the cultural and creative world to know what is best and how to make creative Scotland work well. It also means adopting an arm's-length approach to culture and the arts. The fact that the minister has listened to those appeals shows that the new Government trusts our artists and has no interest in micro-managing our country. It is not just me who realises that the Government is listening. In its written submission to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, the Federation of Scottish Theatre said that it was "heartened by the Scottish Ministers' implicit acknowledgement of their trust in the skills and expertise the Chair and Board of Creative Scotland bring to the execution of their responsibilities". Simon Woods of the Royal Scottish National Orchestra said that the Government is  "interested in doing things that genuinely provide a better cultural life for the people of Scotland". John Leighton of the National Galleries of Scotland said: "We have seen an open and forward-looking approach which we welcome." Even Ruth Wishart, in a fair and balanced piece in The  Herald , said that there is "a genuine desire in all the sectors to make Creative Scotland work ... what cultural and creative Scotland on the ground longs for is a working template for the new order that it can understand and respect." She acknowledged that there were tensions with the bill but warned that, if we sabotage this opportunity with creative Scotland, "then we'll be well and truly stuffed." We have a chance to make a difference. I recently attended an event that was addressed by Seona Reid, of the Glasgow School of Art. She spoke passionately about the need for a leader for Scotland's creative industries and she explored the economic potential of the sector. I acknowledge that we should not place a disproportionate emphasis on economic arguments, but I am persuaded by her view that Scotland should aim to be a creative hub because all the right ingredients are there. We have creative cities, one of which is the UNESCO city of literature, as Jamie McGrigor said earlier. Glasgow boasts a popular musical heritage stretching from bands on Postcard Records in the 1980s to modern-day indie heroes such as Belle and Sebastian and Franz Ferdinand. We have amazing, world-renowned art schools and incredibly talented people. I have always been amazed by the resourcefulness of that group of people, many of whom are young, with a huge passion for and interest in the future of the arts in Scotland. Friends and contemporaries of mine have gone on to do impressive and important work. For example, Hannah Robinson, director of the Mary Mary gallery, has come a long way since first opening up her Dennistoun flat as a gallery space. Many others have managed and continue to manage to work successfully in their chosen fields. We must do more to celebrate and encourage more cultural and arts opportunities for people and we must try to attract more people across the world to realise Scotland's potential. That is why I am heartened by the bill, which will enable creative Scotland to get going and streamline and cut bureaucracy. I was impressed by Anne Bonnar, who gave evidence to the committee. She has the bit between her teeth and she told us that she will never sit on her hands but understands and recognises the importance of this new entity for Scotland and beyond.  The bill is simple, clear, to the point and honest. The minister has taken on board the points raised in previous consultations and acted on them. Art for art's sake is given appropriate attention, and we have before us a bill that enshrines an arm's-length approach to the arts. It does not seek to stifle the arts and what they will be in the future, because it is not prescriptive in its use of definitions. We should be confident that the passing of the bill will mark a new beginning for creativity in Scotland. We should also be confident in the abilities of our artists, practitioners and creative businesses to make creative Scotland work. I support the principles of the bill.

As we have heard, small businesses form the backbone of Scotland's economy. They employ over half the country's workforce and account for the vast majority of private sector enterprises. They are of increasing importance to modern  Scotland not only because they are a source of employment and enterprise, but because of the flexibility and range of services that they can offer in our changing society. That is why the Scottish Government's small business bonus scheme could not have come at a more opportune time and why I welcome the opportunity to debate its positive impact throughout the country. I recently surveyed small businesses in the South of Scotland—in South Lanarkshire and Ayrshire. The results of that survey were overwhelmingly positive and I will draw on them in my speech. As the lifeblood of Scotland's economy, small businesses do much more than simply provide jobs. They often provide services that do not exist anywhere else and make them accessible to the people who need them most. In rural areas, small local shops and businesses bring goods and resources to small communities in which large chains have no interest. A successful small business—the UK's champion chippy in Biggar springs to mind—can act as a magnet for an area, which brings business to other small shops and outlets in the vicinity. Small businesses have an incentive to invest in their staff and communities. Developing and retaining skilled employees helps to build a personal touch and a level of service that larger organisations with a higher turnover and remote management find more difficult to achieve. The response of one local shop in Biggar to my survey was: "we are a rural newsagent and work long hours—this relief will ensure we can keep all our staff". With the limited powers of devolution, it was right for the Government to seek a way to encourage our small businesses, to promote diversity on the high street and to boost small businesses' ability to reinvest in the community. A health-care firm in Lanark that responded to my survey called the small business bonus "a very attractive saving". Some Opposition members have taken great delight in criticising the Scottish Government's policy to help small businesses proactively, but allowing businesses to channel profits into higher wages, staff training or new outlets hardly strikes me as the wrong thing to do. It is right, and it smacks of common sense, to help high street shops to stand up to the out-of-town retail chains; it is sensible to help a family firm to find the confidence to plan for the future; and it is certainly not right wing to encourage local artists and artisans to try something new and different that might benefit the whole community. If we want to see policies that harm small businesses, we need look no further than the  Westminster Government, which presides over the moral outrage of poverty indicators that are rising almost as fast as City bonus rates. That Government is content to let immigrant office cleaners pay more tax than their non-dom employers, and it has doubled the income tax rate for the poorest earners in our society. New Labour is in thrall to big business, and it appears to neither understand nor care about the need to invest in and support the dynamic small enterprises that drive Scotland's economy. The SNP's brand of progressive social democracy and acting in the national interest chimes well with mainstream opinion in Scotland. That opinion is keen and receptive to attempts to kick-start our economy and rejuvenate our high streets, which in some towns, as Roseanna Cunningham mentioned, are scarred by shutters and closed shops. Members should compare that with new Labour's economics, which have left 17 per cent of Scotland's population living in poverty. If supporting and growing our small businesses can even begin to help to improve wellbeing and other poverty indicators, it should be welcomed across the chamber. There is clear evidence that the small business bonus scheme has been warmly welcomed and is having a major impact. In my region, almost 5,000 small businesses in South Lanarkshire, and 3,000 in North Ayrshire, will have their business rates abolished next year. A total of around 6,400 and 3,700 businesses respectively will benefit from some form of reduction in rates under the scheme. My survey shows that many businesses are feeling an immediate impact, with nearly all indicating that they will apply for the refund under the scheme. Perhaps Johann Lamont, who I see is not here, should take note that businesses need to apply for that. If she does not want to apply for her business bonus relief, she should donate it to someone who would like it. I highlight to the Scottish Government that around a quarter of respondents to my survey in both council areas had yet to receive information from their local authority about the scheme—I notice that the Conservative amendment makes the point about awareness raising. I am pleased to hear that the Government has taken note of that. The final word must go to an artist in New Lanark, who responded to my survey and was absolutely delighted to have her rates reduced from £66 to £26 a month. I am sure that Opposition members will be pleased to hear this quotation: "This is of great benefit to me as I only took over my studio in August and have incurred many set-up expenses. Please pass on my sincere thanks to the blessed Alex Salmond and tell him that if he would like to commission a painting, I will gladly donate one (to his wonderful Party!)"  I am happy to pass on the thanks of small businesses throughout the South of Scotland to the blessed Alex Salmond and the blessed Jim Mather, and to the Scottish Government. They have shown confidence in our local enterprises, which will be repaid with more and better opportunities for communities throughout the country. There is a growing sense that if that is what can be achieved under devolution, how much more could be done with normal powers of independence?

I welcome today's debate, which gives us the opportunity to reflect on the past year of achievements of Scotland's new Government and on its ambitions for the future. When the First Minister made his statement to Parliament two weeks ago, he spoke about how the SNP is meeting its pledges to the people of Scotland and what we have delivered since winning last May's election. The motion before us  outlines many of those achievements: the partnership with local government that froze council tax levels; the reduction and eventual abolition of prescription charges to restore, as Nicola Sturgeon said, Aneurin Bevan's vision of medicine free at the point of need; and the reintroduction of free education to Scotland, which is the country that first introduced the concept. The SNP's ambition goes beyond what we have already achieved and, indeed, beyond what we can achieve under the limited powers of devolution. We are establishing the saltire innovation fund to encourage business and technological innovation. We plan to launch Scotland performs, which will focus on the outcomes of Government policy. We also heard the First Minister restate the Government's intention to give the people of Scotland a direct choice on their future in an independence referendum. Only the full powers of independence will give the Parliament the ability to meet fully the ambitions of the people of Scotland that were reflected in last year's election. After eight long years, we are beginning to see devolution work in the way that people thought it could. That is giving people the confidence to think about how much more could be achieved.

I think that the polls suggest that that is the case. During the First Minister's statement, I reminded the chamber of the scandal of child poverty in Scotland. In the very week that the First Minister made his statement, we heard reports from the Scottish Alliance for Children's Rights, suggesting that a damning report card on Scottish child welfare will be presented to the United Nations later this year. Sadly, its contents are not really news—we already know about rising teenage pregnancy rates, thousands of underage criminal convictions and the fact that one in four children lives in poverty. That is the situation in 21 st century Scotland—a shameful legacy that 10 wasted years of new Labour have done nothing to reverse. Although the First Minister confirmed that the Scottish Government will do everything in its all-too-limited power to tackle those scandals, he agreed with me that the best, quickest and fairest route to ending child poverty in Scotland is for the Scottish Parliament to have the full powers of an independent state. An independent Scottish Parliament and Government will have control of the welfare state, the power to reform taxation and  the ability to reject the managerial, target-obsessed culture that has stifled the war on poverty in the UK for the past 10 years. Unionist members may not like that reality; in that case, I would ask them a simple question. Do they honestly believe that, if they were to form the Government of an independent Scotland, they would not be in a better position to end child poverty, given that the London-based Government has so clearly failed? Does the socialist Scottish Labour Party seriously come to this chamber and say, "No, we do not want the power and responsibility to lift our children permanently out of poverty. We do not want the power to mobilise Scotland's oil wealth to help our vulnerable two-year olds, our teenagers who are looking for apprenticeships and our students who are struggling to get by"? As we move forward, Scotland faces a choice between vision, ambition and confidence for the future, and a mindset that is stuck in the past. My colleague Alasdair Allan recently raised the spectre of former minister Sam Galbraith, who revealed the true feelings of some on the Opposition benches, when he said on the radio that, but for our links to London, Scotland would be "an insignificant little country". To those words, I can only respond with the words of Hugh MacDiarmid: "Scotland small? Our multiform, our infinite Scotland, small?" I believe that no country is insignificant. No country is too small to be limited by anything other than the imagination and ambition of its people. Sam Galbraith's is the mindset that Scotland rejected last year, when it chose to place its trust in the Scottish National Party. The SNP Government has done its best to work with those who are willing to co-operate in this chamber and beyond to make a concrete difference to the lives of people in Scotland and, indeed, in the wider world. The motion touches on that when it talks about climate change—a global challenge that does not respect borders. During the Easter recess, I had the privilege of visiting Zambia with Oxfam Scotland, and saw at first hand the effect of climate change on communities that live in precarious circumstances. That is why I welcome the Scottish Government's world-leading proposals for a climate change bill, the establishment of the saltire prize—one of the biggest international innovation prizes in history—and its commitment to growing Scotland's international development budget and influence overseas. The First Minister confirmed to the Parliament recently the steps that he is taking to show  solidarity with people affected by natural disasters in China and Burma—once again, doing what we can and hinting at the potential Scotland would have as an independent nation on the world stage. Our nationalism is defined by our internationalism, and independence is defined by the relationship that Scotland would have with other countries in the United Nations, the European Union, and any other agreements freely entered into. The Government motion makes clear that Scotland's future is safe under a Government that is committed to putting the interests of Scotland's people first, last and always. We are repaying the trust of the people by delivering on the pledges that we made last year. As somebody once said, we have no reverse gear. We are moving Scotland forward, and showing on a daily basis how we can, and will, be better off with independence.

I thank Ian McKee for securing tonight's debate on the National Association of Youth Orchestras. I share his concern that there is doubt over the association's long-term future in the city, but I am sure that the council and Ian McKee will do all that they can to ensure that it remains based in Edinburgh. As the motion states, the association makes a vital contribution to cultural life not only in our capital city, but throughout the country. The debate provides us with a good opportunity to consider the importance of youth orchestras to Scotland, and I have a particular interest in speaking tonight. While at school, I played—or at least tried to play—the oboe and I was in the school orchestra and the Perthshire central bands, which brought together young musicians from schools from across the county. I never played in the Perth Youth Orchestra, but many of my peers did. The opportunity to be part of an orchestra should never be underestimated. It is thrilling to be part of something so big that sounds so wonderful, and to hear applause at the end of a piece is  exhilarating. On a practical level, the chance to practise and play their instrument in a full orchestra allows young musicians to hone their playing abilities and to improve their skills. Another obvious plus is that it is enormously gratifying to see the pleasure that people get from listening to an orchestra full of young people. It also allows those young people to make new friends and lifelong acquaintances. Being part of a youth orchestra offers young musicians the opportunity to learn their trade and gain more experience before heading on to bigger and better things. I mentioned the fact that I played the oboe at school. When I was first oboe at school, a young Michael O'Donnell was second, but members should not be fooled into thinking that I was any good. In stark contrast to me, Michael displayed an obvious talent, and I am delighted to learn that he is now a professional musician with a formidable reputation that includes his playing at the Edinburgh and Cheltenham festivals and the BBC proms. Others who have carved out remarkable careers have been Alasdair Beatson and Malcolm Edmonstone, also in my class at school, who are award-winning musicians and have performed around the world. Of course, we cannot forget Ayrshire's Nicola Benedetti, who was recently crowned best young British classical performer. Those musicians have all played in youth orchestras, and I do not doubt that they will look back fondly at their time spent there and be appreciative of the support, tuition and experience that it gave them. They are doing Scotland proud, and I hope that youngsters in youth orchestras and groups across the South of Scotland—such as the Lanarkshire Orchestral Society, the North Ayrshire Schools Orchestra, and the Ayrshire Fiddle Orchestra—find as much enjoyment in their respective groups as I did. Who knows? They may be harbouring the next Nicola Benedetti. Those examples and their successful stories illustrate why it is so important that we continue to support youth orchestras and groups in all their guises That is why everything must be done to ensure that the National Association of Youth Orchestras stays in Scotland. I accept that the association's moving to London would not necessarily negatively impinge on youth orchestras and groups, but I worry that such a move could send the message that Scotland is not as good a location as London for UK bodies such as the NAYO, which we all know is not the case. As Ian McKee suggested, modern technologies and transport links surely enable wider dispersal of cultural bodies. In the 21 st century world, London need no longer be the epicentre. I share the sentiments of Ian McKee's motion and support him and the City of Edinburgh Council  in their efforts to ensure that this important organisation remains here. I am heartened that the council is working hard with the NAYO to achieve that.

I am pleased to participate in today's debate and am glad of the opportunity to join in discussions about a policy that parliamentarians who were here in 2002 are right to be proud of. It was a landmark achievement to remove the costs and stress associated with growing old and infirm and requiring residential care or care in one's own home. It proved that the Parliament had come of age and that parties could work together for the benefit of the people and summon the gumption to travel a radically different route to that proposed and followed by Westminster. It showed that where consensus prevailed, the people benefited. However, despite the policy being implemented with the very best of intentions, it has had its flaws, its unintended consequences and its critics. We have heard about the pressures that an ageing population will have on the policy; about food preparation problems from Christine Grahame; and concerns about nail trimming from Help the Aged. Perhaps Mary Scanlon will be pleased to learn that my sister is a podiatrist, so I understand how essential her skills are to the elderly population. That is why it is right that the SNP Government, sticking true to a manifesto commitment, commissioned an independent review of free personal care. I am heartened by the tone of Nicola Sturgeon's motion, which shows that the Government is reacting positively to the Sutherland report by accepting in full all its recommendations, and by her intention to work with COSLA to ensure openness and transparency on waiting times. I thought that most of us in the chamber would want to echo the consensus of the past and would try to be as constructive as possible to ensure that this flagship policy does not wither on the vine, but flourishes as intended. I assumed that most members would welcome the Scottish Government's intention to pursue vigorously the attendance allowance that the UK Government so callously withdrew. It just goes to show that one should never assume anything, because it is clear from the Labour Party's amendment, which scrubs from the cabinet secretary's motion the bit that will allow her to pursue the attendance allowance, that the supposedly socialist Labour Party has performed yet another remarkable U-turn and  does not want the Scottish Government to get that money back. The Labour motion also appears to be mixing up Wanless reports—I think that the one cited in the motion was done not for the Government but for the health charity, the King's Fund. I share Ross Finnie's concerns about that review. As we have heard, Lord Sutherland's review categorically states: "The Review Group considers that the Care Development Group was right to view Attendance Allowance in care homes as a UK contribution towards personal care costs." It also says that the Scottish Government should "In the short-term seek the reinstatement of the £30 million in Attendance Allowance withdrawn to those in care homes at the time of introduction of the FPNC policy in Scotland and for those arrangements to stand until the wider assessment of funding streams for long-term care at a UK level ... can be made." If we have a £40 million shortfall and we are due £30 million, we should ask for it. That sounds like a sensible plan of action. Just because the Scottish Government is going to engage in dialogue to get the money back does not mean that it cannot work constructively with the UK Government on a longer-term review of care provision and benefits. Margaret Curran, in her amendment, fails to see that point. Alex Salmond cited in his statement to Parliament yesterday examples of when the Scottish and UK Governments have worked together and when the Scottish Government has shown itself ready to co-operate with Westminster to meet the challenges that the countries face. The issues about free personal and nursing care, attendance allowance and wider long-term reform should be no different. Henry McLeish recently said, in an interview on "Good Morning Scotland", that parliamentarians should be putting petty, party-political squabbling to the side, that this was not a petty discussion about a small amount of finance and that every political party in Scotland should be supporting the move. I agree with him whole-heartedly on that. The new politics currently enjoyed in Scotland should be about doing what is right, not what political masters in London say should be done. The people of Scotland voted for a devolved Government that has responsibility for and a duty of care to its people. The people of Scotland want their representatives to stand up for what is right and, as Christine Grahame said, not to continue to have their policies constrained by what goes on in London. That is exactly what the Sutherland review wants the Scottish Government to do. It has identified a legitimate flaw in the policy of the Department for Work and Pensions to keep the money and it has suggested that the Scottish  Government ask for it back. It is simple, it is supported in the briefing supplied by Help the Aged and it is something that each party—I thought—supported. Throughout my first year in the Parliament, I have heard accusation after accusation that the Scottish National Party does not care for the most vulnerable in society. The elderly are one of our most vulnerable groups; they are due our care and their dignity must be maintained. The SNP is clear that, by implementing Sutherland's recommendations and, importantly, by getting back Scotland's money to help implement free personal care properly, it will do its utmost for that group. It is also showing the people of Scotland that it is willing to stand up for our country and not shy away when Scotland's interests are jeopardised. It is depressing that some have decided to break the consensus in the Parliament, to ignore a key recommendation of the Sutherland report and to question the Government's motives in standing up for this country. The debate need not have descended into the partisan bickering that Henry McLeish warned against; it could have been much more. I hope that the Labour Party amendment falls tonight and I am confident that the cabinet secretary and her team will do their best to secure our attendance allowance. I know that those who should be in receipt of it will be grateful for their efforts. There is a real chance to make this flagship policy work and I look forward to the updates that I am sure the Government will provide as it seeks to make free personal care for the elderly a policy for us to be proud of.

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to support aid and relief efforts, following the natural disasters in Burma and China. (S3F-788)

I am sure that all members echo his views and recognise the important contributions that aid agencies are making. With the prospect of another cyclone hitting Burma and hopes of a diplomatic breakthrough dashed, does the First Minister agree that the regime there should co-operate fully with the international community in the ways that reports suggest that China has done to ensure that aid gets through quickly to those who need it most? What role can the Scottish Government play as part of that international community to encourage the regime to co-operate and what can the Scottish people proactively do to help the situation in Burma and China?

The First Minister will be aware of reports about the shameful legacy that the Government has inherited over a range of social indicators, particularly on the welfare of children. How will the Government's programme tackle the scandal whereby one child in four lives in poverty? Is it not correct that Scotland's Parliament and Government need all the powers of an independent country to introduce the massive social reforms that successive UK Governments have failed to deliver on?

To ask the Scottish Government what role local health care provision can play in building a healthier Scotland. (S3O-3075)

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that in contrast to the previous Executive, which presided over the closure and downgrading of local health facilities in Law and Stonehouse, this Government remains committed to supporting NHS Lanarkshire in implementing all the local health projects, including a new health centre in Carluke and a minor injuries unit in Lanark, that were identified in "A Picture of Health: A Framework for Health Service Improvement in Lanarkshire"? Will she further confirm that such projects are not under threat as a result of the decision to retain Monklands hospital's accident and emergency unit?

To ask the Scottish Government what support it is providing to help promote sustainable development in Zambia. (S3O-3019)

I recently returned from a trip to Zambia with Oxfam Scotland, where I viewed projects that the agency and its partners run, which promote sustainability. Does the minister agree that Scotland's historic links with countries such as Zambia provide us with a unique opportunity to build on those connections and allow Scotland's input into international development to have a tangible and positive impact, not only on the country that benefits but on Scotland? Does she agree that the expertise of agencies such as Oxfam and the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund should be used to inform Government?

The topic of international education should unite everyone in the Parliament as we grow to realise that Scotland has an important international role to play in the global arena and that, in a fast-changing and interdependent world, education can help young people to meet the challenges that they will confront now and in the future. I welcome the Government's commitment to ensuring that Scotland's children are equipped to understand the world around them. I want to concentrate on the benefits of school linking. I have been amazed by the results that such a simple exercise seems to have on the kids who take part in it. The school links that I have learned about and seen at first hand show that the process helps to build a degree of confidence, self-esteem, wellbeing, knowledge and understanding that might not be attained through the use of text books alone. That is in line with the Government's key objective of making our country smarter and fairer, and with the curriculum for excellence's aims of making children confident individuals, successful learners and effective contributors, and of building capacity so that they can develop their critical thinking. Learning about the world and Scotland's place in it by linking in partnership with schools across the globe is not just about learning the geography or the poverty statistics of countries in the developing world; it can be fun. Importantly, international education should be about respecting different cultures, traditions and languages, and it should be made relevant to all areas of the curriculum and all ages and abilities, not taught as an additional subject for teachers to tutor. It should also be about sustainability, with the premise being that the school is in a partnership and that learning from each other is a reciprocal process. In short, international education should be part of the school's ethos. My parliamentary assistant spent a year working in Malawi. As I said in a previous debate on Malawi, he told me that when young Malawians come to Scotland or young Scots go to Malawi, the remarkable thing is that they notice not the material differences in their lives but the similarities of their experience. Typically, we say that youngsters do not like doing homework or are on the lookout for romance. From that, we know that genuine partnership and understanding can work both ways, and that young Scots will come to realise that, regardless of where someone comes from in the world, when we scratch the surface we are not that different one from the other. What makes a good school link? According to Oxfam, it means educating children about  "social justice ... diversity ... interdependence ... peace and conflict ...critical thinking ... respect" and the "Ability to challenge injustice", and about having "empathy ... Commitment to social justice and equity ... Concern for the environment." I will share a couple of anecdotes to highlight good examples of school linking. The first concerns my first encounter of school linking, which was at the Scottish Storytelling Centre up the road on the Royal Mile. I attended an event that was co-hosted by the British Council, where stalls were laid out by schools that were involved in a partnership. I visited each one and was particularly taken by one stall. The pupils were so eager to tell me about what they were learning that they dragged me over to it, their eyes glistening. Their work was outstanding. I told their teacher that they were a credit to their school. She went on to tell me of one wee boy who had brought to school the bull marble from his marble set. He told her that he wanted to send it as a present to a political prisoner whom he had been learning about because his father was in prison and he knew what prison was like. The story sums up everything that is good about school linking. The young boy's thought processes had led him to feel tremendous empathy and respect for someone who was fighting for justice thousands of miles away. I found it incredible that, all by himself, the boy had made a link between the political prisoner's situation and his personal circumstances. The second anecdote concerns a visit to the Parliament of a South African school that is linked to a Scottish school and which I hosted. The pupils were members of a choir and were so pleased to share their traditional song that they gave an impromptu performance for us in the chamber. For me, that proved the tremendous cultural benefit to all the pupils and teachers involved. Those are fine examples of school links. If the Government is to increase the roll-out of such links, I urge it to ensure that that is the type of school linking that Scotland follows. In the briefings that we received for the debate, charities such as Oxfam, SCIAF, IDEAS and the sustainable development education policy network highlighted examples of poor school linkings that do nothing to broaden young people's horizons or promote understanding between them. If those concerns are prevalent, the topic is worthy of debate today. As Kenneth Macintosh and Iain Smith said, schools—admittedly with the best of intentions—can believe their role to be that of fundraiser and donor, which serves only to perpetrate and reinforce the stereotypical myth  that the role of the developed world is to fundraise for the poor and for charity. We need to ensure that school links are partnerships that are based on equality. As a country, we must understand that we do not know it all and we have much to learn from those around us. However, teachers need support for that. They need guidance on how to achieve the best for their school and students and how to ensure that the children who leave their school and care grow into adults who know the difference between justice and injustice and right and wrong, and participate in the wider community to make it a fairer and equitable place—one that respects diversity. That approach raises challenges. I believe that the principles of being a good citizen and a good global citizen should be embedded at every opportunity in the curriculum for excellence. The new curriculum provides a good opportunity to ensure that we in Scotland get global citizenship right. We all agree that Scotland has a great role to play in the world, albeit that we may not agree on the level at which we should play it. However, we must all work together to ensure that today's children and students are well equipped to make them confident and able to go forward into work. We must ensure that they realise that co-operation and respect should triumph over prejudice and stereotyping.

Will the member explain what she means by "narrow nationalism"?

What impact will the proposals have on the colleges and universities that are training the teachers of the future, and when is the impact of the Government's proposals likely to kick in?

Fair trade is a major success story of our time. The concept goes to the heart of the vision shared by many of us—from all parties—of a world of economic and social justice. People in Scotland can be proud of the role that they have played in taking the idea of fair trade into the mainstream of society. I congratulate Patricia Ferguson on securing the debate and on her recent election as the convener of the cross-party on international development, of which I am the vice-convener. The group is the largest established in the Parliament, which in itself is a sign of Scotland's international outlook and commitment to global solidarity with those most in need. The basic principle behind the fair trade concept of paying producers in the developing world a social premium, to protect them from the vagaries of the market and to provide a secure and sufficient income, goes back to the formal establishment of the Fairtrade Foundation in 1992 and the Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International network. However, it is the hard work of the foundation and the range of charities and non-governmental organisations that support its work that has led to the wide array of Fairtrade  goods now available and the increasing level of awareness among the public. In 2007, sales of Fairtrade goods reached almost £0.5 billion in the United Kingdom. Since 2005, the number of African producer organisations selling to the UK market has almost doubled, going from 81 to 152. More than half of the UK population—about 57 per cent—recognise and understand the Fairtrade mark. That awareness is hugely important because, for many people, contact with the Fairtrade mark and fairly traded goods is the first step on a journey towards greater understanding of the social and economic injustices that leave so many producers and communities in the developing world in poverty. The work of schools, parishes such as St John's in Carluke and towns up and down the country—many in the south of Scotland—to achieve Fairtrade status is testament to the desire of many people to put their commitment to global justice into action. To achieve Fairtrade status, communities must be dedicated to change over the long term and willing to change what it means to be consumers in a globalised world. I pay tribute to the work of Scotland's international development sector, in particular Oxfam, the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund and Christian Aid, in supporting schools, churches and communities in their efforts to achieve Fairtrade status. I am aware of the progress that is being made towards Scotland achieving Fairtrade nation status. It is right that we do not rush into that, and I commend the work that has already been done to guide the process. The wider implications for public life and society are immense—every aspect of procurement, consumer and sourcing practices will have to be carefully monitored. Despite all the hard work and achievements of the Fairtrade movement, we are only at the beginning of a journey towards a world where trade justice becomes a reality. Running the Fairtrade organisations remains the work of committed individuals, backed by civil society and the wider public. They are building and promoting an alternative model of economic development. People in Scotland and throughout the rich world who buy Fairtrade goods make a conscious decision to do so and, by that decision, they recognise that many of the alternative goods that they purchase are unfairly traded. Multinational companies and rich countries' Governments continue to manipulate the global markets in their interests. Oxfam has summed that up in its report "Rigged Rules and Double Standards". Through economic partnership agreements and the World Trade Organization, the rich world denies developing nations the very protections and producer support that allowed  countries such as ours to become rich in the first place—all in the name of the free market. Many of the organisations that I mentioned earlier, and hundreds more across Scotland, are backers not only of the Fairtrade Foundation but of the trade justice movement, and they were the forces behind the make poverty history campaign in 2005. I am happy to join my colleagues throughout the chamber in stressing our commitment to the Fairtrade movement.

) : It is clearly with much sadness that we are having this debate. Who in the Parliament can feel pleased that we are discussing the fifth anniversary of the invasion of Iraq when troops and civilians are still being killed and when people across the world who dissented so strongly from the decision to invade are still being ignored? If we did not continue to display our opposition to the war and to use every avenue open to us to show our dissent and to reaffirm that the actions that the United Kingdom Government took at this time five years ago were not taken in our name, we would be failing humanity and the memories of the people who have died as a result of the conflict. It just so happens that, five years ago, I could voice my abhorrence of the war only by joining anti-war groups and taking to the streets. Five years on from those actions, I have had the privilege of being able to secure a debate on the subject in our Scottish Parliament. This is my first members' business debate and it is timely. My motion supports the actions of Rose Gentle in her pursuit of justice as we mark the fifth anniversary of the invasion. I cannot think of an issue that, in my 12 years of active political engagement, has galvanised a generation of political activists more than the Iraq war. With colleagues in the Scottish Socialist Party and the Scottish Green Party, I set up the anti-war movement at the University of Glasgow. The movement was the fastest-growing group on campus, which, given that its membership came  from an age group and section of society that is often accused of apathy, demonstrated people's motivation to ensure that their voices of opposition to Tony Blair's actions were heard. Alas, as we all know, the people were ignored. On 15 February 2003, people took to the streets with a sense of optimism that the Government would listen and Tony Blair's path could change from one of intent towards conflict to one of diplomacy and reason. The 2 million people who marched in London, Glasgow and other towns and cities throughout the UK exploded the myth of political apathy. It looked as though people power might win the day and the heart and mind of a Prime Minister who did not seek unpopularity as a badge of honour. Folk who felt distanced from politics took their chance to re-engage. What was the aftermath of all that action? The Guardian summed up the situation when it described the bleakness that stemmed from a political elite that wanted to keep the public's sustained disquiet at arm's length and carry on with business as usual, despite the fact that a disastrous invasion had gone ahead for deceitful purposes. That is what hurts most: our country was taken into a war that the people evidently did not want or believe in and of which people did not accept the legality. Far too many experts in international law think that the war did not comply with international law for us simply to ignore the issue and let its legality go untested. The people who marched five years ago and Rose Gentle and other relatives of people who have fought and died still do not know whether the decision to invade Iraq was legitimate. The Secretary-General of the United Nations at that time, Kofi Annan, said of the invasion: "I have indicated it was not in conformity with the UN charter from our point of view, from the charter point of view, it was illegal." Elizabeth Wilmshurst, the deputy legal adviser in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, wrote in her resignation letter: "I cannot agree that it is lawful to use force against Iraq without a second Security Council resolution ... I cannot in conscience go along with advice—within the Office or to the public or Parliament—which asserts the legitimacy of military action without such a resolution, particularly since an unlawful use of force on such a scale amounts to the crime of aggression". Professor Philippe Sands and other notable academics said in a letter to The Guardian in 2003: "There is no justification under international law for the use of military force against Iraq. The UN charter outlaws the use of force with only two exceptions: individual or collective self-defence in response to an armed attack and action authorised by the security council ... There are currently no grounds for a claim to use such force in self- defence. The doctrine of pre-emptive self-defence against an attack that might arise ... has no basis in international law." Who can submit a robust counter-argument to that? Those quotations illustrate that the rationale to go to war was illegitimate and unlawful and that the war has proven to be an expensive and destructive mistake. It is no wonder that the families whose loved ones are serving in the military are calling for an inquiry into the legality of that most hideous conflict. I spoke to Rose Gentle the other day, to let her know about the debate. She told me that the military families who want an inquiry are desperate to find the truth and cannot understand why, if there is nothing to hide, they will not be granted an inquiry. They are not calling for an inquiry as a press stunt or to get their photos in the paper; they are doing so because they want to find out whether their sons and daughters lost their lives needlessly—and if they did, to get answers and some form of redress. All members of the Scottish Parliament will sympathise with the sorrow and grief that those families feel and respect their determination not to let their campaign wither on the vine. As Rose Gentle told me, the campaign's aim is to ensure that what happened does not happen again. The families know the pain of war and what it is to suffer. They are feeling the consequences of the UK's decision to invade Iraq. Their campaign is based on the hope that the Iraq war can be the illegal war to end all illegal wars. They hope to restore the rule of international law and to ensure that no more soldiers and innocent Iraqi civilians die because of that futile conflict. I want to use this opportunity to show the people who marched on 15 February 2003 and those who will be at Blythswood Square on Saturday that politicians care passionately about humanity. Politics does not need to be about backroom deals, imperialistic conquests and hidden documents; it can and should be about openness, listening and doing what is right. That is why politicians from the Parliament should march in solidarity with Rose Gentle on Saturday. My motion calls for a positive and peaceful resolution, but that can be achieved only if there is full honesty about, and understanding of, how the war began. If Scotland had had the powers of a normal country, with a top-table voice in the UN, it would have had an opportunity to stand up for the rule of international law. That is why I want Scotland to take its place in the international community. I joined the Scottish National Party not to change flags but to change society and to play a role in making Scotland a centre for fostering peace and reconciliation throughout the world.  Another Scotland is possible and another world is possible. We must find the gumption to do our bit to ensure that we are never dragged into a murderous conflict again.

Today's debate allows us to consider the OECD report as a test of policies that have affected the rural areas of Scotland in the past and to see where we can take our precious rural areas in future, in order that they may be prosperous and dynamic once again. As members have said, there is much to be pleased about in the report. It shows that rural Scotland as a whole has good socioeconomic indicators compared with urban areas, with some parts displaying the highest GDP per capita growth in Scotland. However, there can be no room for complacency in protecting livelihoods and communities in rural Scotland. I grew up in Perthshire and, although I do not represent that area, my upbringing there allows me to understand the experiences of those who live in the countryside in the south of Scotland. I grew up on my family's tenant farm, which I loved as a child. People in the countryside have a sense of freedom, see the seasons change and grow up with a spiritual connection to the land. No report can ever relay that. However, when people hit their teens, the sight of the first daffodils in spring is less appealing when they feel isolated and remote.  In common with many young people who live in Scotland's countryside, I left and headed for the city lights to study. The briefing from the south of Scotland alliance shows that the working age population in the south of Scotland is forecast to decline, partly because of young people leaving the area for education. I suspect that the tale is similar throughout the rest of rural Scotland. I am keen, therefore, for the Government to explore ways to keep young people in rural areas, which will ensure that those areas are sustainable, diverse and vibrant places that people want to stay in or return to. People in rural areas seem to make do with their lot and feel that not having access to all the pleasures of 21 st century life is a normal state of affairs simply because they live in the countryside. A woman came to me about problems that she was having with her heating. She is elderly and lives at the southernmost tip of Clydesdale, and had resigned herself to the fact that her problem had not been solved simply because she lived in the countryside. However, that should not be the case. I had the pleasure, at the start of the year, of meeting people from the ambulance service in Biggar. They believe that, because they are operating in a rural area, they are forgotten about, despite the fact that they provide a vital and often life-saving service. We should not forget that rural Scotland does not necessarily equate with agricultural Scotland. Rural South Lanarkshire and Ayrshire have farms, but they also have a vast number of mining villages. Living in those often forgotten about places are people who have seen coal and jobs come and go and have experienced a huge sense of environmental injustice. I urge the Government to remember those areas when developing a distinct rural development policy, as recommended by the OECD. The fact that none of those points is new suggests that now is the time to use the OECD report to kick-start a rural renaissance, to show the people of rural Scotland that we value them and want to showcase what their areas have to offer. The OECD report gives good examples of ways in which that can be achieved. We need to improve our infrastructure—my Corsa can testify to that, as it has taken an awful beating when travelling across the vast area of the south of Scotland.

I will deal with the south of Scotland as a whole in the rest of my speech. We definitely need to maintain the links between our urban and rural areas, not so the urban way of life can be imposed on the rural one, but so that people, including tourists, can easily access our countryside. It will come as no surprise to ministers that I, as a South of Scotland MSP, will make a special plea for the area. The OECD report notes that the dedicated policy framework for the Highlands and Islands convention has worked well. Perhaps, as the south of Scotland alliance suggests in its briefing, now is the time to consider what lessons the south of Scotland can learn from that convention. No one can deny that the south of Scotland has much to offer. From Burns in Ayrshire to John Muir's house in Dunbar, the south is festooned with history, culture and places to see and visit, including a world heritage site. Encouraging tourism is a no-brainer, and I hope that the cross-cutting work between the portfolios in the new Government manages to create a decent strategy to take advantage of the south of Scotland's cultural rich pickings. However, the Government will always be hard pressed to actively rejuvenate the countryside when policies from London mean that crucial lifelines such as post offices continue to close and fuel prices negatively impinge on our rural dwellers, and when Westminster abandons Scotland's farmers when they face economic ruin, such as after the foot-and-mouth disease crisis. I remind the Government that rural Scotland does not simply mean farming Scotland. Further, it does not just mean the Highlands and Islands. Rural Scotland has been heartened by the work that has been done so far by the Government, and I urge ministers to continue on their path to rejuvenate our countryside and restore confidence in it.

Will the cabinet secretary expand upon the level of liaison and communication that she has had with staff working in the state hospital?

I am glad to be participating in today's stage 3 debate, which will finally kick tuition fees into the bucket where they belong. I thank the students from the University of Edinburgh, who mobilised their peers to protest today. Jeremy Purvis seeks to amend the bill to guarantee that student support will not be adversely affected by the abolition of the graduate endowment. I accept that he is trying to be constructive and make the bill more acceptable to a party that introduced the graduate endowment, and although the amendments are not entirely necessary, I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that there is no difficulty in agreeing to them. The abolition of the graduation endowment will improve student support, remove the worrying burden of additional debt from current students and give them stability and confidence when planning their future. However, until we can be sure that Labour and the Tories will concede that they are wrong in their opposition to the aim of the Scottish National Party Government to make higher education in Scotland free once again—and there was a hint of a breakthrough in Annabel Goldie's comments at First Minister's question time—I guess that it will be down to the SNP, the Greens and the Liberal Democrats to speak up for Scotland's students. The Tories have flip-flopped all over—

I have addressed the amendment; I am explaining why I think that the abolition of the graduate endowment is—

Today's abolition of the graduate endowment, including the amendments, will stop students being penalised financially and affected by the hardship that the endowment causes. The Government should be applauded for tackling student financial hardship and for making Scottish education free once again—

Today's bill is not an end in itself but a start—

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to tackle rising numbers of personal bankruptcies and home repossessions. (S3O-2274)

Store cards and unsecured personal loans that charge extortionate rates of interest are a source of personal debt that can rapidly spiral out of control. Does the minister agree that we could tackle such issues much more effectively if regulatory power were devolved to the Scottish Parliament?

Scotland's new relationship with Malawi is undoubtedly one of the great achievements of devolution. I thank the Scottish Government for providing the opportunity to discuss that relationship and I congratulate the minister and the representatives of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association on their successful trip to the country in the recess. I pay tribute to the work and experience of members who have done much to strengthen the relationship between the two nations. Malawi is known as the warm heart of Africa and—perhaps not coincidentally—as the Scotland of Africa. I am not sure whether that is attributable to the warmth of its people, its landscape or its erratic weather conditions. Malawi is rich in heritage and culture. In a part of the world where borders that were established in colonial times do not necessarily respect traditional ethnic or cultural boundaries, it has much in common with its near neighbours—traditions and customs, dances and languages, families and friends. It is a source of inspiration to us all. Malawi also stands out as an African nation that has made a successful and  peaceful transition to multiparty democracy from one-party rule in the mid-1990s. As we know, the country is marked by widespread and endemic poverty. On the United Nations human development index, Malawi ranks 164 th and is the 14 th poorest country in the world. Nearly two thirds of Malawi's population live below the poverty line of $2 a day, 40 per cent do not have basic reading and writing skills and 14 per cent are infected with HIV/AIDS. Those statistics shame us all. It is scandalous that the UN should still have to compile such indicators more than 30 years after the richest countries promised to allocate at least 0.7 per cent of their gross domestic product to international development and when we are halfway towards the millennium development goals target date of 2015. In the 21 st century, we have the knowledge, the resources and the ability to end poverty wherever it exists. I am pleased that the Scottish Government is showing some political will in that respect. It is worth noting that despite the huge challenges that exist, Malawi stands as a proud member of the international community and chooses to work in partnership with our country and other countries to develop its economy and society. Statistics tell only one side of the story. We must look beyond the bare facts for the human face of development. I have not yet been lucky enough to travel to Malawi, but a number of my friends and colleagues have done so, and they have told me about the challenges that its rural areas face. The people in its northern and southern regions often think that their opportunities are squeezed by the more prosperous central region. As an MSP for the South of Scotland, I can understand that. I have also heard about the innovative projects and programmes that are making a real difference to people's lives in Malawi. The Eva Demaya project, for example, is based 15 miles from the nearest tarmac road and the northern town of Rhumpi, and it relies on solar power for electricity and boreholes for water. However, a genuine partnership exists between a Scots-Dutch couple and the local community that is making a real difference to people's daily lives. The centre provides a mix of conventional western treatments alongside traditional Malawian healing and homoeopathic methods. In addition, it provides food, decent clothing and employment opportunities in an area in which all three are in short supply. The Chesney Trust for Education in Malawi is another project that was founded by a Scots volunteer who visited Malawi and fell in love with it. Away from infrastructure such as roads and  electricity, which we in Scotland take for granted, the trust is building a school with a special unit for hearing-impaired children—Patricia Ferguson mentioned hearing impairment—that will also serve as a focus for local employment and development. We can find many similar examples, which is why Scotland's relationship with Malawi has rightly been described as a partnership. Many MSPs can give similar examples of constituents who have built links with Malawi. In the South of Scotland, St Michael's academy in Kilwinning was one of the first schools in Scotland to establish a link with a school in Malawi—St Peter's school in the northern capital of Mzuzu. The partnership has had a transformative effect on St Peter's school. Equipment, buildings and resources have been provided that otherwise would simply have been out of the school's reach. However, it has also had a transformative effect on the school in Scotland. The partnership gives real meaning to the concept of global citizenship and enables young people from both countries to broaden their horizons. When young Malawians come to Scotland or young Scots visit Malawi, what is remarkable is not that they notice the differences in their material lives, but that they discover the similarities of their experiences. They do not like doing homework, they are on the look out for a boyfriend or a girlfriend, and they want to be the next champion in their favourite sport. From that, we can see that genuine partnership works both ways. There should be a two-way street. For that reason, I encourage the Scottish Government to ensure that when it distributes grant funding it considers not only how Malawi can learn from Scotland, but how Scotland can learn from Malawi. Agencies such as Oxfam in Scotland, the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund and others that have been mentioned understand that people in developing countries are not only looking for charity—they are looking for justice. Much of the development work that is taking place in Malawi and throughout the poorer parts of the world seeks to strengthen communities by building capacity and empowering citizens with knowledge and capital. Community-based health awareness and care programmes, credit unions and women's centres offer models of local development work that we can learn from and can consider applying in some of Scotland's most deprived communities. In conclusion, we all agree that the partnership between Scotland and Malawi is one of the great achievements of devolution so far. The new Scottish Government has clearly demonstrated its commitment to building on that positive and healthy international relationship, which is based on global co-operation and respect and does not seek to perpetrate the stereotypical images and notions of the past.

The minister talked about survivorScotland and said that the Government was determined to raise public awareness of the existence and impact of all forms of abuse. How will the Government do that?

I, too, thank Rob Gibson for lodging the motion, which allows us the opportunity to discuss the traditional music scene in Scotland at a time when, as Cathy Peattie noted, Burns suppers are still taking place. I had the privilege of opening the semi-finals of the young traditional musician of the year award in a village hall in Coulter, near Biggar, in the South of Scotland. It was a real treat to be able to hear not only the eventual six finalists—including Ewan Robertson—but the other young performers who were unlucky enough not to make it to the finals this time. I would not have relished the job of the judges, who had to pick a winner, as the standard was truly outstanding. Simon Thoumire and others who were involved in organising the event—and Meg Beresford, who allowed the semi-finalists to stay in Wiston Lodge and jam there—should be recognised for playing their part in keeping Scotland's music tradition alive. And what a tradition we have in Scotland. From the Shetland fiddle tunes and the waulking songs of the Western Isles to the muckle sangs, the border ballads and—my favourite—the bothy ballads, our rich tapestry of traditional music is hard to beat. We should never be ashamed to celebrate it. What luck that Scotland has dedicated and talented young people who are passionate about keeping the tradition going. Their dedication, coupled with the time and effort they have to put into learning their instruments, should be congratulated; it shows that not all young people are simply hoodies.  Rob Gibson's motion acknowledges the contribution that institutions such as the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama can make in the development of musicians, and I support that sentiment, but we must be aware of the vast amount of work that is done over and above those national bodies by local folk groups such as the Clydesdale folk club in the South of Scotland, who had a big hand in supporting the young trad musician of the year award event, and who do their best to nurture talent. I witnessed an example of that when Douglas resident Tom Gold was presented at the semi-final in Coulter with the David Roberts prize. David was a former member of the Clydesdale folk club who unfortunately passed away fairly recently. That young guy, Tom, who is only about 15, blew me away with his fiddle playing—I know that he will go on to be a great success. The tradition is also kept alive by the work of the school of Scottish studies, Glasgow Caledonian University's collection of political songs and the Elphinstone institute in Aberdeen—they all work hard to ensure that we do not lose the oral traditions of our travelling people. Why is it important to keep those traditions alive? Why does it matter so much? Because our folk songs and music form a crucial part of our history and provide a useful glimpse into our past. At university, I studied bothy ballads and agricultural folk songs from the north-east. Members do not need to worry; I will not perform any songs or renditions, because I am pretty rubbish—Cathy Peattie can do it. Those ballads told the stories of farm labourers: their working conditions and love lives, the feeing fairs and the efforts that were made by the army to recruit them. Those songs were their words, and they should be of equal value to any academic texts or condescending contemporary newspaper reports. The songs add a different dimension to the usual methods of finding out about our past, and are more important than we probably realise. Last week, the Parliament debated the importance of teaching Scottish history in our schools. Members largely agreed that we need to be aware of our heritage and history to understand ourselves better and to be able to move forward with confidence. I firmly believe that teaching our songs and traditional music should be included in the effort to encourage our children to learn about their past and to be confident in that learning. I hope that by recognising the achievements of young traditional musicians we can work together to raise awareness of our varied and valuable traditions.

What are the member's thoughts on the Scottish Labour MPs who voted to divert money away from Scotland to fund the Olympics? Does she think that the money would have been better spent in Scotland?

I thank the Scottish Government for providing an opportunity to debate health improvement in Scotland. I also thank the staff at the Edinburgh royal infirmary for treating me so well after I spilled soup on my hand yesterday. As we have heard, we face significant challenges in improving the health of our society and, in particular, in reducing the inequalities that exist within and between our communities. Health to me, as to others, does not simply mean physical fitness. Mental well-being and overall quality of life need to be factored in when we are measuring how healthy any individual or society is. I will focus on aspects of health improvement among two groups: the young people of Scotland and people in rural areas, especially the South of Scotland region, which I represent. Both groups have particular vulnerabilities and challenges and I am pleased to welcome the early steps that the Scottish Government is taking to improve their health and well-being. Getting healthy practices right in the early years has benefits that last a lifetime—and a longer, healthier lifetime at that. The budget commits £32 million to specialist children's services, including cancer care and high-dependency specialties. The Government is committed to sustaining four major children's hospitals in Scotland, including new facilities in Glasgow and Edinburgh by 2012. Healthy exercise is one of the best forms of preventive medicine as it keeps young people fit and healthy, builds strength and improves mental  well-being. The Government has adopted an aim of increasing financial investment in the let's make Scotland more active strategy, which sets a target of 80 per cent of children attaining recommended levels of activity. Currently, around 25 per cent of boys and up to a third of girls are not meeting that target, so it is vital that the Government continues to invest in indoor and outdoor facilities that make it easy for children to keep fit. As we all know, exercise can help to tackle obesity, so we need to make healthy play for young people an attractive and easy option. We all agree that the Commonwealth games will inspire a new generation of athletes in Scotland. I am just disappointed that, at such a crucial time, many Scottish MPs at Westminster have voted to divert lottery funding away from Scotland that could have been used to tackle obesity here. Tackling a challenge such as obesity requires us to adopt many different approaches and it is good that a consensus is building about the importance of a healthy diet. I am particularly delighted with the Government's commitment to pilot free school meals. However, diet includes both food and drink, and it is increasingly clear that alcoholic drink poses a threat to the health and well-being of Scotland's young people. Alcohol abuse can cause both short and long-term damage to physical and mental health. I welcome the Government's commitment to take concerted action to promote better understanding of the risks that are involved in binge drinking. In that area in particular, our approach to health improvement needs to go beyond straightforward management of the NHS and related resources. We need to tackle the cultural and societal trends that encourage and glamorise alcohol intake, such as the manufacture and marketing of sweet alcoholic drinks that are targeted specifically at young people. At present, however, the Parliament and the Government can only do so much because there are constraints from Westminster in relation to the powers to alter alcohol taxation and to regulate advertising. If other parties genuinely support Scottish solutions to the challenges that Scotland faces, I hope that their contribution to the national conversation on our constitutional future will take the matter into account. Many health challenges are best dealt with from a Scottish perspective, not least those in our rural communities, which often seem to be overlooked when it comes to health provision and improvement. People in rural areas often face particular difficulties, especially with access to services. I strongly welcome the steps that the Government is taking to meet those challenges, including the roll-out of NHS 24 to every mainland  health board and the trial of walk-in appointment services in Lanarkshire and Lothian. The decisions to save accident and emergency services at Monklands hospital and to stop car parking fees at NHS-run car parks—as mentioned by Stuart McMillan—will also benefit people in the south of Scotland who have to travel some distance to access hospital treatment.

Okay.

The commitment from the Government is adequate. It saw that there was inequality because there were prohibitive car parking charges, including for NHS staff on lower wages. There is undoubtedly a consensus about the need to improve the health of our nation, and there will surely be a debate about how to achieve that. I welcome the fresh approach that has been adopted by the Scottish Government which, as in all other areas of policy, is ambitious for our country's future.

Does the minister agree that the decision by Scottish Labour MPs to vote for the transfer of Scottish lottery funds away from good causes—many of which help Scottish youngsters to get fit and healthy—to the London Olympics is deplorable and will in no way assist her with the fight against obesity?

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to promote healthy diets from locally sourced products among the people of Scotland. (S3F-445)

I welcome the launch of the national food discussion. Does the First Minister agree that introducing children to healthier and—which is important—locally sourced products at an early age will have lifelong benefits, and that the Government's pilot of free school meals can only help in that process? Furthermore, does he agree that ensuring that all our children have a healthy diet, regardless of their background, should be central to any national food policy?

I thank Keith Brown for lodging his important motion and for securing this timely debate. It is timely because never in my lifetime have I seen such a magnificent display by the Scottish international squad as that during their ultimately unsuccessful campaign to secure a place in the Euro 2008 finals. The nation was behind the team, but alas the whole nation did not have equitable viewing access to witness Scotland's brave attempts to win a place in the Euro championships. I want to refer to the response that Keith Brown received from James Purnell, the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport. As members will recall, Keith Brown asked for Scotland's games to be added as listed events, which must be shown on terrestrial television, so that we can all enjoy them. I saw Mr Purnell's response, which was that, although the games meet the required criteria, they cannot be put on the list because that is impractical. If we all took that attitude, I am afraid that the entire world would come to a halt. Why is that too impractical for us, when Germany seems to manage and Italy has no problem getting round the impracticalities? The bigger question is not why Mr Purnell, a member of the Westminster Parliament, takes that view; it is why the Westminster Parliament should have any say at all in whether the people of Scotland are allowed to watch their national football team play. Of course, in an independent Scotland, we would have control over everything, including broadcasting, and would not have to wait for the outcome of a Westminster review of which matches should be reserved to free-to-view TV. It is not just the national team that gets short shrift in the television coverage. Why is it that on a Saturday evening we can watch the highlights of English Football Association club games, but if we want to see Scottish Premier League highlights, we have to wait until late Monday night? For a St Johnstone fan such as me, and for fans of other clubs from the lower divisions, there really is no hope—I mean that there is no hope of getting TV coverage. As someone who used to play football for the University of Glasgow, I am well aware that women's football remains the very poor and far-distant relation of the men's game. If we want to encourage young girls to play football, we must also consider how we can better promote coverage of the women's game. To return to Keith Brown's motion and the match to which it refers—the Scotland versus Italy Euro qualifier last November—the fact that people could not watch that game unless they had Sky caused  nothing short of a stushie. I will share with members some stories that show the way in which the current broadcasting of games impinges negatively on young people. One guy told me that, because he is not yet 18, he cannot normally get into pubs to watch Scotland games. However, he did once enter a pub to watch a qualifier. The kick-off was at 7.45, so he saw only the first 15 minutes of the match, because the pub's licence allowed him to stay in the pub only until 8 o'clock. Another person told me that the Scotland versus England play-off for Euro 2000 was live on Sky, but was to be aired straight after the game on the BBC. He was too young to go to the pub and tried his best not to hear the result. He was full of anticipation for a successful score, only to look out of his window and see a grown man in a kilt greetin as he walked past. Of course, the fact that he saw that man is by the by, but the point is that it is not very exciting for people to watch important games after they have been played. What kind of message does the situation send out to young people? Only in Scotland could it happen that, on the one hand, efforts are being made to make the population healthier and fitter while, on the other hand, people are being forced into the pub to watch sport. I am willing to lobby Westminster and to seek to persuade it that our argument is the right one. I am happier still to argue that broadcasting powers should be transferred to the Parliament so that we can decide what is and is not practical. However, I will only really be satisfied when Scotland is a fully independent nation and has no need to ask for the right to watch our team play and no need to ask for more powers, because the decision will be ours and ours alone.

I have a short question. I welcome the cabinet secretary's support for the provision of services through community pharmacies. As she is focusing on areas of deprivation and poor access, will she consider using the pilot projects to increase the capacity of and services offered by pharmacies in smaller towns and rural areas, where access to GPs is often limited?

The Government has announced a significant increase in expenditure on the prevention and treatment of alcohol abuse. What will that increased expenditure achieve? How will progress be measured?

To ask the Scottish Government what consideration will be given by Learning and Teaching Scotland to including the Scots language in the experiences and outcomes headings in respect of language in the curriculum for excellence. (S3O-1437)

I spent Tuesday afternoon at Kirkton primary school in Carluke with the bestselling author Matthew Fitt, who was giving lessons on the Scots language to primary 7 pupils. The children's reaction was incredible to watch. Every child was fully engaged and their confidence grew. That is not an isolated example of what can happen. Does the minister agree with me and the teachers at Kirkton primary school that the teaching of Scots in schools and the inclusion of Scots in the curriculum for excellence will increase the confidence and self-belief of Scotland's children, which in turn will make for successful learners?

I welcome the opportunity to discuss this important issue and to do my bit to sell the south of Scotland. The debate is timely, because tomorrow is the day that we celebrate Scotland's patron saint and it coincides with the launch of the winter festival, which is a long overdue initiative that beautifully ties together some of Scotland's most important dates and celebrations. The debate also coincides nicely with last weekend's comments from VisitScotland's chairman, who said that we should market our weather as an attraction. Some of us are perhaps still to be persuaded of that argument. We have heard much about how important tourism is and how it contributes more than £4 billion annually to the Scottish economy. We know that gaps exist and that more can be done to improve the industry. That is why I am heartened that the Scottish Government supports VisitScotland's ambitious target of increasing that £4 billion figure by 50 per cent over the years to 2015. Tourism has been correctly identified as a key contributor to the Government's economic strategy, which aims to achieve sustainable economic growth. It is important that tourism is not overly concentrated only in certain areas, as my colleagues Nanette Milne, Jim Hume and Cathy Jamieson have already said. Although our country undoubtedly has key attractions and honeypot areas, each region of Scotland has something to offer visitors from elsewhere in the world, from  elsewhere in the UK and even from elsewhere in Scotland. Let us not forget that tourism is not just about bringing in money. Tourism plays an essential part in raising awareness and knowledge of Scotland's history and culture, especially among our younger people. If we can encourage more people to visit Scotland's outdoors by using public and active travel—be that walking, cycling, horse riding, canoeing, swimming or hang gliding—we will potentially contribute to a healthier Scotland in line with the Government's key objectives. Although it is important that we continue to attract visitors from overseas, Scotland's wealth of historic buildings and beautiful landscapes and its range of attractions to suit all ages and tastes are well placed to offer alternative destinations to Scottish people who would otherwise take carbon-intensive flights for short breaks in Europe. However, not every region is equal in terms of visitor numbers or investment in the tourism industry. In the greater Glasgow and Clyde valley area, the occupancy rate for self-catering establishments is 51 per cent. For caravan and camping sites, the rate is 46 per cent. Those figures are below the Scottish average of 55 per cent and 51 per cent respectively. Given that those types of accommodation are more likely to be located in the more rural parts of the area, as a country we obviously need to up our game dramatically to ensure that every part of Scotland, regardless of its geography, is known about and advertised enough. We must not get bogged down in the traditional notion that Scotland is only the Highlands and Islands. There is evidence of concerning trends. For example, New Lanark—the 13 th most visited attraction in the greater Glasgow and Clyde valley area—attracted 354,425 visitors in 2006. That total was down by 2.3 per cent from the 2005 figure of 362,850. The Government and its agencies must be conscious of the requirement continually to raise their game across all of Scotland in attracting tourists from both within and outwith Scotland. I want to ensure that the homecoming celebrations in 2009 are not just about the Highlands and Islands or Scotland's major cities. Emigration from the south of Scotland was also significant, so no area of Scotland should be neglected. The Government's idea of enticing back the Scottish diaspora is to be commended. I agree with Alasdair Allan that our diaspora is an untapped resource that is long overdue appropriate attention. Many historians have suggested that the forgotten cousin of the Highland clearances—the Lowland clearances—had a greater impact than its northern relative. Without wanting to engage in a debate about whether one clearance was more devastating than  another, I gently remind the Government that the south of Scotland, which I represent, has much to offer and a history that is equally rich and engaging. Indeed, one reason why 2009 was picked as the year for the homecoming celebration is that it is the year in which we commemorate the 250 th anniversary of the birth of Scotland's national poet, Robert Burns. If he was alive today, he would be one of my constituents. Cathy Jamieson did a good job in highlighting the need to sell the Ayrshire aspect of that. We need to ensure that everyone globally knows about what Scotland can offer. That can happen only with effective marketing and by building on the excellent global reputation that Scotland is lucky enough to possess. We should be rightly proud of what Scotland has to offer for tourists from all parts of the world and from all walks of life. As VisitScotland implements its strategy to boost revenues by 2015, it should do so in an innovative, sustainable manner that promotes the attractions that are to be found in every part of Scotland.

Like the previous speakers, I welcome the debate. It gives the Scottish Government the opportunity to respond to the super-complaint from the consumer group Which? and the Office of Fair Trading's findings. I sincerely hope that it will allow us to develop and kick-start further discussions on ways to improve Scotland's legal system. As has been mentioned by other members, including John Wilson, Which? believes that removing the restrictions on solicitors providing joint services with advocates would provide a  much better service to consumers, with savings on overheads and better economies of scale being passed on to those consumers. In general, Which? believes that multidisciplinary practices would enhance services and bring costs down for clients. Whether or not there is agreement on the Which? proposals, it is clear that there is a need for change, but we must ensure that any change is carefully considered. As we move forward to do that, it is important that the Parliament and the Government work with industry to ensure that we find a regulatory framework that is fair and appropriate to Scotland's specific circumstances, as has been acknowledged by the cabinet secretary. Indeed, in its response to the Which? complaint, the OFT—despite regarding the current regulation of legal services as restrictive—said: "the OFT notes that the legal services market in Scotland is different from that in England and Wales. The OFT also considers that it is important to develop an appropriate Scottish solution to any perceived problems ... the OFT has not assumed that the changes currently being made in England and Wales will be automatically suitable for the Scottish market." Of course, the debate is not just about ensuring service delivery, or whether there should be regulation. As Pauline McNeill's amendment shows, it is about the kind of regulation that we should have and equal access to justice, especially for those who need it most and those who would be most at risk of losing that access in an unregulated market. As highlighted by Rhoda Grant, with her experience of the Highlands and Islands, that is particularly important in rural communities. It is also true of the areas that make up the South of Scotland region. We must not leave the industry to the whims of the free market, as that would be bad not only for practitioners but for consumers. I spoke to a local solicitor in Carluke, who told me that, like every other industry, solicitors have witnessed a lot of changes to their working practices over the years. I was told that it was becoming increasingly difficult for rural offices to recruit new trainees—and to recruit people, full stop—and that more and more small, individual firms are being merged and amalgamated. The Law Society of Scotland concurred with that when it said: "Rural practices report difficulty in attracting staff and family law practices may be withdrawing from legal aid provision." In addition, when small firms try to concentrate on and specialise in specific areas, such as conveyancing, there is a latent fear that, eventually, the bigger, amalgamated firms will take away their business. Given that that is the fear now, the situation can only get worse, especially if the free market is allowed to prevail, so careful  consideration must be given not only to supporting small firms but to allowing bigger firms to use their expertise to compete in a growing international arena. At present, Scottish solicitors work in 44 countries throughout the world. It is clear that a balance needs to be struck. The situation demonstrates the importance of ensuring that any regulations are appropriate, that they meet the particular needs of our dispersed communities, and that they recognise the distinctiveness of the Scottish legal practice and its growing international influence. However, no one is saying that the status quo should remain. That is the view not only of the small firm in Carluke but of the Law Society of Scotland, as expressed in its consultation on alternative business structures. The consultation is a useful document that excellently and thoughtfully gets across what we must strive to obtain from people in the legal world. The Law Society acknowledges that things need to change, but it urges us to be mindful that change must never come at the cost of quality or of the much-cherished independence of our legal system. Independence is one of the most important elements of the system's operation; the independence of advocates and of solicitor firms is fundamental to the legal profession. I am no legal expert, but I know what I do not want as a consumer: I do not want to be ripped off or given legal advice that discloses confidential information about me or that is not in my best interest. Instead, I want any solicitor whom I hire to respect me and the rule of law, and to behave with honesty and integrity. It is encouraging that the Law Society's council shares those views and is conscious that any changes in business delivery models must protect not just the core values but the client. Smaller Scottish legal practices should have the opportunity to expand and innovate in a way that provides communities and individuals who have recourse to the law with the access that they need. We must protect our legal system. I think that there is agreement that while the quasi-liberalisation practices that have recently been endorsed in the UK's other legal jurisdictions—England and Wales—may be suitable for those countries, they are certainly not suitable for Scotland. We need only look at what is happening to the Post Office to realise what happens when industries that provide vital and specialised public services are forced to deregulate and open up to the wrong kinds of competition. Thousands of local post offices are being closed or are proposed for closure, and the range of services that is provided by the few, increasingly centralised branches that remain is being reduced.  We can learn lessons from such an approach to regulatory reform. I have no doubt that the Scottish Government will listen carefully to the points that have been made in the debate and will work closely with the Scottish legal profession to ensure that it is in the best state to serve 21 st century Scotland.

As my colleague Christina McKelvie noted, it has been nine years since Scotland compiled any kind of comprehensive strategy on early years and early intervention. Given that we all agree how crucial it is to have healthy, happy, informed, inquisitive, aspiring and involved children, we might think that one of the things that the new Scottish Parliament would have done in 1999 would be to look at an overarching strategy to help us help our children become all those things. That would have been a fitting intervention for the early years of our Parliament. That is why I was pleased to hear our Minister for Children and Early Years talk so passionately and with such commitment about a comprehensive plan to do the best for Scotland's children. The nine-year-old strategy that I mentioned a moment ago—"Meeting the Childcare Challenge: A Childcare Strategy for Scotland"—was not so much an early years strategy as a plan to provide more accessible child care. That is important, of course, and it is something that the SNP supports, but it is not the end of the story. Doing the best for children is not just about education. It is also about health. If children are well nourished, fit and healthy, they will learn better. If they are emotionally secure and their psychological needs are taken care of, their minds will be free to learn. That, too, will enable them to learn better. Doing the best for children is about social interaction. It is our duty to create an environment in which children have access to a variety of experiences and adult influences. If they have that access, their learning will deepen. Doing the best for children is about having loving, supportive families, as Elizabeth Smith noted. It is society's duty to support families and enable them to provide the right environments for their children. Children thrive in stable, loving environments, where their capacity to learn increases. Doing the best for children is also about wealth and poverty. The link between poverty and learning is unquestionable, as are the words of Douglas Hamilton, the head of policy and research at Save the Children, who said of the child poverty figures in March: "The Scottish Executive and the UK Government strategies have not gone nearly far enough—the figures are disgraceful." As the minister said, the SNP Government takes seriously its pledge to eradicate poverty. As we do so, children will be free to learn and they will do so better. It is right to invest time and money in our children's early years, but it also makes economic  sense. When the Work Foundation published the results of a major investigation into the early years, it came to the following conclusion: "Many of society's most intractable social problems—crime, drugs misuse, unemployment, poor skills and endemic unhappiness—are rooted in the experiences of children during their first five years of life." If we get things right in the first five years, we will undoubtedly save money that would otherwise be spent on dealing with the effects of crime and drugs. The Work Foundation estimates that, for every £1 that is spent on helping families and young people who are at risk, up to £17 of public expenditure can be saved. If the conclusions of the Work Foundation's studies are correct, we have only a short period of time in which to influence and encourage children positively, so we must not waste any more time. What do we have to do? For a start, we need to ensure that our children are fit and healthy. The introduction of the free school meals pilot is a terrific start and is heading in the right direction. Many children go to school without having breakfast and rarely eat a nutritious meal. Our approach is simply common sense. Often, common sense is all that is needed to help to improve children's lives. That is why I find the actions of South Lanarkshire Council—with particular reference to getting children fit—bizarre. I will give an example of something that happened at a school in Carluke in the south of Scotland. To encourage participation in sport, the school has new enclosed playing fields. That is good news so far. From afar, they look like bright, new, shiny, wonderful facilities, but on closer inspection the surfaces are not grass or new age Astroturf but tarmac. A friend of mine said, "In my day, they called that a road."

It is a strategy and an approach, and we want to make contributions to further that. At the moment, the project is a pilot. The results will be considered and the project could be rolled out further. I return to the point about tarmac. I think that we all agree that, in the 21 st century, tarmac is not the best surface for children to play energetic sports on. It will not help us to find the next James McFadden. Learning happens not only in nurseries and primary schools but throughout people's lives. We  have to ensure that children's life experiences are about more than home and school. They need to venture out into wider society, but that is becoming more and more difficult. We have all seen the report by Scotland's Commissioner for Children and Young People, which says that nearly half of the adults who were surveyed fear being wrongly accused of harming a child and will not volunteer to work with them. Often, that means that local clubs and organisations are not set up. If children are denied access to such clubs, they miss out on other parts of life that will add depth and fun to the learning experiences that they get in the classroom. The arguments for focusing on the early years are compelling. The Work Foundation argues that investing more in early years services, especially in parental support and community-based day care, will better help disadvantaged children and help us to save public money in the long term. Tonight is Hallowe'en and many children will be excited and happy to dress up to go guising—perhaps some of us in the chamber will do so, too—but Hallowe'en is not only a game. When it comes to the future of our young children, let none of us play games and let us work together as a Parliament towards ensuring that the children who need our help and intervention are provided with a brighter, healthier and happier tomorrow.

I take members back to 3 May 1997, which was a bright, sunny day. As I travelled to school, I was a bit bleary-eyed because I had stayed up to watch the election results flood in. I walked to school with a smile on my face and felt a sense of optimism, a sense that something major had happened. The reason for that sense of well-being was Labour's victory in the election—things could only get better. It was a result that was supposed to signal the end of 18 years of Tory rule, or so I thought. I should have realised that nothing had changed when the very next year I, along with thousands of other students across Scotland, had to pay for my education. In 1997, Tony Blair told us that the Conservatives' broken promises had tainted all politics. In comparison, his tenure would be hallmarked by the politics not of a revolution, but of a fresh start. His Britain would be respected in the world for the integrity with which it conducted its foreign relations. The new Labour Government would make the protection and promotion of human rights a central part of its foreign policy. However, as the years rolled on, it became clear that new Labour's foreign policy would be far removed from the appealing words that were spoken at the beginning of the party's term in office. As Alex Neil said, if we want to see a genuine example of a broken promise, we need  only look to the actions of the new Labour Government in waging war on Iraq. Broken promises are not just an element of London new Labour; unfortunately, as we have heard at length, they are a not-too-distant feature of Scottish new Labour. Education was to be a key theme for Labour in 2003. In its 2003 manifesto, it told us that class sizes in maths and English at secondary 1 and secondary 2 levels would be reduced to 20 and that additional teachers would be deployed to meet that goal, which had the explicit backing of Labour's Liberal Democrat colleagues. We were also promised maximum class sizes of 25 for primary 1 pupils. Despite being in power for eight years, the Labour-Liberal coalition failed to deliver on that promise.

No, I am sorry—I want to move on. [ Interruption. ]

In February 2007, we learned that more than 41 per cent of all primary 1 pupils were in classes that contained more than 25 pupils. The previous Administration also failed to deliver on the promise of reducing class sizes in maths and English. In the May election, I stood in the Clydesdale seat. Under freedom of information provisions, we learned that not a single maths or English class in Clydesdale was of the promised size. Pupils and parents in Lesmahagow, Biggar, Carluke, Lanark and Larkhall, along with countless others across the country who had been promised such reductions, were failed by eight years of a dithering, inactive Government.

I have had eight years of hearing from the member. Perhaps that failure is why Wendy Alexander, who in her 2003 election leaflet said that a vote for a party other than hers would put smaller class sizes at risk, decided last month that class sizes were "not a good measure of what matters." As Nicola Sturgeon said, the SNP won the election in May because we ran a positive campaign that talked up Scotland and showed its people what enormous potential we had to be a fully functioning, normal country. Our theme—it's time—was successful, so much so that the Conservatives used it for their conference banner. We pledged to offer hope and aspiration, and we will deliver on that. Labour does not have a divine  right to rule in Scotland and it should not dare to apologise for the election simply because it lost it. As Tricia Marwick said, it is not Labour's right to win every election in this country. That thing called "democracy" is precious and no members of our party will ever take it for granted. The people have placed their trust in us to deliver on our contract with them. We have made a pretty impressive start: we have announced the abolition of the bridge tolls, the scrapping of the graduate endowment and the saving of the Crichton campus. I could go on, but I will not shame the Opposition by listing more examples of the SNP's ability to accomplish more in months in government than the previous Executive could do in eight years. The Labour Party needs to rid itself of its tendency to think complacently that people will always vote for it. Times have changed; we operate in a new political climate, which I hope will develop into an environment in which we all act for the good of our country. That is why it is so disappointing to have to participate in a yah-boo debate—a style of debate that is all too common at Westminster, but from which I thought that we all hoped to distance ourselves at Holyrood. How will the people of Scotland feel if they see Opposition politicians playing political games instead of providing robust opposition that helps the country to be run positively? Maybe the Labour Party cannot afford to do that. All Labour members who support the motion will be playing games because they know that no Government anywhere in the world has ever implemented all its manifesto pledges five months into a four-year term. They know, too, that those who are behind the motion have engaged in the most childish political mischief making and that the SNP Government has been well received, is doing well for Scotland and will keep its promises to the people of Scotland.

I am in my final minute. The elation that countries in Britain felt when new Labour broke 18 years of Tory rule did not feel half as good as 4 May this year felt. The difference this time will be that the hope and aspiration that the whole country feels, and the trust that has been placed in the SNP, will be rewarded by positive, responsive government that is dedicated to making the country a better place to be. It is up to the other parties in the Parliament whether they join us on that journey.

On a point of clarification, Presiding Officer. Karen Whitefield mentioned that—

Well, she spoke—

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has made regarding Scotland receiving a share of oil and gas revenues. (S3O-801)

I draw the minister's attention to findings from the Norwegian statistics bureau that were recently reported in the Norwegian press, which show that Norway's oilfield economic growth has outpaced that of all other western countries during the past four years. Experts believe that that growth will continue in the long term. The bureau cites good growth in export markets, high wage growth and a decline in unemployment. Does the minister agree that that makes for depressing reading for Scotland because it is yet more evidence and a prime example of the kind of country that we could be if we had more control over our oil and gas rights and were able to use our resources to benefit the people of Scotland?

I whole-heartedly applaud the Government's statement. My question is about not hidden waiting lists per se, but waiting times in general. Does the cabinet secretary share my anger at the situation in which a constituent of mine finds himself? He was put on a waiting list in Glasgow for an operation that was not performed in Lanarkshire, where he lives. However, after waiting for two years to reach the top of that list he was taken off the list and put at the bottom of the waiting list in Lanarkshire, because the operation is now carried out there. He must start the waiting process again, which is unfortunate. Does the Government appreciate the frustration that he felt? Does it agree that such incidents demonstrate the previous Executive's incompetence in managing the health service in Scotland?

Like many members, I welcome this debate and I congratulate the cabinet secretary and the Government on producing "Skills for Scotland: A Lifelong Skills Strategy", which has gained a lot of support from business communities throughout the country. The strategy and the motion rightly see training, education and employment as connected and interlinked. That all-encompassing approach, and the decision to streamline structures to make it easier for people to access learning and training, are to be welcomed, and smack of good, simple common sense. We are a small country, so it should be straightforward to match people with jobs and sort out areas of weakness. I am glad that the strategy takes on board the need to ensure that everyone in Scotland has access to good advice and opportunities. That follows on nicely from last week's debate about the Crichton campus, when everyone in the chamber agreed that, if we truly want to rejuvenate our countryside, we must make education and training accessible to people in rural as well as urban areas. However, we should not forget that many groups of young people in rural and urban areas remain alienated from training, learning opportunities and certain job sectors. That is why I am delighted that "This strategy aims to promote equality of opportunity to those trapped by persistent disadvantage and to improve numbers of ... economically active" people from different groups. It is regrettable that, despite this being the 21 st century, discrimination persists in Scotland. I encourage the Government to consider that when it develops the strategy. Last month, I was delighted to attend an event in Glasgow hosted by Positive Action for Training in Housing. PATH was set up with the charitable objective of developing and running positive action training programmes throughout Scotland using section 37 of the Race Relations Act 1976. It addresses the issue of the underrepresentation of black and minority ethnic communities in housing, social work and related professions. PATH commissioned the University of Strathclyde's equality and discrimination centre, in  collaboration with Professor Gus John, to conduct research into the career aspirations and influences of black and minority ethnic young people in Scotland. Young people were surveyed and the overwhelming response showed that careers guidance and counselling lacked an attention to black and minority ethnic young people. The respondents felt that services did not meet the needs of BME people in the community, at work or in education. Survey respondents were still largely influenced in their choice of career by their parents. That is probably true of most young people, but what I took from the lecture on the survey was that young BME folk were disproportionately influenced by their parents in their career choice. It was not suggested that that was a bad thing, but rather that it perhaps narrowed their choices. That, and the fact that BME young people are not happy with the formal careers guidance that they receive, shows that Government and local authorities need to ensure that the careers guidance that they provide does not alienate a host of talented young people, but rather encourages them to enter sectors of the workplace that they might previously have discounted.

No, I do not. As I said earlier, the Government will examine different groups and ensure that people with various abilities and of various races and faiths are encouraged to get into the employment sectors that they want to enter. The strategy covers that quite adequately. I was just raising an issue that was brought to me last month, because I thought that it would be worthwhile contributing it to today's debate.

Like Ian McKee, I look forward to seeing the document that was mentioned and finding out more about the situation. The PATH evidence showed that, if we want to raise the career aspirations of Scotland's young people, we need to ensure that parents who  inform young people have more information as well. I subscribe to the Government's agenda of a smarter Scotland. I also want Scotland to be fairer. To ensure that Scotland has a sustained, vibrant and successful future, we have to use all of our people. We cannot afford to have a country in which some people feel alienated. I know that the cabinet secretary will work to ensure that the aspirations and ambitions of everyone in the country are raised and that their skills, education and training help them to get the jobs and careers that they want.

As a South of Scotland MSP, I am delighted that the new SNP Government managed to save and develop access to university education at the Crichton campus in Dumfries. I hope that the local community will continue to be involved in helping to develop the campus in a sustainable way. Until I became elected to represent the South of Scotland in the Parliament, my only real contact with Crichton was when, as a student at the University of Glasgow, I tried to borrow books from the library and discovered that the only available ones were down in Dumfries. I am pleased that the link with the University of Glasgow has been preserved and that the educational opportunities that are available at the campus have been expanded. The First Minister and cabinet secretary should be congratulated on their efforts to ensure that this level of education is available in the south-west of the country. The decision was the correct one. It is in keeping with the kind of Scotland that the Government wants to create—a smarter Scotland. Others who should be congratulated are the stakeholders at the campus, including the University of Paisley, and the local MSPs who remained committed to Crichton, notably Elaine Murray, Alasdair Morgan, Michael Russell, Alex Fergusson and others whose names were mentioned in the debate. When some questioned how Crichton could be saved without amending the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992, and others suggested that only a miracle could save it, the new Government stepped in and took full, considered and direct action to ensure its future. That action is a good example of Government working as it should. There was no humming and hawing; positive action was taken. That contrasts with the previous Executive, which failed to deal satisfactorily with the precarious situation that the Crichton faced for more than a year. Although the new Government can take some of the credit, it should not take it all. In addition to all those whom Derek Brownlee cited, quite correctly, as having been involved with the campaign, I note that the Crichton university campus students association ran an excellent campaign with the assistance of students and staff, which attracted attention and captured the imagination. As Elaine Murray mentioned, the students' passion for their place of learning was shown by walking 100 miles to the University of Glasgow, by producing a book of essays on how important the campus is for them, and by holding demonstrations and organising a letter writing campaign. That tenacity and dedication should not go unnoticed by the  Parliament, so I am pleased that the campaigners are given due credit in the motion. We are an open Parliament and we are accountable to the people. We need to respond to the people's wants and needs, and to do so for the greater good of the country. I can only imagine how delighted the students must be with the success of their campaign. I say that I can only imagine because, although I marched as a student along with thousands of others, our calls for free education fell on deaf ears. Support for the campus has come not just from Dumfries and Galloway but from across the world, which demonstrates the wonderful international reputation of the Crichton campus. The issue grabbed the attention and united staff, students and politicians in such a profound way because the campus has proven to be such a huge success. It has provided a useful seat of learning to those who would not normally have access to higher education. The fact that 56 per cent of the student intake comprises students who are the first in their family to attend university is hugely significant. It is also significant that students from more than 20 countries around the world choose Dumfries as their place of study. The campus has also proven to be vital to the vibrancy and long-term sustainability of the rural south-west of Scotland. Providing access to further education and university education is essential if rural areas are to keep young and ambitious folk. As Alasdair Morgan and Murdo Fraser correctly pointed out, if that is not offered, young people will simply leave. With the announcement of new opportunities at undergraduate and postgraduate level and improved education, infrastructure and health provision, the campus has the opportunity to develop in an exciting way—as Chris Harvie mentioned earlier—that will assist the whole of the south of Scotland to flourish. When the Crichton was opened, the previous Executive was rightly proud of the innovative nature of the project. The new Government is carrying on that work and helping to develop that vision further. If we want a smarter Scotland, we need to ensure that education is accessible to everyone, not just those who live near a city. When we find something that works, such as the Crichton campus, it is down to us to protect it.

I am particularly concerned about sexual offences against children, and specifically about the low rate of custodial sentences that are being given out for such crimes. In recent years, barely more than half of those who have been convicted of sexual offences against children have spent time in prison. I appreciate that prison can only ever be part of the solution, but does the Cabinet Secretary for Justice agree that the protection of our children from such offenders is paramount? Will he examine closely how we can protect children from convicted sex offenders, and will that include consideration of setting up a sentencing commission?

I congratulate the Scottish Government on encouraging a debate on a smarter Scotland and on the welcome announcements. The title of the debate allows us to focus the mind on what should be the crux of why we are all in the chamber, which is the matter of how we make our country better. Some good and constructive comments have been made and I am sure that the Government will listen to them and take appropriate action. A United Nations Children's Fund report stated: "The true measure of a nation's standing is how it attends to its children—their health and safety, their material security, their education and socialisation, and their sense of being loved, valued and included in the families and societies into which they are born." A debate about making Scotland smarter is therefore more than a debate about the role of schools in providing first-class education in maths, English, science or social science. Rather, it is a debate about establishing how we are going to make Scotland's children happier, healthier and  more confident. Schools have an integral part to play in that. As a start towards hitting those long-term goals, we should accept the case for reducing class sizes. Evidence suggests overwhelmingly that reducing class sizes will produce enormous benefits, so we must strive to overcome any problems that are identified. The oft-cited experiment in Tennessee shows that there is a direct correlation between attainment levels in schools and smaller class sizes.

I thank Hugh O'Donnell for that, but I argue that there is still overwhelming evidence of a direct correlation and that reducing class sizes makes attainment levels higher. It does so for three reasons. First, children get more attention from their teachers. Secondly, if there are fewer children in the classroom, there are fewer distractions in the learning area. Thirdly, children forge better relationships not only with their teachers but with their fellow pupils. The Educational Institute of Scotland recognises that, which explains why it vociferously supports reductions in class sizes. In "The Scots' Crisis of Confidence", Carol Craig argues that Scots collectively and individually lack confidence, which has knock-on implications for our economic growth, enterprise, physical and mental health, and creativity. We need to shift the cannae-do and "Ah kent yer faither" mentality to one that values excellence and encourages and praises effort and determination. A positive child-focused education system, combined with smaller class sizes in the early years, would make a great difference. If we ensure now that there are fewer children in P1 to P3 classrooms, we will have more confident, ambitious and successful Scots in the years and decades ahead. I hope that the Government agrees that we must do everything in our power to create happy and confident kids. Last week, I had the pleasure of attending a global schools initiative event at the Scottish Storytelling Centre. A teacher told me that the Scottish kids were in awe of their African and Asian peers who had travelled to Scotland as part of that valuable global exchange. The Scottish kids were struck by the visitors' ability to speak confidently and eloquently in public. There is an endemic lack of confidence in our society, so much so that we consider that lack an unfortunate Scottish trait. However, Scottish children are as  able as children from Africa, Asia, Europe or anywhere else in the world. We must ensure that our education policies address their lack of confidence. The Scottish education system was—in many respects it still is—the envy of the world because of its ability to give every child a decent education, regardless of where he or she comes from. I hope that the Government will retain that principle. However, we must remember that despite that principle, it is often the poorest children in society who are most disadvantaged, as Ian McKee correctly noted. Urgent anti-poverty strategies must be implemented to work in tandem with all other social policy issues. In its recent report, UNICEF stated: "The evidence from many countries persistently shows that children who grow up in poverty are more vulnerable: specifically, they are more likely ... to have learning and behavioural difficulties, to underachieve at school ... to have lower skills and aspirations, to be low paid, unemployed, and welfare dependent." I am sure that all members have seen the shameful child-poverty statistics from Save the Children. We must realise that we cannot ignore anti-poverty strategies when we discuss education and the goal to have a smarter Scotland. No child should be born to fail in a country with as much potential as Scotland. I hope that the Government will acknowledge that as it implements its new policies. We need to raise the aspirations and hopes of all children in our nation and ensure that they are never written off. Confidence, anti-poverty measures and small class sizes have the potential to kick-start our economy by helping our country to become smarter and more successful. We might not reap the benefits immediately, but as politicians we must recognise that we should act for the good of society and our country with long-term thoughts in mind. We need to coax and encourage our children—the future generation—to realise that they are valued, wanted and needed in our society. Building confidence in the early years is one way to do that. The power of the issue was made abundantly clear to me when I participated in a hustings that South Lanarkshire Council held in Hamilton during the election campaign. Schoolchildren from throughout Lanarkshire were present, and after the debate they were asked to use electronic keypads to vote on the matters that affect them the most. The poll showed that one of the biggest issues that concern young people at school is the lack of self-confidence. We must take note of that. If Carol Craig is correct, we can expect to improve economic growth, enterprise, physical and mental health and creativity by tackling the crisis of confidence in young Scottish children. The matter is therefore an absolute priority.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the graduate endowment and the prospect of massive student debts are scaring a generation of young Scots and preventing them from entering higher education? Does she agree that that point was proven through the publication yesterday of the age participation index for Scotland for 2005-06, which showed that, since the introduction of the graduate endowment, the percentage of young Scots entering higher education has significantly declined?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the people of Ayrshire will welcome the decision to maintain the accident and emergency unit at Ayr, given that they will no longer be fearful of having to make potentially risky and significantly longer journeys to receive vital treatment? Furthermore, does she believe that her decision to reverse the closures shows that the SNP Government listens to the people and local groups instead of ignoring their concerns? Will she confirm that that listening approach will be the hallmark of her department? Is she aware that the people of Ayrshire were sickened by what can only be described as a sham consultation process? More than 50,000 members of the public registered their opposition to the downgrading of services at Ayr in a petition, but every one of them was simply ignored. I congratulate the cabinet secretary on today's strong commitment—

Yes, okay. I congratulate the cabinet secretary. I am sure that the people of Ayrshire will welcome the fact that they have a Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing who realises that the NHS is run for the people who use it instead of a health minister who rides  roughshod over the people of Ayrshire, who made their feelings very clear.

I congratulate the cabinet secretary on engaging promptly with stakeholders who are concerned about the future and current state of our rural communities. I hope that that listening approach of taking on board concerns and opinions will continue to be the hallmark of the way in which the Executive proceeds. I particularly welcome the comments on the new entrants scheme and the commitment to bringing new blood into the industry. The reason that I have chosen to make my maiden speech in this debate is that rural issues and agriculture are close to my heart. I am the daughter of a tenant farmer and represent the largely rural south of Scotland. I will take great notice of today's words and future action. Farming is not an easy occupation. Indeed, to call it simply an occupation does a disservice to that valuable way of life, which is being eroded by mounting bureaucracy, paperwork, red tape and legislation. Members who represent rural constituencies and regions will no doubt be aware of the NFU manifesto, which noted that 2,281 pieces of European Community legislation covering agriculture were in force, with a further 568 pieces of legislation on the environment. On top of us are rules covering food hygiene, employment law and animal safety. In addition to those rules, quangos hold a Big Brother-like control over the industry. Agencies such as the Scottish Environment Protection Agency have grown in authority, placing another noose around agriculture's neck. I hope that the minister's actions echo the words of John Swinney and that he looks to rein in the power of such bodies as part of the useful process of slimming down Government. We must remember that farmers are primarily food producers. We are a country blessed with the finest food and products and possess a worldwide reputation for quality. It is unbelievable that we do not use that in our best interests, as Christine Grahame was right to note. Our schools and hospitals are providing food that is purchased cheaply to save costs, but the reality is that those decisions cost us dearly. We need to be more aware of the impact that our decision to buy strawberries in winter has on the environment. I am not suggesting that we completely remove consumer choice, but we need to raise awareness of what we produce in  Scotland and how foods are produced. As part of a joined-up approach to addressing the health and well-being of our nation, we have to raise awareness of how locally produced foods can help our nation become healthier. We need look only to our neighbours in Finland, who reversed their appalling health trends by using the rich source of nutritious berries growing right on their doorstep. That example of how a small country can affect positively the health of the nation using local produce should not escape the attention of our new Executive. We are in real need of action on this, because there have only ever been warm words. I went to a rural primary school surrounded by fields of potatoes, but we were served potato waffles and frozen chips. The situation has changed little. I trust that in 2007 we will finally take action to reverse years of neglecting our local producers in favour of the cheapest option. That is why I urge the Executive to examine the possibility of using what is on our doorstep and helping our farmers by using their produce to feed the mouths of the next generation of consumers. It is up to us as parliamentarians to set an example and promote, where possible, producers in our constituencies and regions. I plug the Clyde valley, the garden of Scotland, which produces the finest tomatoes. In that case—and, I am sure, in many others—the label "Grown in Scotland" truly is the mark of quality. I am sure that the Executive will be interested in a conversation that I had with a Clydesdale farmer I met at the Lesmahagow show. He is involved with the Royal Highland Education Trust and he is keen to see the expansion of many of its initiatives, such as farmers visiting schools and school pupils visiting farms. I agree that if such initiatives were expanded they could be a useful tool in educating youngsters about where their food comes from. Furthermore, I hope that the Executive shares my thoughts about placing Scotland on the international stage. Scotland's food has an excellent reputation and its quality shines through. In my opinion, the marketing of it has let the industry down. We should follow the Irish example, as Brian Adam suggested. Ireland markets its produce well and participates in international conferences and exhibitions much more prominently than Scotland does. I am confident that the new cabinet secretary and minister will be more than capable of releasing that untapped potential. There is more to rural development than farming and food. I hope that the announcements made today and the future course that the new rural team takes will kick-start a rural renaissance that  values local over global and acknowledges that co-operation in all areas, strands and avenues is the way to take our rural communities forward. One example of co-operation in progress is the Biggar eco forum, which is making an ambitious attempt to make Biggar the first carbon-neutral community in Scotland. I visited the forum in May and was impressed by its emphasis on raising environmental issues, highlighting ways to reduce CO 2 output and attempting to create a viable, sustainable rural economy with the support of local businesses, schools and churches. I hope that the minister will join me in congratulating those responsible for the initiative and perhaps even pay the forum a visit. We all understand that a multifaceted approach to the development of the rural economy is needed to ensure its viability. I have concentrated on farming, food and local issues that have been raised with me, but I could have spoken about so much more. I am pleased about the proactive way in which the new Executive is setting about tackling these issues and look forward to assessing its progress and actions in future.