Learning and skills development that supports pathways into the energy sector is embedded within curriculum for excellence and features in a number of qualifications. The sciences and technologies curriculum areas provide opportunities for learners to explore different types of energy sources and their uses. Education Scotland has developed resources to support teaching on energy and to build young people’s awareness of careers in the sector, such as its STEM central website, which uses engineering as a context for learning. Energy skills Scotland is also working with industry to facilitate better engagement with schools.

I thank Mrs Milne for her supplementary question and I appreciate her interest in this matter as one of the co-conveners of the oil and gas cross-party group. I certainly saw her comments on this very matter on the energy voice website over Christmas. The energy sector—and the oil and gas industry in particular—is a huge bonus for the Scottish economy. It offers a wealth of opportunities for young people, including young women as well as young men, and we must ensure that those opportunities are available the length and breadth of Scotland. I know of the good work that is taking place in the Aberdeen City, Aberdeenshire and Angus council areas, but there is an onus on us all to see how we can extend and learn from that good practice. The Government wants deeper and more comprehensive engagement between the world of education and the world of work. Our on-going work includes the Wood commission, of which Nanette Milne and her colleagues will be aware, and the energy skills Scotland initiative, which is crucial in developing a long-term co-ordinated plan for the whole country. The Wood commission has made some pertinent recommendations with regard to science, technology, engineering and mathematics and careers advice. However, we need to ensure—I hope that this will reassure Nanette Milne—that the opportunities that exist for young people in the north-east are available to young people the length and breadth of Scotland.

I think that it is appropriate that I make a point of clarification. Those are not missing youngsters. Skills Development Scotland has increased its endeavours to contact young people who are in need of opportunities, and those are young people whose whereabouts we do not know, despite our efforts. That is one reason why we promoted the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill—which the Labour Party failed to support—which is about improving data collection and creating a statutory responsibility to ensure that every agency is signed up to sharing information about providing the best opportunities for all our young people. Why did Labour fail to support the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill?

Will the member take an intervention?

My question to Ms Marra is this: why wait until a young person has been unemployed for a year? That is way too long. Why will she not join the Scottish Government in calling on the UK Government to implement the European youth guarantee now, like every other European country bar the Czech Republic? With the powers of Jobcentre Plus and welfare we could intervene within four months. Other European countries are implementing the European youth guarantee. Why are the Labour Party and the UK Government not supporting it now?

This year marks the 100th anniversary of the death of Mary Lily Walker, who was a native of Dundee. The city is, understandably, celebrating the life of that remarkable woman, who introduced ground-breaking social and healthcare reform. One hundred years on, we have seen a huge change in the lives of working women. Women now work in every sector in Scotland—often at the top of their profession—or run their own businesses, and yet they still face barriers to and at work. At last year’s women’s employment summit, which was held in partnership with the Scottish Trades Union Congress, delegates discussed the many barriers that women can face in the labour market. Since March this year, I have had support in monitoring progress since the summit from the strategic advisory group on women and work. I am grateful to the group for its passionate yet well-informed input to our wide-ranging mission. In addressing Parliament today, I hope that I am adequately reflecting its views and concerns. Since the summit, we have had the timely report from the Equal Opportunities Committee on its inquiry into women and work, which considered childcare, occupational segregation and flexible working. However, although significant challenges remain for today’s women, I stress that we are not here to debate bad news. I invite members to consider the wider picture. Women are doing well in the labour market. The latest statistics show that the female employment rate is 69.5 per cent in Scotland, which is an increase of 3.2 per cent in the past year. Over the year, the number of women in employment in Scotland has risen by 54,000, and female underemployment has also decreased by 2.9 per cent over the past year. However, we know that problems still exist, and we need to find ways within our powers to tackle them. The cost and availability of childcare is often cited as the key problem for working parents and women in particular. That is why we are legislating now, via the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, to increase the level of funded early learning and childcare from 475 hours to 600 hours per year for three and four-year-olds and, from 2014, for the most vulnerable two-year-olds. Our white paper, “Scotland’s Future: Your Guide to an Independent Scotland”, which was published last week, set out our commitment, in an independent Scotland, to work towards a childcare system in which all children from age one to starting school would be entitled to 1,140 hours of childcare and early learning a year, which equates broadly to 30 hours a week, 38 weeks per year. That would be truly transformational and would enable more women to make greater choices about their working lives. In developing that commitment the Scottish Government is indebted to Professor Ailsa McKay, whose input has been invaluable, and I thank her for that. Among the other topics that were discussed at the summit, occupational segregation is one of the most complex and challenging, but we must challenge it for the sake of our economy and of equality, including equal pay. Because the issues are so broad, the first recommendation from the summit on which we acted was the re-establishment of the Government’s cross-directorate working group. In addition to Scottish Government officials, the group calls on the expertise of our external partners in the STUC, Napier’s Scottish resource centre for women in science, engineering and technology, the close the gap project and the men in childcare initiative. The group will oversee the work to progress the women’s employment summit recommendations, alongside the recommendations that the Royal Society of Edinburgh made in its report, “Tapping all our Talents: Women in science, technology, engineering and mathematics—a strategy for Scotland” One action that is already under way is the implementation of careerwise, which is a £250,000 fund to encourage girls and young women to consider careers in science, engineering and technology. Careerwise Scotland is being implemented by the Scottish resource centre. It will work collaboratively with employers, schools, colleges, universities and Skills Development Scotland to encourage and support young women into science, technology, engineering and maths learning and jobs. It is worth mentioning that earlier this month, Prospect union launched the Prospect pledge to encourage the Government and employers to do more to help women into STEM jobs. I assure Parliament that I fully support that ambition. Early next year, I will hold an event with the information technology industry with an emphasis on how to attract young women into the sector, which I hope will also contribute to that work. On the modern apprenticeship programme and vocational education training, Skills Development Scotland is pursuing a range of activities including working with Scottish union learning to better target underrepresented groups in the apprenticeship programme, be that young women, members of the black minority ethnic community or people with a disability. As members all know, we await the final report from the Wood commission. However, we need to be clear that addressing occupational segregation is not just about getting more women into STEM jobs. Women are often drawn to particular sectors and types of jobs. It is crucial that we properly value all the work that women do—paid and unpaid—which contributes so much to Scottish society and to the Scottish economy. Another topic of discussion at the summit was access to training for women of all ages. I recognise that women will need to access training at different stages of their lives and that those who are returning to the labour market may need to refresh existing skills or retrain in a new area.

The facts of the matter are that women are well represented as learners within colleges—53 per cent of learners are indeed women and women make up 51.5 per cent of the population. Given what we know about the barriers to women participating in the labour market, it is absolutely crucial that women get access to learning that is economically relevant and which will give them access to well-paid and fruitful careers. On another matter, I have asked officials to identify any barriers to training that women face and to explore how those can be addressed in full. As part of that work, I am pleased to advise the Parliament that through the energy skills challenge fund, OPITO—the oil and gas skills body—and Fife College are specifically targeting women for courses that are due to commence in January 2014. The Scottish Government will pilot an offer of childcare support for those courses.

Absolutely. That issue has been debated and discussed within the chamber and also within the strategic group on women and work and amongst the occupational segregation group. We know that men are more likely to be in apprenticeship frameworks such as construction and engineering, which take longer to complete and are often at a higher level. However, as I said earlier, we do indeed want women to have access to opportunities in a variety of sectors, including those sectors in which women are currently underrepresented—sectors that can lead women to long careers and careers that will help to address equal pay issues, for example. As regards women in enterprise, in Scotland only 21 per cent of small to medium-sized enterprise employers are women led. Following last year’s summit, we facilitated a series of workshops, which were chaired by Professor Sara Carter of the University of Strathclyde and Jackie Brierton of Women’s Enterprise Scotland. A draft framework for action by the Scottish Government and its partners has been produced and we anticipate that it will be completed by the end of the year. Figures that Sara Carter has provided show that, if women in Scotland were to start businesses at the same rate as men, economic growth could be more than 5 per cent. That demonstrates the importance of addressing the enterprise gap. The challenges for women in the workplace are many and varied. In the short time available, I have not been able to cover all the work that is under way by the Scottish Government and our partners. I hope that my colleague Shona Robison will address in her concluding remarks some of the wider equality issues and issues to do with women’s participation on boards and in broader public and corporate life. I have not had time to touch on the excellent research and analysis that has been led by Professor Patricia Findlay, but there are good papers on the employability in Scotland website. To end on a personal note, I assure Parliament that, within the scope of the powers that we currently have, we are taking steps across all areas of Government to tackle the barriers to employment or progression that women face. I for one certainly want to do more. One of the many reasons why I want to bring powers home to this Parliament is so that we can make a practical and long-lasting difference to women’s lives. I move, That the Parliament recognises the significant contribution that women make to Scotland’s economy; agrees that there is a potential economic impact from enabling more women into the labour market and that implementing the Scottish Government’s commitment to a universal childcare system as outlined in Scotland’s Future, Your Guide to an Independent Scotland, would significantly help raise women’s participation; recognises the commitment of the Scottish Government now and in an independent Scotland to increasing women’s representation in public and corporate life; further notes that the Scottish Government remains committed to tackling all of the barriers faced by women that prevent their full participation in the labour market; notes the progress made since the Women’s Employment Summit, which was held on 12 September 2012, and recognises the contribution of the STUC and other partners to that progress.

I remind Ms McMahon that, in the Scottish Government’s response to the Equal Opportunities Committee, we agreed with its recommendations. We agreed with the specific recommendation to undertake a marketing campaign looking to target young women and to get more of them into apprenticeships.

Will the member give way?

Consistent with the aims of our reforms, the recently merged Ayrshire College is expanding vocational education opportunities across North Ayrshire. The new college is a considerable boost for North Ayrshire and it will continue to adjust its curriculum to reflect the needs of local employers. Moreover, in the academic years 2012-13 and 2013-14, Ayrshire College has received additional funding of over £3.26 million from the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to deliver additional places for young people, women and adults returning to education.

Yes, I do agree. I listened to the figures that Mr Gibson quoted, and I think that I am correct in saying that he is talking about the claimant count figures for 16 to 19-year-olds, which have fallen right across Scotland. Given the particular challenges of North Ayrshire, it is encouraging to hear about that improvement. Kenneth Gibson might also be interested to know that the claimant count, although it is not a full estimate of youth unemployment, has also fallen across the 16 to 24-year-old cohort, from 11 per cent to 8.1 per cent. He is absolutely right about the importance of vocational education and training. The targeting of specific skills needs in order to meet the needs of local employers will, indeed, boost the employability of learners of all ages, and support growth.

The Highlands and Islands skills investment plan has been prepared by Skills Development Scotland, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council over the past six months to provide an agreed framework for increasing alignment of education and skills provision with the needs of local employers.

The Highlands and Islands skills investment plan is the first regional skills investment plan, and it is very much looking to align education and training opportunities with skills needs and the needs of employers. The Highlands and Islands skills investment plan was discussed at the convention of the Highlands and Islands at the end of October and a number of suggestions were made before the plan was finalised. I can go away and look at the specific issue that Ms Grant has brought up, but I assure her that the purpose of a skills investment plan is to enable young people to make the most of the opportunities that are available to them in their local economy. That is important for all Scotland, but particularly for rural Scotland.

I welcomed the unanimous support for the Wood commission’s report and its direction of travel when it was debated in Parliament on 8 October. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has asked the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to discuss delivery of the commission’s interim recommendations on increased collaboration between schools and colleges with a range of partners, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, sector leaders, local authorities and Education Scotland.

We are certainly looking carefully at the funding implications of the Wood commission’s report. Sir Ian Wood said that “significant additional funding” would not be required, but it is stating the obvious to say that additional funds will be required, so we are looking at that in detail. The cabinet secretary has been very clear with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. Some funding will be identified to enable the very important pathfinder projects, in which we hope to make progress apace for the next academic year.

There continues to be a strong disagreement between the Scottish Government and the UK Government with regard to implementation of the European youth guarantee. I last discussed that issue face to face with David Cameron and his colleagues at a joint ministerial committee on Europe meeting a few weeks ago. The Scottish Government very much believes in early intervention, which is absolutely pivotal in preventing youth unemployment becoming long-term unemployment. Although we are making good progress in Scotland with our headline youth unemployment indicators, the proportion of young people who are in the claimant count for 24-plus months is rising. I have concerns about the failure of the work programme. The other thing that I am really concerned about is the narrative that is emanating from down south, in which instead of having a debate about how we can enhance opportunities for young people, such as through the European youth guarantee, we are having a debate that is fuelled by welfare cuts and cuts to benefits to young people. I do not like that debate, which is emanating from the UK Government, and which in some regards has been emulated by the Labour Party at United Kingdom level.

As I said in response to an earlier question, I welcome the unanimous support that was expressed in the Parliament for the report. I also mentioned that the cabinet secretary has asked the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to discuss with partners early progress on the identification of pathfinder projects.

That is a matter for the Scottish funding council and its partners. I hope that it will be helpful to the member if I say that it is clear that, in the identification of pathfinder projects, they are looking for areas where there is existing good practice and where there is a strong focus on science, technology, engineering and mathematics subjects. Discussions are on-going. I am sure that Mr Brodie is well equipped to make representations, whether via me or direct to the Scottish funding council and other partners.

In January this year, the Government set up the independent commission for developing Scotland’s young workforce under the leadership of Sir Ian Wood. At the halfway point of its work, the commission has published an interim report, which has received widespread endorsement from the education and business communities and caught the imagination of many. I welcome the interim report, the extent to which the commission has already made progress, the vision that it has set out on vocational education and the practical steps that it has outlined in its recommendations. Although it calls for a set of evolutionary steps, the report is, overall, hugely ambitious on behalf of all our young people. There are many exciting aspects of the report but, above all else, it lays out a realistic blueprint for how we might move to an education system that sets out clear and attractive pathways that can take young people from school into employment. Scotland has a good recent record on addressing youth unemployment, but I want our long-term approach to boosting youth employment to be among the best in the world. We have been making progress on increasing attainment, but I want the opportunity gaps in our society to be eradicated. We have some well-developed and well-understood pathways for young people, but I want everyone to understand and hold in high regard all our educational and training pathways. The report makes a significant contribution to achieving all those aspirations. It highlights a number of drivers that make the delivery of its recommendations possible. The flexibility of the senior phase of curriculum for excellence, the regionalisation of our college sector and the growth in modern apprenticeships are all clearly identified as important drivers for delivery. Those are all reforms that the Government has undertaken. They build on the progress in Scottish education that the Parliament has delivered since devolution. That means that we have a platform to build a world-class vocational education and training system that we can proudly place alongside our world-class higher education system for the benefit of all our young people, our employers and, of course, Scotland’s economic wellbeing. We can disagree at a political level about many issues but, across the Parliament, there is a consensus that our young people’s future should not be one of the issues that we dispute. We all want our young people to be able to make the most of their talents. We all want to benefit from the contribution that a highly skilled and well-motivated young workforce can make to our country’s success. We all want to avoid the situation in which young people suffer the long-term scars of unemployment at an early age. That is why, as the Government considers the commission’s interim report, in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, I was keen to give Parliament an early opportunity to contribute to how the recommendations might be taken forward. That is a process that we can start today and one that I want to sustain, with all members, in the months ahead. We are starting from a strong base here in Scotland, but there is much that we can learn from other countries. I recently visited Switzerland and Germany to see for myself how their vocational education and training systems help to drive low levels of youth unemployment. Both countries expose young people to the workplace at an early age and place great importance on well-understood, high-quality vocational pathways. In both countries, employers are seen as part of the education system and view themselves as such. I was struck by the widely held understanding that educationists and industry need to work together to prepare young people for life after school. It was very apparent to me that there was a clear understanding of what it is like to be 16 and of the support that young people need to develop a whole host of attributes required to move successfully into adult life. In those countries, there was also a clear understanding that early exposure to the workplace helps to build those attributes among young people. There is no doubt that we all have empathy towards our young people. We have all been there—admittedly, for some of us, that was longer ago than we would care to remember—and most of us have young people in our lives. I look forward with particular interest to the commission’s further recommendations on bringing employers much closer to the education system. There is an appetite among employers in Scotland to do more and I know that the commission will focus on how we can make that possible.

As the commission proceeds with the second phase of its work, it will perhaps consider some of those issues about statutory requirements. Despite a global economic recession, countries such as Germany have seen youth unemployment fall, and there is great interest in how they have achieved that. We need to build a system that ensures clearer progression for young people from school into work in the good times as well as the bad. We need a system that will be robust enough that whether the economy is up or down, our young people get the best start to their working lives. It is not for me to pre-empt the work of the commission in its second phase. However, I have no doubt that it will look at many countries, including Germany, when it considers how we can proceed to a system in which, as Sir Ian Wood described it, employers are not just passive recipients but are integrally involved in the education and training of young people. Given what I have said, I hope that it is clear that I am enthusiastic about the commission’s interim recommendations. Detailed consideration will have to be given to each recommendation and to the implementation challenges that may exist. However, I welcome the opportunity to work with COSLA on this and I also welcome the early engagement that leaders throughout the education sector are having with each other. I will not go through all the recommendations, but I want to highlight some of them. The focus on informing young people about the opportunities throughout the world of work from an early stage of their secondary education is critical. I am particularly interested in the recommendations on science, technology, engineering and mathematics and the growth sectors in that regard. It is essential that we inspire young people around the opportunities to pursue careers in those parts of the economy in which their chance of a long-term, rewarding career is greatest. That must involve teachers, careers advisers, employers, parents and guardians working together to inspire young people about the possibilities that lie ahead. That has to be underpinned by strong pathways that help young people reach for those opportunities. At the launch of the commission’s interim report, Linda McKay, the vice-chair of the commission, spoke about the unique opportunity that the commission has had to look across schools, colleges and modern apprenticeships. By taking that approach, the commission has highlighted a number of possibilities to smooth transitions for young people and put all our young people in a better position to move confidently and ambitiously towards rewarding employment from the senior phase onwards. Our college reform programme has, over the past two years, seen a remarkable transformation in the shape of the sector. Leaders in this new sector are continuing to realise the opportunities that regionalisation presents. The commission is clear that colleges should focus on the employability of their learners through closer links with industry. That is a central principle of our regionalisation agenda. A little over two years ago, in “Putting Learners at the Centre: Delivering our Ambitions for Post-16 Education”, we proposed that the role of further education should be to provide people with the skills that they need to get a job, keep a job or get a better job and develop a good career, however near to or far from the labour market they are. This is the whole point: young people go to college and engage in education at least in part to enhance their career prospects. Employment outcomes are therefore a fundamental indicator not only of a college’s success, but of the success of the education system as a whole. The commission has rightly identified the need to provide opportunities and support for all young people, irrespective of their background. The Government has asked the commission to place the equality agenda at the very heart of its work. I know that it is determined to make meaningful recommendations across education and employment in its final report to help address inequalities in employment outcomes. The interim report highlights, for example, the success of activity agreements in supporting some of our most vulnerable and disadvantaged young people and calls for that approach to be extended where appropriate to those aged under 16. Although the commission helpfully makes recommendations to bring forward careers advice, it is important to recognise that the career modernisation programme aims to maintain universal support for all young people while providing more intensive support for those who need it most. In the report’s forward, Sir Ian Wood refers to attainment for all. The Government has made improving attainment a central element of its education strategy. A number of the recommendations, if implemented well, will help us realise our ambition for Scotland to be the best place to go to school, where every young person can enjoy an education that encourages them to be the most successful they can be and provides them with a full passport to future opportunity. It is very interesting that the report does not contain the term “parity of esteem.” There can be little doubt for anybody who has read the report that the commission members believe passionately in the importance of both vocational and higher education to our young people, our economy and our society. They state that clearly in the report and whenever they speak about their work. However, rather than simply calling for greater parity of esteem between vocational and academic education, as many others have done in the past, the commission has laid out a number of practical steps that it thinks will help bring that about. Ultimately, by delivering those well and demonstrating the enhanced employment outcomes of those who follow the vocational pathways that the commission outlines, we will start to see a shift in the outmoded culture to which the report quite rightly refers. The commission’s work is only half finished. It will focus on employers and equality issues between now and early next year. However, I very much believe that we have to take this interim report seriously, so the work begins now to implement it. Working in partnership with COSLA, I plan to work with the commission to bring together leaders from across the education system and beyond to consider the recommendations and their implementation. The national summit, which Sir Ian Wood will chair, will focus on the issues raised by the interim report. I invite members of this Parliament with an interest in this to attend the summit, which will take place at the turn of the year. I very much look forward to today’s debate. I am sure that it will reflect the wide-ranging interest in the commission’s work. It will undoubtedly help inform the Government’s thinking on the interim report as we consider the recommendations, in partnership with COSLA, in advance of the commission’s final report next year. I move, That the Parliament believes that schools should promote educational attainment and positive destinations for all pupils including those who wish to pursue vocational pathways; welcomes the interim report from the Commission for Developing Scotland’s Young Workforce; further welcomes the emphasis that it places on closer cooperation between schools, colleges and employers in providing vocational education; agrees that the report provides a sound basis for future policy decisions, and invites the Scottish Government to work in partnership with all parties, COSLA, local authorities and stakeholders to build a consensus based around the commission’s report, including ways to make early progress in developing the opportunities that young people have to improve their skills and employability.

I am grateful to Ms Marra for taking an intervention. It was very remiss of me earlier not to acknowledge that this is her first outing in her new portfolio position, so I appreciate it. I suggest that although we can be absolutely united that youth unemployment remains too high, Ms Marra should not misuse statistics from the Office for National Statistics—particularly for young people. We know that the only comparison labour market stats for young people can be year on year, and year-on-year statistics show that youth unemployment in Scotland has fallen. It is still too high and, on that, I hope we can unite.

I appreciate the tone and tenor of Mr McArthur’s speech. Would he accept that if we consider the proportion of employers who recruit young people under the age of 25, Scotland outperforms the rest of the UK by a few points? We can unite on the point that we need to encourage more employers to recruit young people directly from education. When we speak to those who do that, we find that they accept that young people make a very worthy contribution to the workplace.

The Government takes Mr Brown’s point. One of the reasons why we set up the youth employment Scotland fund was to reflect the fact that small businesses in particular do not necessarily have HR expertise. That is reflected in how the fund is used across local authority areas to enable the scaling up of local wage-incentive schemes. Part of that is making it easier for small employers in particular.

The Government takes very seriously, for a host of reasons, the Wood commission’s recommendations. Will Ms Dugdale acknowledge the importance to the apprenticeship programme of employed status and the fact that it is employer led, and that we now need to work out how we retain the employer-led element and meet the needs of the growing economy? For clarity, I hope that Ms Dugdale is not suggesting that we remove support from all 16 to 24-year-olds. In the current framework every 16 to 24-year-old gets support and a contribution from the Government.

The careers information advice and guidance strategy was published in March 2011. It sets the framework for the redesign and improvement of careers guidance for all, and Skills Development Scotland has been modernising its offer to schools and carrying out a series of reviews to ensure that it is meeting the needs of today’s young people. The focus is on developing the career management skills of individuals in order to equip them to seek and grasp career opportunities and to have the agility to cope when their circumstances change throughout their working lives.

My understanding of the Skills Development Scotland customer satisfaction survey is that between 800 and 900 people replied and that the research that Mr Findlay mentioned was based on interviews with about 1,000 young people. I will take the evidence in the round, because the evidence in the round from that research and from previous research demonstrates what we have always said as a Government—that we have not and will not replace front-line careers advisers with web-based services. The modernisation process is about having various channels of delivery. In the modern world, we want to use web-based facilities, but we also want to retain face-to-face contact. Last year, Skills Development Scotland delivered to all secondary 4, S5 and S6 students group sessions and face-to-face contact in relation to my world of work and vital career management skills. We are delivering our careers information, advice and guidance strategy through a variety of methods, and we will continue to do so.

I very much welcome the debate, which gives the Parliament an important opportunity to continue to make its distinctive voice heard on such vital matters. I begin by making it clear that, as a Scottish Government, we are absolutely determined to address the root causes of poverty. Scotland is a wealthy nation. We would be the eighth-richest nation in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development by gross domestic product per head. We are energy rich, our workforce is highly skilled and our reputation for innovation is long established. We have world-class universities and Scottish businesses are competing at the highest level worldwide. It is therefore a social, economic and moral disgrace that, in a resource-rich nation such as ours, tens of thousands of children live in poverty. It is also a disgrace that tens of thousands of older people live in poverty. Perhaps more than anything, it is a disgrace that that has been true for generation after generation. It is time to change all that, and I believe that Scotland has what it takes to make that change. That is why, as a Government, we have invested so much in supporting household incomes and tackling poverty. Others in this Parliament may call that “something for nothing”; we call it our social wage. It is our contract with the people of Scotland. Our amendment picks out just a few of the initiatives of this Government and, indeed, previous Administrations. I am proud to say that we have frozen the council tax, which will have saved the average band D household in Fife more than £1,600 by 2016-17.

In a minute. The bus pass for Scotland’s older citizens saves cardholders around £250 a year and the scrapping of bridge tolls saves a regular commuter £233 a year.

In a moment. Nursery care is being expanded, which will save families £707 per child per year.

Unlike David Cameron, I believe in a Scotland in which those with the broadest shoulders bear the biggest burden, but to allow that to happen we need to have a social contract that benefits everyone. Knowing that everyone gets something makes our society more cohesive. I understand why people might want to debate how many universal services we can afford when we are in the grips of Westminster austerity, but what I object to most is the attack on the principle of universal benefits and the notion of a social contract. We are a cohesive society. Through the powers of independence, we want to protect and develop the social wage. We do not want it to be knocked down as a result of Labour’s regressive party politics or Westminster austerity. Let us not forget that we have free prescriptions that save the sick and infirm £104 per year and free university tuition that saves students £9,000 a year, or that free personal care for the elderly, which was introduced under a previous Administration, is funded and maintained by us. Those and other initiatives form our social wage. We are protecting incomes, delivering services and mitigating Westminster’s misguided austerity. We are doing so not simply because we believe that those are the right things to do for the benefit of everyone in Scotland, but because they are the fair things to do, and because international evidence shows that countries with greater equality perform better in economic terms. However, we are doing so in the teeth of Westminster cuts, which will take hundreds of millions of pounds from households on low incomes. The cumulative reductions in Scotland will total an estimated £4.5 billion by 2015, around £1 billion of which will impact directly on children. We will not be able to mitigate the impact of all the changes, but we must continue to act when and where we can. We have therefore pledged £23 million to mitigate the cut in council tax benefit funding and have established in partnership with councils the Scottish welfare fund, which amounts to £33 million for crisis grants and community care grants. We are also spending nearly a quarter of a billion pounds over the spending review period on fuel poverty and energy efficiency.

In a moment. As John Swinney has made clear, this Government will not walk by on the other side. I give way briefly to Jackie Baillie.

I think that Ed Miliband’s energy price freeze is very well intended. It is a scandal that in a resource-rich country such as Scotland we have fuel poverty. However, I would like Ed Miliband to publish the full analysis of the research that underpins the policy. I also note that we have a very important energy commission that is looking at fuel poverty and pricing as well as the sustainability and supply of energy in an independent Scotland.

I want to see the details. However, I have to say that I would have had more confidence in Ed Miliband had I not looked at his record in government as energy minister, during which time energy company profits rocketed and household bills went up by more than 33 per cent. This Government has pledged to find £20 million to help those struggling most with the costs of the bedroom tax. However, although that help is absolutely vital and has been widely welcomed, it does not hide the harsh truth that mitigation will not and cannot be enough. That is the very point that the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations made forcefully this week in its report, “A better state: inclusive principles for Scottish welfare”, which makes it clear that what we need are the powers to deliver Scotland’s own welfare and taxation systems. I agree with Jackie Baillie when she criticises Westminster cuts, and I share her concerns about the most vulnerable in our society. However, I cannot agree with her comment on 3 September that “I am not saying that ... we cannot develop our own welfare system. I am saying we should not develop our own welfare system.” It seems to me that Labour is willing to do no more than criticise Westminster cuts to welfare when what Scotland needs is to do is cut Westminster out of welfare.

It is a moot point. Sometimes when I speak to the most vulnerable people in my constituency it feels as if we take all the risk and see very little of the reward. I also note that earlier this year, in response to the UK Government’s Welfare Benefits Up-rating Bill, the chief executive of the Children’s Society, Matthew Reed, said that “a nurse with two children could lose £424 a year by 2015 and an army second lieutenant with three children £552 a year.” He went on to say: “Many more will struggle to pay for food, heat their homes, and provide other basics for their children as they find it increasingly difficult to keep up with rising prices.” That is not the Scotland we seek on these benches; we want a different Scotland. We want the powers to achieve that vision of a more prosperous and fairer Scotland. However, the Labour Party—the so-called party of equality—with its colleagues on the other side of the chamber wishes to relinquish and abandon powers of welfare and taxation.

In my final minute, I want to make it clear that we very much need the ability to ensure that decisions affecting the day-to-day lives and living standards of people in Scotland—decisions around tax and welfare—are taken here in Scotland by the people of Scotland. With those powers—the powers of an independent nation—we can put an end to welfare cuts and abolish the bedroom tax; we can protect household incomes and maintain the social wage; we can build a taxation and welfare system that is a progressive beacon; and we can end the generations of shame that have been caused by child poverty and which have existed under the Labour union as well as the Tory union. More than ever, what we need is the full powers of an independent nation. I move amendment S4M-07872.3, to leave out from “and believes,” to end and insert: “welcomes the action taken by the Scottish Government to support household incomes including the council tax freeze, the maintenance of free bus travel for older people, the extension of free nursery provision, the introduction of free personal care for older people, free university tuition and abolition of bridge tolls, and believes that, with independence, including control of taxation and welfare, Scotland can be a beacon of progressive action to tackle poverty and maintain household incomes.”

Skills Development Scotland employability fund contracts for 2013-14 were awarded to colleges and training providers in March 2013. In advance of that, SDS held a bidders’ conference in Perth on 11 January this year and managed an online question-and-answer facility to support training providers as they prepared their employability fund bids. SDS provides on-going support to employability fund training providers through a dedicated contracts manager, and it held a further information session for training providers in Stirling on 11 June. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has negotiated delivery of the college element of the employability fund as part of college outcome agreements. The funding council will continue to support colleges through regular engagement with outcome managers.

This is the first year of the new employability fund, and I understand, from my engagement with organisations such as the Scottish Training Federation, colleges, local authorities and other providers, that its creation is very welcome and that it is bringing together organisations and funding pots. Notwithstanding that, as it is the first year, there will be some very important learning that we can reflect on. That is important. We will have to reflect on the experiences of all providers, particularly as we strive to improve outcomes for young people. The member is correct that there is a co-commissioning panel, which is led by SDS, but the decision on commissioning is made unilaterally by SDS and decisions have to reflect local need. I assure the member that, through my on-going engagement with stakeholders, we will learn and enhance the decision-making processes. I will look at the issues that the member has raised about local labour market information and why it is not subject to freedom of information legislation. I have to say that that is news to me, but I will get back to the member on that.

Learning and skills development relating to energy, including renewables, are embedded in the curriculum for excellence and feature in a number of qualifications. Within the curricular areas of sciences, technologies and social studies, learners investigate the use and development of renewable energy. Links can be made to the cross-curricular theme of sustainable development education. Education Scotland has developed a range of resources to support teaching on energy and build young people’s awareness of careers in the sector, including learning journeys on renewables within STEM central and a leaflet for schools called “Working in the energy sector: A guide for teachers and those who provide careers advice”.

I agree that it is absolutely imperative that young people—in particular, young women—are aware of the opportunities in the energy sector and that our schoolchildren have the opportunity to develop the skills and qualifications that they need to unlock job opportunities in that area. I am aware of the committee’s inquiry and its interest in getting more women to pursue science, technology, engineering and mathematics and careers in those subjects. As Chic Brodie will be aware, at the heart of curriculum for excellence are skills for learning, life and work. Uptake and attainment in science and maths, particularly at higher and advanced higher level, continue to be strong. On a broader theme, energy skills Scotland and the commission for developing Scotland’s young workforce both have a positive contribution to make to facilitating partnerships that create better connectivity between the worlds of education and work, so that our young people are better informed and have better pathways to the opportunities that exist now and those that will exist tomorrow.

This has been a largely well-informed debate. Top marks go to Marco Biagi, the former researcher, for a very eloquent exposé of the links between education and our economy and how we can gain more of the benefits of a first-class education system through having the full range of economic powers. In addition, I very much enjoyed Duncan McNeil’s speech. I hope that he does not mind my saying that I found it to be uncharacteristically reflective and humorous in parts, although he covered some very serious issues. The Scottish Government very much welcomes the committee’s report, so I hope that the committee’s members will find the Scottish Government’s response to the report’s many recommendations very positive; we have responded positively in part or in full to all the recommendations. As the committee does, we have a desire to get into the guts of the issue and to seek more information. We have already published more information about older and disabled workers, but we will seek ways to improve our measurement tools in relation to the skills utilisation measurement framework and the national performance framework. As members know, the economy is absolutely key and central to our endeavours. Recent economic and employment indicators are encouraging, but the Government very much recognises the ethos of what the committee has articulated, in that although a feature of the recession is lower unemployment rates than anticipated, we should not have a debate that is falsely framed as unemployment versus underemployment, because we must consider both issues as part of a continuum. The Scottish Government very much recognises the personal impact on health poverty and life chances of underemployment, as well as of unemployment. We know that fuller participation in the labour market from better utilisation of skills and through enabling more people to fulfil their potential will not only grow our economy, but will help us to challenge inequality. Sustainable economic growth is essential and is very much the starting place. We must ensure that, when we get economic recovery, young people, women and other equalities groups get their fair share of opportunities. We know that there is an economic cost to young people, women and other equalities groups to their not being able to fulfil their full potential. I believe that the Scottish Government can undertake a number of actions, so we are currently undertaking some actions to tackle the causes of long-term underemployment. Many of our measures through Skills Development Scotland are about co-investment, with employers, in flexible training opportunities, the low-carbon fund and the energy skills fund. Other work-based learning includes Scottish union learning, which is very important in reaching members of the workforce that other services find hard to reach and is especially important in improving literacy among workers. The Scottish Government funds that to the tune of £1.422 million every year. On specific programmes, the Scottish Government is investing in graduate internship programmes—which is, in essence, paid work experience—which have been very successful. The outcomes of those programmes are leading to graduates getting into employment at a rate of between 70 and 75 per cent. Very specific sectoral responses to skills shortages and underemployment such as skills investment plans and skills action plans are also crucial. As Minister for Youth Employment, I am especially interested in the notion of matching older workers with younger workers. Some good examples of that are already happening in the private sector. That chimes with our make young people your business campaign, which is about changing hearts and minds and encouraging employers to see the benefits of workforce planning, investing in young people and growing their own talent, particularly in the light of our having an ageing workforce. We will discuss that issue and the range of issues in and around underemployment with the Scottish employability forum. In my remaining time, I will touch on some very important infrastructure issues. At its very heart, post-16 education reform is about aligning the world of education with the world of work. I hope that the committee’s members welcome the additional investment in taught postgraduate places and undergraduate places that are targeted at key economic sectors. In Scotland we know that we have yet to reap the full economic benefits of our first-class research. Much good work is under way in our innovation centres and knowledge-transfer partnerships. In the college sector, there is £61 million that is additional to planned budgets, much of which will be used to increase part-time provision for women returners. That is an opportunity to increase bursaries and childcare grants as well. Margaret McDougall and Alison Johnstone, among others, mentioned childcare. The Government is taking a valuable step forward with the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill and the commitment to providing 600 hours of childcare and early learning. However, we have to be honest; we know that good-quality childcare cannot be done on the cheap. However, although the costs of childcare are high in Scotland, they are not the highest. The cost of nursery and childminding provision is higher in many parts of England and elsewhere. We have to recognise that the childcare workforce is primarily female; the committee rightly made the connections between the social care sector and underemployment. I know of one feminist economist who argues that only when we start to get more men into childcare will we see childcare salaries increase. The solution is not about reducing the costs of childcare but about how we better compensate either providers or parents. I am very glad that the Council of Economic Advisers is looking at the economic benefits of a universal childcare system and is learning from the best in Europe. It is looking at models of delivery and funding and considering how we cold move to a sustainable and affordable universal system. Of course, to complete that journey we will indeed need the powers of independence, because the link between the labour market, tax and welfare is rather elementary. In the minute that I have left, I want to make specific mention of zero-hours contracts, which many members from across the chamber have mentioned today. As John Swinney said, the Government wants to seek more information about the prevalence of zero-hours contracts and is considering what steps can be taken as part of the forthcoming procurement reform bill. We want to consider specifically how procurement procedures can take account of workforce matters, but we have to recognise that any action, even in the context of the procurement reform bill, must be consistent with employment law and with European procurement legislation. I welcome in part Kezia Dugdale and Duncan McNeil’s contributions, in which they spoke about how we all have a responsibility to do absolutely everything that we can within our existing powers. I am very accepting of that. I hope that, in that spirit, members including Mr McNeil can also accept and open their eyes to the potential benefits of this Parliament’s having a full range of economic and employment law powers. My final point is that the Scottish Government has worked in close partnership with the STUC for many years now, because we are very committed and publicly signed up to promoting equality in the workplace whenever and wherever we can. I congratulate the committee on its thorough and interesting work.

The Office for National Statistics does not publish information on the number of 16 to 24-year-olds on zero-hours contracts in Scotland. However, last week’s labour market figures show yet again that Scotland has lower unemployment and higher employment rates among our young people in comparison with the United Kingdom. We remain resolute in our efforts to reduce youth unemployment even further, and the action that we are taking to support young people in employment is making a difference. Our investments in 25,000 modern apprenticeships a year and more than 3,000 community jobs Scotland placements to date, and a £25 million investment to support employer recruitment incentives throughout Scotland this year, are all contributing to quality job opportunities for young people.

Let me reassure Mr Gray that, in all our endeavours to boost youth employment, we are seeking to create substantial and sustainable employment opportunities for young people. To give one example, 79 per cent of those who complete modern apprenticeships secure full-time employment. I take the point that has been made about zero-hours contracts. Although some people will choose to undertake zero-hours contracts because they want and need that flexibility for their life circumstances, I also accept that zero-hours contracts are part of a wider problem of underemployment in Scotland. We know that young people are hit the hardest by unemployment and underemployment. I take exception to what Mr Gray says about employment powers. I think that it is highly pertinent to the debate what we could do if we had powers over employment law, which would also mean that our debate on the issue would be a little less theoretical.

No, what I am saying—[Interruption.] Presiding Officer, I am trying to explain exactly what I said, despite being rather rudely heckled. What I am saying is that it would be more pertinent if this Parliament had employment law within its remit, and I have argued for that pretty much all my political life. I think that Mr Gray is being rather disingenuous. We will lay out in full what we would like to do with employment law, but I think that it is important that employment law should come within the province of this Parliament. We will not get even the choice or opportunity to shape employment law in the way that we would wish without that power. In that sense, Mr Gray’s questions are rather theoretical. Let us not put the horse before the cart but have employment law devolved to this Parliament instead of leaving it abandoned to Westminster. I have no doubts that there are problems with zero-hours contracts and that those are part of a wider problem to do with underemployment. This Parliament and Government are also focused on doing what we can to resolve that issue using the powers that we have.

I think that our distinctive policies and approach in Scotland are having some positive outcomes. Our approach includes an unremitting focus on tackling youth unemployment, which I think is shared across Parliament and, arguably, across Scotland, given that Scottish employers are more likely to employ young people under 25 than companies elsewhere in the UK are. Policies such as our modern apprenticeship programme are leading to sustainable employment—and to full-time employment at that. Our policies on paid internships have resulted in very good outcomes for graduates, with 70 per cent of the 800 graduates who have participated in Government-funded schemes going into employment. It is important that we get more of our graduates into graduate-level employment, because that will help to address underemployment. That is something that we are doing now with the limited powers that we have.

Scotland’s economy needs the energy, fresh ideas and skills of the young to remain competitive. Young people are absolutely essential to our economy, today and tomorrow. The monthly and quarterly publication cycle of the various labour market surveys gives politicians, economists and media commentators much to consider. Although statistics are always subject to interpretation and qualification, regardless of how we choose to interpret recent figures, a number of things are true: youth unemployment in Scotland has dropped in each of the past five months, and the latest annual population survey figures show a decrease in 2012 compared with 2011; Scotland’s youth unemployment rate is lower than the United Kingdom average and the rate in each of the other home nations; and only five countries in the European Union—Germany, Austria, the Netherlands, Malta and Denmark—have a lower youth unemployment rate than Scotland does. The relentless efforts across Scotland by councils, employers, voluntary organisations and others are testimony to our call for an all-Scotland approach to tackling youth unemployment. Those efforts are making a difference and need to continue. Although the recent downward trend in the youth unemployment rate and level is welcome, there are still 65,000 young people in Scotland who want to work but have not been able to secure employment. For young people who are in work, underemployment is a growing concern. Last week’s research paper by Professor David Bell and Professor David Blanchflower reminds us that underemployment is particularly concentrated among the young and that, last year, 30 per cent of 16 to 24-year-olds who had jobs wanted longer hours. That adds to the challenges that young people face in today’s labour market. I welcome the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s report on underemployment, which was published last month, to which the Government will respond soon. Although there has been a welcome decrease in the headline youth unemployment figures, the increase in long-term joblessness among young people is worrying. Schemes to support young people, such as the wage incentives of the youth contract and the work programme, are the responsibility of the UK Government. It is a source of deep frustration to me that I cannot be confident that the young people concerned are receiving the support that they need and that we do not have the ability to adapt those resources to better support young people who are in danger of being trapped in a cycle of long-term unemployment. The latest youth employment report from the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development is called, “Employers are from Mars, young people are from Venus”. Based on research with employers, it highlights a mismatch between employers’ expectations of young people during the recruitment process and young people’s understanding of what is expected of them. On the one hand, many young people are struggling to find their first job. On the other, some employers are finding it hard to get the skills that they need. We need to address that mismatch to reduce youth unemployment and ensure that businesses are equipped with the right talent for their immediate and future needs. Making young people our business means changing the way in which we do business. For employers, that includes acknowledging what young employees bring to the workplace and adapting their recruitment methods so that they do not act against young people. For young people, it means gaining the skills that are valuable to employers and demonstrating how they can put them into practice. Government and others who support young people and employers need to help young people and employers to understand one another. We are making good progress on each of those fronts. Last month, Gordon MacDonald MSP hosted a parliamentary reception for third sector employers and young people who are supported by our successful community jobs programme. In the past three years, more than 3,000 young people have had high-quality work-based training opportunities through the community jobs Scotland scheme. The young people and employers at that reception were definitely on the same planet and understood how to support one another’s aims. Last week, at Cumbernauld College, I presented a number of young people with the new certificate of work readiness. What is different about that qualification is that half of the time required to complete it—around 190 hours—needs to be spent in the workplace and assessed by the employer. It is endorsed by business organisations such as the Scottish Chamber of Commerce and the Federation of Small Businesses, as well as by employers such as Diageo, Scottish Power and Burn Stewart Distillers. Achieving the certificate will help young people to prove that they are ready for the world of work. The reforms that are under way in the college sector will ensure that the skills that people develop at college help to grow the economy. Regional colleges and outcome agreements will make it easier for employers to influence learning provision. The commission for developing Scotland’s young workforce, led by Sir Ian Wood, will advise on what further improvements might be needed to our education and training system to make it even more responsive to the needs of the economy. I want more employers to accept the business case for investing in young people and to look at how they can create new youth jobs, offer apprenticeships or offer high-quality work experience for young people. That is a big ask, but I know that there is a large appetite among employers to respond. In return, through modernising our careers service, preparing young people better to make the move from education into work, and making our education and skills system more responsive to industry needs, we will help to ensure that their workforce needs are better met. In responding to the needs of key growth sectors, we are providing a wider and better mix of skills. One example of that is the energy skills action plan, which has led to significant collaboration with industry and Scotland’s colleges and universities, as well as other key delivery partners. Since 2010 the low-carbon skills fund has provided more than 2,000 training places for small businesses across Scotland. Last year, we supported a further 1,000 flexible training places in the energy and low-carbon sector by continuing that fund and introducing the new energy skills challenge fund. In addition, 500 modern apprenticeship places a year have been ring fenced for the sector. My world of work includes a specific energy section that has attracted 5,000 internet hits in 18 months, helping to attract young people to the sector. Initiatives such as careerwise will improve collaboration between schools and businesses and encourage more girls into science and engineering careers. As well as making our education and skills system more responsive to industry, we are supporting businesses to develop their own solutions to meet workforce needs. For example, the Nigg Skills Academy will provide general training for 3,000 by 2015. Building on all that, the Scottish energy skills academy will support our existing business base and attract further energy investment in Scotland. Our approach to tackling youth unemployment is more in tune with the European countries that are introducing youth guarantees than with the UK Government. We agree with intervening early to prevent young people from becoming unemployed in the first place.

I hope that Mr McArthur is fully aware of the European youth guarantee, which the European Commission proposed, and that there is a political agreement between member states—although only the UK Government and the Czech Republic have exercised their right to decline to participate in that guarantee. The European youth guarantee is about intervening early and not waiting until young people are long-term unemployed or claiming jobseekers allowance for six, 12 or 18 months. It is about giving a guarantee of work, apprenticeship, education or training to every 16 to 24-year-old, or in European cases, 15 to 25-year-old, within four months of their either leaving education or becoming unemployed. That is a very progressive, significant commitment that we should implement in this country. I discussed the European youth guarantee with UK Government ministers and I regret that they are not convinced by it. They seem to object to Europe coming up with such proposals in the first place. We all know of the challenge of rising youth unemployment across Europe, with the exception of the countries that I mentioned earlier. I hope that Mr McArthur will look at the European youth guarantee. Liberals are often very pro-European, so I hope that he can persuade his coalition partners to think again on it. Employment services are essential to implementing such a European youth guarantee. Although this Government does not have the necessary powers over employment services, we are doing everything that we can to make progress. For example, in education we have prioritised college places and supported more higher education places for young people. We are offering high-quality paid traineeships and work experience opportunities through, for example, community jobs Scotland and the certificate of work readiness. We continue to achieve our target of 25,000 new modern apprenticeships each year, and 77 per cent of last year’s modern apprenticeships were taken up by 16 to 24-year-olds. Very soon, we will announce a package of financial support to help businesses create 10,000 jobs for young people. I will continue to look at how other countries in Europe and elsewhere are tackling youth unemployment and learn from that good practice, which I will be glad to share with Parliament. As well as looking at the impact of our actions, it is very important that we look at what others are doing and the impact of their actions. Next week, I will join other European youth ministers at the Education, Youth and Culture Council. While I am in Brussels, I will meet the rapporteur who is leading on the European Parliament’s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs’ youth unemployment report. Last month, The Economist painted a bleak picture for young people across the planet. With 75 million young people unemployed and youth unemployment rates in Spain and Greece racing towards 60 per cent, it is not surprising that the article was called “Generation Jobless”. However, despite the negative headline, the article finished on a more hopeful note and acknowledged that Governments are trying to address the mismatch between education and the labour market and that companies are beginning to take more responsibility for investing in the young. Our focus should not just be on avoiding a lost generation. Our efforts need to be on helping young Scots to be part of an aspiration generation, an ambition generation and an innovation generation, in which all our young people are encouraged and nurtured to play a full and productive role in Scotland’s economy, both today and tomorrow. With all that in mind, I move, That the Parliament welcomes the drop in youth unemployment by 29,000 over the last year, as outlined in the April 2013 Labour Force Survey; commends the efforts made by many employers in Scotland to offer job, training and work experience opportunities to young people, helping them to play a vital role in the current and future workforce; further welcomes the achievement of 25,000 modern apprenticeship starts for the second year in a row; agrees that the Certificate of Work Readiness, backed by business and developed by Skills Development Scotland and the Scottish Qualifications Authority, helps young people demonstrate to employers that they have valuable skills for the workplace, and further agrees that efforts should continue to support employers to invest in youth jobs, including through the recruitment incentives funded by £25 million in Scottish Government and EU funds and delivered by local authorities.

I appreciate the complexity of labour market statistics, which must be understood and studied carefully. Does Ken Macintosh acknowledge that the quarterly and monthly statistics for the past five monthly releases have shown a downward trend in youth unemployment in Scotland?

The strength of our policies lies in our offer to 16 to 19-year-olds. I always read the blog posts by Stephen Boyd and the STUC, and they are usually very well informed. On this occasion, I take issue with them because the cohort of 16 to 17-year-olds in the labour force survey is so small, whereas in the annual population survey, in which the cohort is larger, unemployment among 16 to 17-year-olds has actually fallen.

I appreciate that some people with significant needs are very far away from the labour market, but evidence from the UK Commission for Employment and Skills shows that employers who recruit young people are satisfied, by and large, with their work readiness. What young people lack is experience, which is just down to their youth.

Does Mr Gray accept that although the annual population survey has a larger survey base, the labour force survey figures are reliable, can be used and are the most recent figures? Does he accept that the annual population survey figures do not accommodate the more recent, up-to-date, positive figures?

I will be brief. Does Mr Gray accept that it is welcome news that 77 per cent of modern apprenticeship starts last year went to 16 to 24-year-olds? Does he also accept that, under our programme, more modern apprenticeships are going to new starts than they did under Labour? What is his position on the 10,000 places? Will Labour commit to the 25,000 target? What is being proposed?

Will the member take an intervention?

I will be very brief. Does Labour want to stop the modern apprenticeship programme for over-25s and for those who are already in work?

I am grateful to all members who have participated in the debate. It might not always feel like it for members, but contributions from across the political spectrum always influence Government thinking and subsequent action. In the past 12 to 18 months, many members from across the Parliament have made significant and helpful contributions on issues such as long-term unemployment, additional support needs, women, ex-industrial communities and rural skills, and we are incorporating those into our strategy and day-to-day work. I also thank members from across the political divide who undertake a lot of activity in their constituencies to support young people and employers and who do everything that they can locally to boost youth employment. Members often invite me to meet local organisations and attend youth job fairs or to meet to discuss a variety of matters. I am always more than happy to do my best, diary permitting, to accommodate members from across the political divide. I am glad that SNP and Labour MSPs take full advantage of that, although I must say that I have never yet received a request from a Tory or Liberal member to support any sectoral events or local activity—I am just saying.

I will check with my private office. Of course, I am always open to invitations to go to Orkney. Last year, I visited Skills Development Scotland in Orkney. Patricia Ferguson made a good case about the sterling work of the Royston at work project, which I have visited with local members. To me, the issues there are an example of why we should never abandon welfare powers to Westminster but, laying that political difference aside, I am of course more than happy to meet her, Royston at work and any others to discuss the issues. I will not make any promises, but I can give an undertaking to do my best to look for a solution. In that vein, I am also happy to accept Mr McDonald’s kind invitation to the young Scotland’s got talent event in Aberdeen. As Ken Macintosh said, we have explored the labour market statistics. We must all recognise that there is a variety of statistics and that they are complex. We must all strive to get into the guts of the figures so that we understand as best we can what is working and not working and the trends ahead. I welcome the fact that members seem to agree that the youth unemployment rate is falling and is going in the right direction. I wish to emphasise the positive. We have nearly 30,000 fewer young unemployed Scots now than we had at this time last year, and youth unemployment is at its lowest level in three years. In making that point, I am in no way complacent. I have many faults—too many to list here—but complacency is most certainly not one of them. We must emphasise the positive movement in the figures so that we increase the resolve to do more. Now is most certainly not the time to take our foot off the gas. That is a real opportunity for us all to grasp. We can all use the positive movement—the drop in youth unemployment—to persuade more employers that they can and do make a difference and that our young people have an invaluable contribution to make to the economy. It is important to acknowledge that Scotland is outperforming the rest of the UK, with higher employment, lower unemployment and better activity levels. That, again, is not to be complacent in any way, but it is important to acknowledge that Scottish employers are more likely to recruit young people. That is evidenced by the UK Commission for Employability and Skills. It is also evidence that the distinctive Scottish Government policies—whether the modern apprenticeship programme, opportunities for all, reforms to the colleges or the modernisation of the careers programme—are having the right impact. Let me also be clear that having better youth employment statistics than the UK is not the limit of my ambition. I look to other European countries large and small that, despite the global economic recession, have youth unemployment rates of less than 10 per cent. That is what our ambition needs to be. I very much regret the fact that, as yet, the UK Government does not support the European youth guarantee. I say to Mr Macintosh that we will do everything that we can within the powers that we have. I point to community jobs Scotland and the employer recruitment incentive, which is the most ambitious employer recruitment incentive wage subsidy programme anywhere in the UK and will create up to 10,000 jobs. One of the tasks that I hope to complete imminently is the signing off of grant letters to local authorities so that they can support small and medium-sized businesses in their areas in getting young people into work. Mr Macintosh should be reassured that the £25 million of Scottish Government and European money will be well spent in partnership with local authorities and small to medium-sized businesses with a view to making a difference for our young people. The challenge of youth unemployment is compounded by an economic downturn and structural changes to the labour market. To address the economic downturn, we need to reinvigorate the economy. We need economic growth. In that regard, I would prefer simply to have a Parliament with a full range of powers than a Parliament with limited powers. On the structural changes in the labour market, we know that there are fewer entry-level jobs for young people. We also know that word of mouth is still the number 1 form of recruitment, which disadvantages young people. We know that young people are held back not by their lack of qualifications or a lack of talent but by their lack of experience. Their only crime is being young. Therefore, we need to ask companies large and small to have youth policies—policies in which they go the extra mile to recruit young people. The small and medium-sized companies are our untapped potential. That is why the employer recruitment incentive, which will be delivered very soon, is important. However, as well as making our ask of employers, we need to change how we deliver education, skills and training. That is what the reform of colleges and the modernisation of careers services are about. We have achieved good outcomes. We have more young people in full-time college courses, higher retention rates and higher completion rates. That will improve job prospects, but the outcome of education is not, in itself, a qualification; the outcome for any education is jobs and whether our young people are in part-time jobs, full-time jobs or well-paid work. In that regard, it is not the length of courses that matters but the content of courses and the connectivity between the world of work and the world of education. I welcome the change in tone from Labour members. I have often been more concerned that their focus is on knocking down solutions rather than building them up. I will end with the words of Harry Burns. He often talks about how we all have to take the responsibility to nurture very young children and treasure babies. Similarly, we all have a responsibility to ensure that our young people are supported, guided and nurtured, and that they are enabled to spread their wings and to become independent in the workplace. Instead of giving them just one helping hand, I and the Government want to help them with both hands. That is what having the powers of independence is all about—it is about being able to use absolutely everything that we have at our disposal, from tax to welfare. I again call on those who wish to abandon powers to Westminster to think again. That is not in our young people’s interests.

Like other MSPs, I commend Neil Findlay for securing this well-attended and well-supported debate. For the record, I restate the Scottish Government’s position, which is that blacklisting is wholly unacceptable. The Scottish Government endorses the Health and Safety Executive’s comments; condemns any form of blacklisting of employees by employers for raising concerns about safety standards at work; and is totally opposed to blacklisting or the compilation of a blacklist on such a basis. First of all, I want to address the most prominent issue that has been raised by Neil Findlay and other members. Although we as a Government acknowledge the call for a Scottish Government inquiry, we believe that it is appropriate for the Scottish Affairs Committee to conduct and conclude its inquiry into this issue. As we know, matters of employment law are reserved to the UK Government and the Scottish Government is not at this time convinced of the merits of holding another inquiry while the Scottish Affairs Committee’s investigation is on-going and its recommendations are pending.

Absolutely. As members of the Scottish Parliament, we are all very aware of the high standard that has been set for the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament as regards compliance with the European convention on human rights, but the fact remains that employment and industrial relations continue to be reserved to the UK Government. In my view, that is an anomaly of the constitutional settlement, but it is the position. John Wilson rose—

I will let Neil Findlay in once I have made a bit of progress. We are pleased by the rigour that the Scottish Affairs Committee is applying to its investigation. As a Government, we have read the committee’s interim report with great interest. In that report, the committee concludes that the service that the Consulting Association offered was a blacklisting service into which subscribers put money, and that information that they took out of a database was used to make decisions about whether to employ certain individuals. We concur with the committee in concluding that that practice was unethical and is to be condemned.

I will come on to the point about action that can be taken. There have been significant regulatory changes since 2009. On Mr Findlay’s first point, I reassure him that, as a Government, we are looking forward to the Scottish Affairs Committee’s final report, which we will look at extremely carefully. It would be inappropriate for me to pre-empt any conclusions or recommendations that the committee is considering as part of the weighty and serious investigation that it is undertaking. I note from the committee’s interim report that it intends to continue its investigation in four main areas. It will consider whether companies that have been involved in blacklisting should be prevented from tendering for public sector contracts in the future or whether they should be allowed to tender only if they pay compensation to people who have been blacklisted. It is important that the committee continues to seek evidence on whether blacklisting is still taking place, whether within the construction industry or more widely, especially in Scotland. Other issues that it is exploring include whether compensation should be paid, to whom and by whom it should be paid, and whether the existing legislation on blacklisting is sufficient, if it is properly enforced, or whether changes in the law are necessary to eradicate the practice. I come to Mr Findlay’s second point. As we know, the legislative framework at the time meant that blacklisting was not illegal but, as Elaine Smith told us, the Employment Relations Act 1999 (Blacklists) Regulations 2010, which were introduced by the UK Government in 2010, prohibit blacklisting. Therefore, I believe that we are starting from a better position. There are also the Public Contracts (Scotland) Regulations 2012, which provide that contracts should not be awarded to companies that have been involved in grave misdemeanours. A number of companies that have been awarded contracts by the Scottish Government and its agencies since 2007 have been named by the Information Commissioner’s Office as companies that subscribed to the Consulting Association. However, we have no evidence to suggest that any of those companies engaged in blacklisting in connection with the performance of any contracts that were awarded by the Scottish Government or its agencies. I am sure that members will appreciate the need for evidence and rigour.

I understand Mr Smith’s point and there is no doubt in my mind that there are many people who have been adversely affected by blacklisting. However I hope that he understands the point that I am making and accepts it in the spirit in which it is intended. It is appropriate for the Scottish Affairs Committee to continue its investigation and to seek further evidence. The Scottish Government will consider the final report closely when it is published. We have invited the unions—the STUC, Unite, Unison and the GMB—to work with us on the development and strengthening of guidance for public bodies on addressing the issue of blacklisting in terms of their procurement processes and with regard to public contracts. We intend to circulate an initial draft of the guidance to the unions shortly and to convene a meeting to get their valuable input. We want to explore with the trade union movement the potential for asking additional questions of suppliers at the selection stage of a procurement exercise and for holding suppliers to account through revised terms and conditions of contract, including issues such as termination clauses for those who breach relevant legislation. As members have suggested, we are, in addition, considering what measures we can include in the forthcoming procurement reform bill to deal with inappropriate conduct, including blacklisting, by companies that are bidding for public contracts in Scotland. In a recent debate, the Deputy First Minister stated clearly: “I want to ensure that procurement spend is a force for good and that we are supporting the economy and its constituent parts, and promoting good practice, sustainability and ethical behaviour.”—[Official Report, 17 April 2013; c 18685.] Given the tone and tenor of this debate, I am confident that we can move forward as a Parliament with due diligence and vigilance to ensure that blacklisting is consigned to the history books. 13:38 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

The latest employment figures, which were published earlier this month, indicate that we are seeing positive results from our efforts to date. Youth unemployment in Scotland has fallen by 29,000 in the past year, to 65,000. That is a 6.8 per cent fall, to 16.1 per cent, and the lowest rate since December to February 2010. For the second year running, we have surpassed our target to provide 25,000 modern apprenticeships. That shows that our efforts to support young people into work are making a difference. Of course, more needs to be done. I can assure Mr Eadie and Parliament that we will continue to use every lever of power available to us to tackle youth unemployment.

I put on record my thanks to employers large and small throughout Scotland, and employers throughout the public, private and third sectors, who are making every effort to provide young people with an opportunity to enter the world of work. We have some distinctive policies in Scotland, such as free tuition and opportunities for all. The modern apprenticeship programme is very different in Scotland. We have community jobs Scotland and the employability fund and, of course, this year we have the most ambitious employer recruitment incentive as we move forward with the make young people your business campaign. We can evidence that, as a result of Government policy, combined with the endeavours of employers throughout Scotland, we are making progress. The latest statistics show a very welcome, significant step in the right direction. However, now is the time to increase our resolve and not to be blown off course. We could do more if Jobcentre Plus and the Department for Work and Pensions were devolved. I very much regret that the United Kingdom Government will not implement the European youth guarantee.

Mr Macintosh’s question is in the right vein and I share his concern. The latest figures show that the number of young people claiming benefits for more than 12 months is increasing. For me, that begs serious questions about the impact of the work programme. Mr Macintosh will be well aware that we have no influence or control over the work programme, which I very much regret. All our policies in this Parliament strive to prevent youth unemployment from becoming long-term unemployment. That is why we are very much looking at prevention. Unlike the UK Government, we believe that we have to intervene earlier as opposed to later. With youth employment Scotland, the most ambitious employer recruitment incentive, which will be available this year, we will endeavour as much as we can to ensure that young unemployed Scots do not become long-term unemployed. I hope that we will have Mr Macintosh’s support in doing that.

I start by expressing my condolences to members of the Conservative Party, because at the end of the day Margaret Thatcher was a mother and grandmother and a colleague and friend to many on the Conservative side of the chamber. The passing of anyone is always a deeply difficult time. It is of course heartening to hear from Jackson Carlaw that Mrs Thatcher was less interested in popularity and more interested in the issues. I will do my best to focus my contribution on the issues. However, I am not going to pretend to be unbiased. Like James Kelly, I have the privilege of representing the constituency in which I grew up, so my contribution to the debate will be very much shaped by the fact that I grew up in West Lothian in the 1980s. All that I can say to Malcolm Chisholm is that I will mention the constitution at some point, because it was my experience in the 1980s that drove me to join the SNP—it was probably the single most important reason. I have long been of the view that, in response to the social and economic strife of the 1980s, there arose an overwhelming need and desire to establish a Parliament—this Parliament—for Scotland and her people: a Parliament that could express a different concept of society; a Parliament and society that recognise that everyone makes a contribution and that therefore everyone should receive something in return. To put it another way, it is a something for something society, a concept that was so passionately articulated by Christine Grahame earlier. This Parliament has, largely, used its powers progressively. This Scottish Government has sought to build on the good work of others and on previous progress, and to articulate, develop and entrench the social contract and, in particular, the social wage. Others have mentioned that the distinctive approach of this Parliament and—I believe—the distinctive aspirations of the people of Scotland are seen in policies such as free personal care for the elderly, no tuition fees for students and increasing hours for the early years, and the fact that 1.2 million older and disabled people receive concessionary travel and that everyone benefits from free prescriptions. I believe that our society is aspiring to a building-up rather than a stripping-down of the progressive platform of social policy. However, that progressive platform is, of course, increasingly under threat. For example, our colleagues in the Labour Party are doing a bit of backsliding; the UK Government is undertaking practices that are in some ways reminiscent of the 1980s; and there is a mismatch, I believe, in outlook, values and priorities between Scotland and the UK Government. There exists once again, as in the 1980s, a democratic deficit, and the most obvious topical example is the bedroom tax. Nine out of 10 Scottish MPs voted against it, and Dennis Canavan commented on television last night that he considers it to be as bad as, if not worse than, the poll tax. I have to ask whether this Parliament would have introduced the bedroom tax, and I feel that I can say with confidence that the answer is absolutely not. Alison McInnes made a thoughtful speech. She spoke of the failure in the Thatcher years to lay down for the future and of the lost opportunities.

In a moment. She is right, because income inequality has increased more quickly in the UK than in any other OECD country. Scotland is a resource-rich country, but we are a much poorer society than we could and should be.

Of course, welfare powers are reserved to the United Kingdom. I would have hoped that our colleagues in the Labour Party would join with the Scottish Government and others, and with the Scottish population, all of whom want welfare powers to be devolved to Scotland. I hope that the other side will recognise that we will act when we can mitigate the effects—for example, this Government has invested £40 million in relation to the cuts to council tax benefit. However, is the extent of our aspiration only to mitigate the bad decisions of a bad Government? Our aspirations and our ambition have to be far greater than that.

No, thank you. I do not want to be churlish or unkind, but I noticed that Mr Johnstone did not take any interventions. We heard a lot of statistics from Mr Johnstone and indeed Mr Lamont. We will study those later at our leisure, but the statistics that they omitted and never once quoted are the statistics on unemployment and poverty.

Not just now, because I am trying to develop a point. The statistic that no one on the Conservative benches quoted is that, from 1979 to 1990, poverty in the UK rose from 13 to 22 per cent. That increase represents 5 million more people in poverty. The relative poverty rate in Scotland today is 15 per cent, which is of course far too high. Poverty is most certainly not inevitable. Derek Mackay was right to say in his opening speech that children are born unequal in Scotland, but we cannot let poverty be inevitable—and neither is unemployment inevitable. My memories and view of the 1980s are scarred by unemployment because my father—

No. I am concluding. My father—this is a personal point—was unemployed between 1982 and 1984, and that had a huge impact on my family. I am fortunate in the sense that I grew up in a loving, caring and stable family, but for me tackling unemployment is not just political—it is absolutely personal. We talk about the claimant count but, as we all now know, it underestimates the true unemployment rate. Nevertheless, the claimant count in Scotland peaked at 13 per cent in January 1987, which represented 334,000 Scots. The claimant count today is 4.9 per cent, which represents 136,000 Scots. That is still far too high. As for youth unemployment, the claimant count, which I repeat underrepresents true unemployment, peaked at nearly 116,000 in 1985. The comparable figure today is 38,200. That is still too high, even though we can point to progress and the move in the right direction in the most recent youth unemployment figures.

My lesson from the 1980s is that we need the economic powers of any other normal, progressive, modern society to ensure that we are not blown off course with the good progress that we are making in tackling youth unemployment and other social issues.

My colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning last jointly met the principals of Motherwell College, Coatbridge College and Cumbernauld College on 22 March 2012. How the colleges would work together within the Lanarkshire region was discussed at that meeting. The cabinet secretary met jointly the chairs of each college’s board of management on 18 April 2012, 11 September 2012, 28 November 2012 and 19 March 2013.

As Mr Lyle knows, Motherwell and Cumbernauld colleges propose to merge and hope to vest by 1 November. Earlier discussions had included Coatbridge College, but it concluded that it would prefer to remain as an independent college for the time being. Although there is no proposal by all four Lanarkshire colleges to merge into a single college and although the Government has no intention of forcing mergers, I believe that the creation of a regional strategic body for Lanarkshire will represent a significant step in improving the breadth and quality of learning opportunities, as it will improve the connectivity to the local economy, which will improve opportunities for learners.

The funding of individual colleges, including for their estate, is a matter for the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council rather than ministers. However, in December, the Scottish Government announced an additional £5 million to support college estates improvement across Scotland. That is separate from and additional to the increase of £61 million that we made to the overall college sector budget compared with our original spending plans.

I thank Mr McMillan for his question. It is the right of every MSP to advocate for their constituency or region. I have every confidence in the Scottish funding council, which as I said in my original answer is the body responsible for supporting capital development in the college sector. We as a Government have already put additional resources on the table. I am sure that the Scottish funding council will look closely at the priority that it can attach to any such proposal. It is of course no secret, however, that the United Kingdom Government’s swingeing reduction in Scotland’s block grant has severely constrained our desire to fund capital projects, including in the college sector. A Scottish Parliament with powers to raise its own revenue would not be constrained in that way.

We are making excellent progress. Outcome agreements have been introduced to make plain what we expect in return for our investment, thereby strengthening accountability. The Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill, which will introduce improvements to college governance, is progressing through Parliament. Two college mergers were completed last year, and four are aiming to vest by 1 August this year, with a further four aiming to do so on 1 November.

Yes, I agree with Clare Adamson’s two points about the importance of consultation and the importance of the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill. The purpose of the bill is to underpin our ambitious college reforms, which will indeed deliver benefits for learners and the economy and which, from 2014-15 onward, will deliver efficiencies of £50 million. As we are seeing in Lanarkshire and many other places, college leaders are seizing the opportunities presented by regionalisation, which is leading to an unprecedented programme of change that is for the benefit of learners.

I know that Ms Smith is not a keen advocate of regionalisation; we on these benches are very much pushing the modernisation of the college sector. Nonetheless, I know that Ms Smith takes a keen interest in this area and follows events closely. Much of the progress will be determined by colleges themselves and the choices that they make on whether to merge. Some colleges have chosen not to merge at this point in time, but they might well review that decision as time proceeds. We as a Government are determined not to take our foot off the gas but to proceed as fast as possible in partnership with the sector.

Access to pre-employment skills training is essential both for those nearest the labour market and for those who face barriers to employment. Under the auspices of the employability fund, Skills Development Scotland has contracted a network of providers to deliver that training, ensuring that it reflects local labour market conditions. Skills Development Scotland will monitor and review the delivery of its contracted training against the objectives of the wider employability fund. That will include regular monitoring of trainee starts and achievements and is consistent with its usual approach to monitoring the performance of national training programmes.

Margaret McCulloch makes a fair point. As the Minister for Youth Employment, I agree that, as part of the Government’s wider strategy, there should be an unrelenting focus on young people who, despite the positive movement in the right direction of the youth unemployment statistics today, are still twice as likely to be unemployed as someone over the age of 24. Nonetheless, we have to consider the needs of older people, by which I mean people from 25 to retirement. The employability fund does that because, as well as replacing the large national training programmes targeted at young people, such as get ready for work, it replaces training for work, which is targeted at people aged 18 and up. The purpose of the employability fund is to bring together funding streams so that there can be more collegiate working at a local level, and to consider the needs of people trying to enter the labour market at the local level. Although it largely focuses on young people, it is most certainly not to the exclusion of others.

I know that the statistics just came out today, but the headline unemployment figures show that unemployment has fallen by 11,000 in Scotland. The figures for young people are indeed encouraging. The youth unemployment rate has fallen by 6.8 per cent. We have the lowest rate of youth unemployment in three years. However, that still means that we have 65,000 young Scots who are seeking to find their way into work, and there is far more to do. I firmly believe that the Government’s policies on colleges and modern apprenticeships, and job creation schemes such as the community jobs Scotland scheme, which has been funded with a £29 million investment, and, from this year, the youth employment Scotland initiative, which is the employer recruitment incentive for small and medium-sized businesses, are important. However, now is not the time to take our foot off the gas, and we must not be blown off course by others elsewhere.

The objectives are twofold: to better meet the needs of learners and employers in a region, and to do so more cost efficiently. Decisions to pursue college mergers, while ultimately requiring ministerial approval, are for the governing bodies of the institutions concerned. We have made clear that we will not force any colleges to merge.

The member mentions issues to do with transport, which are important. Colleges are able to give financial support to students who have difficulty meeting the cost of travel. Of course, we have the best student support package anywhere in the United Kingdom and, for the second year in a row, £95 million is being invested in student support. I already gave figures on regionalisation and mergers in an earlier answer. Those figures came from Audit Scotland and showed that, from 2014-15, there will be annual savings of £50 million across the estate throughout Scotland. That can only be of benefit to learners in Mr Kelly’s area and elsewhere in Scotland. The experience of the Glasgow merger also gives a positive indication of financial savings of £5.8 million. I reiterate the point that the practice of making, and the potential to make, financial savings is of benefit to learners in any area.

My recollection is that, after the budget, which provided for £61 million in addition to planned budgets to be invested in the sector over two years, the cash-terms figure that Mr Adams seeks is a 45 per cent increase. We are, indeed, investing more resources than our predecessors. The good news for colleges is that there is a funding floor of £522 million. That is more than our predecessors provided in each and every year of their Administrations, as they never got to more than £510 million. Despite the austerity that we are experiencing thanks to the UK Government, we are spending more on the college sector. That applies not only to the teaching and revenue budgets but to the capital budgets, in which we are spending 50 per cent more.

If Mr Henry wishes such a detailed answer, we will do our best and endeavour to provide it in writing.

According to the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, the total number of part-time students who have studied at colleges in Fife in the six academic years ending in 2011-12 is 19,280.

I certainly give Mrs Eadie an undertaking that I or one of my officials will contact the Scottish funding council and ask it to contact her. It is worth noting that the majority of learners in the college sector are women. There are roughly 170,000 women in the sector, compared with 150,000 male learners. Most courses continue to be part time, which is of advantage to some women. As I say, I will ask the Scottish funding council to contact Mrs Eadie directly.

Joan McAlpine raises an important and valid point. Our audit highlighted an inconsistency in college application and admission processes, particularly in how well applicants are being informed about those processes at various stages. The audit also showed that informed decisions about choosing the right course, gaining the right qualification or moving on to further learning or work are absolutely central to the success of any learner of any age. That is why, in collaboration with colleges and learners, we are exploring how best to improve the application processes. I am pleased that Colleges Scotland recognises that there is much room for improvement and that it is willing and able to work with the Government on the matter.

SAAS supported nearly 160,000 students in 2012-13 by providing tuition and living costs support of about £570 million. We have the best student support package that is available anywhere in the United Kingdom, and the simplification of the system that was announced in August will make processing applications quicker and easier. The system for this year opened on 15 April and students are encouraged to apply as early as possible.

I do not have time to do Mr Don’s question justice, but I will say for the benefit of the Parliament that the new system will be dramatically simpler for all students. That is partly to do with there being only four levels of award. We are striving for students to have access to more money and to know in advance how much money they will have.

Working for growth, the Scottish Government’s employability strategy, recognises that a strong partnership approach is essential to providing effective support to help people back to work. The Department for Work and Pensions is a key partner at both national and local employability partnership level and engages in a range of joint working activities across Scotland, including a pilot to enable early benefit claims for women leaving prison, following the Angiolini commission on women offenders. We re-established the Scottish employability forum on 31 January 2013 to provide political leadership and oversight on employability and employment within the context of economic recovery. The forum is now chaired jointly by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, the Secretary of State for Scotland and Councillor Harry McGuigan, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities spokesperson for community wellbeing.

I will indeed be brief. I will of course happily make representations to the UK Government. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has done that previously. I am familiar with the Royston at work project. I strongly believe that there is a unique role for the voluntary sector in working with young people who are furthest removed from the labour market. When I visited Royston at work, the particular issue was that some young people were indeed denied a place on the scheme as a result of benefit rules, because some of the training involved the young people being at college for more than 16 hours. If the system of employment and skills was fully integrated in Scotland and steered by the Scottish Parliament, we could easily resolve the difficulties.

Is Mr Findlay aware that the Government supports 26,000 college students by protecting them from higher education tuition fees; that, from 2013-14, part-time undergraduates will not pay fees; and that this Government is supporting around 5,000 postgraduates with fees, which is twice the number under his Government?

The debate has been very feisty, and I hope that the fun is not over yet. Like many members, I am just out of the recess, and I have had the opportunity to do some more leisurely reading. I confess that, unlike Neil Findlay or Hugh Henry, I have not been reading “Grasping the Thistle”; instead, I have had the pleasure of dipping into the “Holyrood Scottish Political Guide”, which has biographies of all current members and some fascinating information. It says things about colleagues that I did not know. For example, I did not know the ages of some colleagues or how many children some of them have—the numbers for the likes of Ken Macintosh and Jamie McGrigor are impressive. It also says that more than 90 current MSPs have benefited from free higher education. The question for not only those MSPs, but others is whether they will vote to pull up the ladder of opportunity for the generations that will come behind us.

As Ms Smith well knows—she would know this if she had looked at the evidence from Universities Scotland—there is no funding gap in Scotland. What bemuses me about the Conservatives’ position is that they seem to believe that the choice is between equality and excellence. The Government entirely refutes that. Even if anyone believed that—it appears that the Conservatives do—what on earth ever happened to making the world a better place for our children? Murdo Fraser fails to understand the role of Scotland’s colleges in delivering higher education in Scotland. Comparisons must take account of the contribution that is made by our colleges in widening access and participation. That is not currently done by FE colleges in England. I cannot imagine what it must be like for a student in England starting their university course this year to be faced with the prospect of £59,000 of debt. I do not imagine that that will do much for participation rates south of the border.

That colleges can deliver higher education with, in some regards, a more efficient and effective use of resources than can their colleagues in higher education should be welcomed. The fact that an increasing number of young people are benefiting from higher education in Scotland is also to be welcomed. The Labour Party’s amendment is, of course, on a par with some of the contributions that we have heard: somewhat rambling and contradictory. The Labour Party appears to be rolling back from its manifesto commitment, which all its MSPs signed up to not only collectively, but individually. It is rolling back from a previous commitment never to introduce back-door or front-door tuition fees, and that is highly lamentable. We have heard no solution from the Labour Party today. It wants a debate, but I thought that we had the debate during the 2011 general election in Scotland. The BBC established that free education was the third most important policy to the people of Scotland. Mr Findlay said that he wanted to have a debate that was beyond politics. The last time that happened, we had the Browne commission, which saw the introduction of fees across the UK. I want to try, at least, to make a consensual point. This week, Anas Sarwar said that we cannot talk about social justice without also talking about redistribution. That is not an incorrect statement, but it is, of course, an incomplete statement, because it is not possible to redistribute wealth without having taxation powers, control of welfare and the major powers over the economy. Neil Bibby said that the advantage of devolution is that it allows us to make different decisions. That is the case only up to a point; we are allowed to make only some different decisions, and we are not masters of our destiny. I have a real difficulty with the apparent acceptance by Anas Sarwar and others of the fact that too few young people from disadvantaged backgrounds are accessing university, and that that is okay. In effect, his comments wrote young people off. My issue with that is to do with whom Mr Sarwar was referring to. Twenty-five years ago, he would have been talking about me.

No. Widening access is at the heart of this Government’s agenda. We do not accept that it is right and proper that only 11 per cent of university students come from the poorest 20 per cent of areas. We will see a level playing field, which will involve redistribution of opportunity. The University of Glasgow published significant research that shows that students with lower grades from poorer backgrounds do as well as more affluent students with better grades, so we need to ensure that all of Scotland’s young people get access to the £1 billion investment that we make every year in our universities. Like Marco Biagi, I agree that there should be no wriggle room for any of our institutions. That is why we are putting widening access on a statutory footing.

No, thanks, because I am summing up. The fundamental difference between the Scottish Government and our Labour and Tory colleagues is their underlying acceptance that poor kids go to college and more affluent kids go to university. What a poverty of aspiration exists in the better together ranks. What happened to conviction politics? What happened to political will? What happened to the politics of priority? We will make this world and this country a better place, because we will continue to challenge and to change. The choices of our young people should be based on their talents, their aspirations and their interests, not on their financial means. Cost should not influence choice. I want to see parity of esteem between vocational education and academic education. Post-16 reform is about access to education and between the college, vocational and academic sectors. The commission for developing Scotland’s young workforce is about building on our platforms of reform—whether curriculum for excellence, careers guidance or post-16 reform—to ensure that this country will one day benefit from world-class vocational education and training. The case has been made for universal services. Education is a public good and we should pay for it through general taxation. Education is the passport from poverty. I started by saying that at least 90 MSPs in the chamber have benefited from free higher education, but the task before all 128 of us is to take part in a very simple vote. Are you for or against tuition fees? Are you for or against up-front or back-door tuition fees? Are you for or against fairness in our education system? Are you for or against an education system that is based on the ability to learn and not the ability to pay?

I, too, congratulate Margaret McCulloch on securing this debate. I always think that the Parliament is at its best when its members bring to bear their expertise and knowledge from their previous lives, and it is important to note that nearly 40 members signed the motion. Malcolm Chisholm told us about the shopping that is available in Edinburgh; John Mason highlighted the facilities in Glasgow; and Elaine Murray spoke about the outlet village at Gretna. Over the years, I have frequented all of those as well as the shops and facilities in Livingston in my constituency. Like Richard Lyle, I believe that shopping is important. Turning to a more serious issue than my own guilty pleasures, I am heartened by the cross-Parliament and cross-party recognition of the importance of the retail sector not only to our economy but in its investment in skills, jobs and, crucially, our communities. In my constituency, Morrisons runs a great programme that takes primary school children into the store and exposes them to a great learning environment where they can find out not only about food but about the range of jobs that support supermarkets. It is also a great example of the opportunities that are afforded by curriculum for excellence. There is no doubt that retail makes a significant contribution to our economy and its health is a very visible barometer of the economic climate. Like other sectors, it has had its own challenges, difficulties and, indeed, successes. Unlike other areas, retail continued to grow in the early part of the recession in 2008-09. However, from 2010 onwards, growth was far more modest and, over the past year, it has very much flatlined and now lags behind other areas. That said, the fact that retail sales in December were 1.5 per cent higher than those the previous year will, I hope, give some grounds for optimism. Retail employs 251,000 people—or 10.2 per cent of the employed population—if we include the owners of shops or retail outlets who actually work in their business. However, I have always been interested not only in the direct employment opportunities that are created by retail; in its briefing, Asda highlights the additional 10,000 jobs that it supports via its supply chain. We must feel heartened when we hear of the Asda store in Forfar that employs the previously long-term unemployed; in fact, 80 per cent of the staff who were recruited for that store had been unemployed. Malcolm Chisholm and others spoke of the opportunities that the retail sector affords young people and I certainly know that it is very often a young person’s first experience of work. I experienced it myself in my mid to late teens; indeed, I attribute my varicose veins to standing in a shop for many hours. However, we must recognise the range of jobs in the retail sector and the opportunities that are available from entry level right up to graduate level. It is heartening to find that the sector is recruiting on the basis of aptitude and attitude; it is very much a meritocracy, where people such as Andy Clark can rise from the shop floor to become the chief executive officer of a major supermarket. It is also worth mentioning that Aldi is recruiting 17 and 18-year-olds to train them up as store managers and that, in my capacity as Minister for Youth Employment, I have met representatives of these stores and visited Asda, Tesco, John Lewis and so on. Indeed, one young person whom I met in a major supermarket told me that, if I was serious about youth employment and boosting the economy, I would use the £30 million of youth opportunities funding to build three supermarkets. However, such a suggestion would, to say the least, get me into hot water. There is no doubt that retail has an important contribution to make as part of the make young people your business campaign. There is a positive business case for employing young people, and the retail sector demonstrates that well. It is important to recognise that 96 per cent of retail businesses are small. For that reason, the employer recruitment incentive for small employers to employ young people, which will go live in April, is important. As a result of an earlier members’ business debate, I gave a commitment to ensure that all members get good information on the make young people your business campaign and the employer recruitment incentive, in addition to information on other offers that are available locally and nationally, so that MSPs can go out and engage with businesses in their localities. On the skills agenda, it is important to recognise the difficulties in the current climate. Members have mentioned HMV, Jessops, Blockbuster, Comet and so on. There is no doubt that, as shoppers, our habits are changing, and the fact that online sales have increased presents challenges to the high street. One facility that I would like to emphasise is the flexible training opportunities initiative, which can be used by small businesses for practically any training opportunity that can allow them to retrain their staff. There may well be a great opportunity for small retailers to train up their staff in things such as e-commerce. However, there is a lot of work to do to regenerate our high streets. The proposed cross-party group on towns and town centres will, no doubt, be crucial in taking forward, among other things, dialogue with the Government on how we can continue to celebrate the successes and push for further success in retail but also reinvigorate our town centres. 13:07 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

I, too, congratulate James Dornan on securing this debate. He has made the case in a very heartfelt way for recruiting young people. I also pay tribute to him for organising a jobs fair in his constituency. I know that the event inspired other MSPs to arrange jobs fairs in their constituencies, me being one of them and Alex Neil being another, along with Kenneth Gibson and Christina McKelvie. I say to all MSPs that I am always more than willing to support their endeavours in their constituencies. In that vein, I know that Margaret McCulloch has done some interesting work with key sectors—I am thinking about hospitality—building on her past experience as a training provider. Kezia Dugdale is not here today, but the work that she does in offering a paid internship through her offices as an MSP is another important example of what we, as individuals, can do. I acknowledge the contributions of all the speakers in tonight’s debate—David Torrance, Margaret McCulloch, Richard Lyle, Mary Scanlon and Linda Fabiani. The debate has been a mature and reflective one. We all know that, to successfully tackle youth unemployment, we need a concerted effort on a number of levels. Action has to be rooted in the local and macro economies. We often have debates in the chamber about the need for economic growth, how to use capital investment and the austerity agenda, and we often have debates that touch on constitutional arguments and the powers that the Scottish Parliament does and does not have. Our response to youth unemployment cannot just be about responding to rising unemployment as a result of the recession; we need to address structural unemployment as well. Despite the magnitude of the issues and the scale of the challenge, we must not underestimate the role that we can all play both as individuals and collectively. It is imperative that we have the support of members of the Scottish Parliament for the make young people your business campaign. I was heartened by the speeches that members made tonight, because we are all, in our own ways, agents of change. We all have networks and contacts in our constituencies and we have scope to make a difference at a local level. We heard about some of the ideas and the good work that is going on in that regard in the debate. At its core, the motion is about combating the perceptions that sometimes exist about young people. The UK Commission for Employment and Skills is showing through its work that the vast majority of our young people are work ready, and they should not be shy about saying that. That does not mean that there are not some young people who need additional support on their journey towards and into work, but the vast majority are willing and able to work. What they lack is opportunity, not talent. Therefore, we must address the fact that only 25 per cent of businesses recruit directly from education and the fact that the proportion of young people in the workforce, in both the public and private sectors, has been declining since 2005. David Torrance mentioned Pamela Scott from Diageo. She attended the national economic forum last February, which focused solely on youth unemployment, then went back to her employer at Diageo and went to work on their own youth employment plan. Indeed, Diageo now has a support package for that and has invested £5 million of its own money in it. At the heart of the make young people your business campaign is making a positive business case for employing a young person, which is not just the right thing but the smart thing to do. We have young people who are willing to work and ready to learn and who are, as Margaret McCulloch said, flexible and loyal. They are most certainly not a burden; indeed, they are an asset. Young people can make a contribution to any business and could have a positive impact on the bottom line. Given the challenges that businesses of all sizes face, I accept that we must make it easier for businesses to employ young people and that we should provide them with information about the employer recruitment incentive, which will be live this April, and other information tools, such as the our skillsforce website. In that regard, James Dornan made an important suggestion about an information pack that could go to members of the Scottish Parliament, and Linda Fabiani was right to say that the information should be relevant at the local level. I will therefore go away and look at how we can devise an information pack for constituency and list MSPs that will actively assist them in their work in their own communities and constituencies if they are going on employer visits or visiting businesses or, indeed, going along to their local Rotary meeting to tell other people about the benefits of employing young people and what assistance is available. Preparing that material will not be a small bit of work, and there is perhaps scope for the Government to look at having a paid internship for that piece of work. There could be an argument for employing a young person to take on the work, given the skills that they often have in communication and social media. We will go away and look at that, because I certainly want to do everything that I can to assist members of the Scottish Parliament in their constituency work, particularly if it will assist local businesses and help more of our young people to get into work. There has been some discussion tonight about the importance of work experience. Of course, it is important, but it must be ethical, voluntary and high quality. Certainly, the Government’s provision in that regard—our work experience programmes and internships—are all paid. The issue of work experience also touches on Skills Development Scotland’s certificate of work readiness, which is now increasingly used in get ready for work training courses. It builds work experience into a training course, and the work experience is assessed by the employer. That means that, in effect, the certificate can act as a reference. Like Margaret McCulloch, I pay tribute to Sir Willie Haughey and his youth with hope initiative, which is a very pragmatic initiative. I certainly wish it every success and I look forward to hearing how it develops. As Linda Fabiani said, we all have to be advocates for the young people in our communities. For the second month in a row, the labour market statistics have been positive. It is important that we mark that we have had the largest-ever fall since those particular records began in 2006. I very much welcome the fact that we have 23,000 fewer young unemployed Scots now than we did at this time last year. However, one unemployed Scot is one too many for this Government. We still have 82,000 16 to 24-year-olds seeking work. We must all address that. Unemployment remains too high and now is most certainly not the time for us to take our foot off the gas in that regard. There is always more to do and we must always do more in challenging each other, because we cannot let ourselves or our young people become the victims of a cycle of despair. What Linda Fabiani said is worth repeating: we need to be advocates for young people. Meeting closed at 18:09.

I wish all my colleagues across the chamber a happy new year. Today’s debate is timely, not only as we look forward with hope and ambition to 2013, but as we look back on, reflect on and learn from our progress and the challenges over the past year. I do not need to tell members that youth unemployment remains one of the most important challenges that we and other Governments across and beyond Europe face. For the past year or so, it has been my job to put young people at the heart of our response to rising youth unemployment, to marshal resources across the Government and to harness support from others outside Government—the business community, as well as the public sector and the third sector. My job has been to spearhead a national response to a national challenge. The good news is that the youth unemployment rate in Scotland has decreased over the year. Scotland now has 25,000 fewer unemployed young people compared with this time last year. That represents the biggest decrease in youth unemployment since the figures were first collected on the current basis in 2006. The most recent set of employment figures showed Scotland’s progress on youth employment: we have higher youth employment, lower youth unemployment and lower economic inactivity among young people than anywhere else in the United Kingdom. However, that is not enough. Although it is all a welcome step in the right direction, there is much more to do. As I look forward to 2013, I ask everyone across the chamber to work together to increase our efforts and strengthen our resolve to do all that we can to support young people towards and into employment.

Yes, there was a marginal reduction in the employment figure. I was trying to say that, in comparison to the UK, we perform better on employment, inactivity and unemployment. However, Ms Scanlon is factually correct to say that there is a marginal reduction in the employment figure. From memory, I think that it was either 0.1 or 0.2 per cent. The employability fund forms part of the Scottish Government’s commitment to supporting people towards and into work. It sits alongside a unique guarantee of a place in education or training for all 16 to 19-year-olds; at least 25,000 modern apprenticeship places in every year of this session of the Parliament; and the upcoming £15 million employer recruitment incentive. Colleges are key providers of employability provision, but they are delivering in a period of considerable change, so we are responding positively to their call for stability. That is why we have asked the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to allocate £18 million to colleges within the existing committed resources for 2013-14 in addition to the £6 million that they will get from Skills Development Scotland. That money forms part of our £500 million-plus commitment to colleges that was previously announced in the draft Scottish budget. It also reaffirms our support for the work that the sector does to help people to get jobs. Central to our endeavours as we move forward in 2013 is making the business case to employers that young people can play a strong part in our economic recovery. That is highlighted in the make young people your business recruitment campaign for young people, which I launched just before the recess. That campaign is about changing hearts and minds. There are around 330,000 companies in Scotland of all shapes and sizes, and around 86,000 young people in Scotland are looking for opportunities to work. Between us, I am sure that we can find ways to mobilise our combined resources and shared appetite to help young people move towards and into employment, thereby giving them hope for their future. In that work, we are not just responding to recession. The Government is undertaking a wide programme of reform. It is tackling structural issues to drive employment opportunities through reforms to the post-16 learning system and is delivering on the promises of curriculum for excellence to better prepare our young people for the jobs of the future. The scale of our ambition is not limited to achieving a return to pre-recession levels of youth unemployment. Prior to the recession, during a time of economic growth, rates of youth unemployment in Scotland were still around 14 per cent, which, to my mind, is far too high. With that in mind, I recently visited Brussels and the Hague to investigate why a small cluster of northern European countries have continued to experience very low levels of youth unemployment during the economic downturn. I want to replicate that success for Scotland’s young people, because they deserve nothing less. This Government is ambitious for all of Scotland’s young people. Action for jobs, our youth employment strategy, sets out short, medium and long-term actions to support young people. It is built on three strategic themes: adopting an all-Government, all-Scotland approach; enhancing our offer to and support for young people; and engaging with employers. Above all, it is a call to those who can effect change—those who can bring people together to provide better solutions for the young people who are out of work—to do so. As part of our all-Government, all-Scotland approach, I have led a series of regional action forums, which have involved young people who are affected by unemployment in action-focused discussions with local employers, key stakeholders and many MSPs who are here today. I have also held a national rural skills summit and a women’s employment summit, and last month, in partnership with Young Scot and the Scottish Youth Parliament, I hosted a national employment summit for young people, which brought together more than 100 young people and gave them the opportunity to engage directly with a range of Government ministers and other senior stakeholders to identify what measures would be most effective in supporting them towards employment. Those events have given me an opportunity to engage directly with young people and employers, both of whom have been clear on how we can help them to succeed. They have told me that we need a more joined-up skills and employment system and more support for employers to recruit young people; that young people want better careers guidance; and that young people have asked for more high-quality job opportunities and work experience. In response to that, we are enhancing our offer to young people. Overall, we are harnessing additional resources across Government and our agencies up to the value of £80 million to support some 23,000 young people towards and into work. We have made clear our unprecedented commitment to young people in Scotland through opportunities for all and have prioritised 16 to 19-year-olds in the 46,000 training places, including 25,000 modern apprenticeships, that will be available each year for the duration of the parliamentary session. We are modernising the careers services by making them more flexible and responsive to the needs of our young people. Graduates, too, are being supported by the provision of high-quality, paid graduate placement programmes. We are piloting a scheme to offer recruitment incentives to small companies to take on an unemployed graduate. To support young entrepreneurs, the Scottish Investment Bank has allocated around £1 million for 2012-13 to the revolving loan fund, which will support young people who are interested in starting or growing their business through access to loans. In the coming year, we will build on that work and will continue to respond to the needs of young people and employers. I will continue to engage with employers of all sizes and in all sectors to identify and address the barriers that they face in employing young people. Yesterday, I visited Stepper Technology, which, in the past year, along with its sister company MES Marine & Engineering Services, has taken on 22 new employees, of whom 15 are under 24. Stepper Technology feels that the business community has a social responsibility to ensure that young people are employed and well trained. Bigger companies—such as Diageo, which is investing £5 million of its own money in youth programmes—know that it makes sense to recruit young people. They are passionate about helping young people to grow and to realise their full potential, because they get it—they know that their success in the future will depend on the quality of the young people whom they attract now, so recruiting some of the best and brightest young people is a key part of their strategy. Through such practices, they can be safe in the knowledge that skills will be passed on to the next generation, which enables companies such as Diageo to remain world leaders in the highly competitive spirits industry. We are responding to help employers to recruit young people. The employer recruitment incentive, which John Swinney announced in the draft budget, will support about 10,000 young people into work. The our skillsforce service, which draws together national and local services, will help employers to plan, recruit and develop skills for the workplace. That has been directly influenced by feedback that was received from employers during my series of action forums.

We will release the details very soon. The thinking behind the employer recruitment incentive is very much that it should enhance our offer to older young people, by whom I mean 18 to 24-year-olds. We have a good offer to 16 to 19-year-olds, and we wanted to do something to extend our offer to other young people. Ms Dugdale is right that it is important to have something that is easy to use and easy for business to work with. We also want to ensure additionality from the use of public resource. We are working closely with colleagues in local government, trade unions and the Federation of Small Businesses on how, in addition to providing financial incentives, we can help small businesses and microbusinesses to recruit young people and on how we can help those businesses with practicalities. There is demand from employers. The UK Commission for Employment and Skills employer perspectives survey report, which was published on 12 December, showed that employers in Scotland were more likely than those in the rest of the UK to have taken on someone who is under 25 in the 12 months that preceded the survey. The public sector is rising to the challenge, too. I have asked public bodies and other agencies to create opportunities for our young people. I am heartened by the response so far but, as always, there is more to do. Perth and Kinross Council is committed to offering 50 modern apprenticeship places for the next three years, Scottish Enterprise recently recruited 20 new apprentices, with a view to doubling its young workforce, and NHS Tayside is developing a modern apprenticeship in care. I will highlight a proposal from the European Commission, which suggests a European Council resolution to introduce a youth guarantee across European member states. That would seek to provide young people up to the age of 25 with an offer of employment, further education or training within four months of becoming unemployed or leaving formal education. I support that proposal, which is worthy of further debate and exploration. It is clear that public employment services are fundamental to the success of such a scheme. With that in mind, I have written to the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions to suggest an early discussion of an approach across the UK that will work for Scotland. We are in the midst of a debate about the sort of country that we want to live in—I, for one, want to live in a nation with a Parliament that has the full range of job-creating powers—but, right now, we must all continue with our all-Scotland, all-Government approach. I include everybody in the Parliament in that. Members are rooted in their communities—they know the businesses in their areas and the needs of their young people. Many members have already directly responded to that by, for example, hosting jobs fairs or other events that relate to important sectors in their areas. I commend those efforts and I ask all members to do more for the young people in their constituencies. In the same way as members urge me and the Scottish Government to do more, I very much believe in a relationship of mutual challenge. We each must play our part to make young people the business of all of us and to do all that we can to support them through the current difficult economic times. Above all, we need to ensure that our young people have hope and ambition for the future and that they do not become disengaged from society and become just another unemployment statistic. I look forward to this important debate. I move, That the Parliament supports the Scottish Government’s “all-Government, all-Scotland” approach at the centre of Scotland’s Youth Employment Strategy, which has had a positive impact on the challenge of youth unemployment; further welcomes the launch of the Make Young People Your Business campaign; recognises that this approach is vital in the development of Scotland’s young workforce; agrees that all MSPs have a role to play in their constituencies to actively encourage local employers and other partners to do more, and welcomes the decrease in youth unemployment by 25,000 seen in the December 2012 labour market statistics.

Will the member take an intervention?

I agree entirely with Mr Macintosh on the scale and scope of the problem and I am well acquainted with Danny Blanchflower’s research. Mr Macintosh is right to point out that long-term unemployment amongst young people in Scotland has quadrupled. That is one of the reasons why we are introducing an employer recruitment incentive. Does Mr Macintosh accept that at least we now know the figures for the long-term unemployed? Under the Tory Government work programme, people were counted as employed when that was not the case—those who had signed up to the new deal were removed from the unemployment statistics. I recognise that unemployment is still too high.

I reassure Ms McMahon that the introduction of my world of work is a service enhancement and is certainly not a replacement for face-to-face contact. We are committed to introducing career management skills into classrooms. I know that Ms McMahon has a passionate interest in young people from disadvantaged backgrounds. The purpose of the reforms is to better utilise professional careers management staff to work more intensively, and on an on-going basis, with young people who are at risk of disengaging or who have disengaged.

I add my congratulations to Jayne Baxter on an eloquent maiden speech. I listened with interest to the activities that her colleagues on Fife Council supported—in particular, the appointment of a youth ambassador. She might be interested to know that North Lanarkshire Council has also appointed a youth employment ambassador, who even attended Alex Neil’s jobs fair in his constituency. I was thrilled to hear her talk about her contact and work with Jim Leishman. I am known to Jim from his days at Livingston Football Club. Far be it from me to cause any problems among the rank and file of the Labour Party in Fife—I hope that Jim will forgive me for saying this—but he spoke at a fundraising dinner on my behalf before I was elected in 2007. Jayne Baxter can take back to Fife my best wishes to Mr Leishman for all the work that he continues to do. I hope that Mary Scanlon will forgive me, but we got a bit of light relief when she gave her grants-not-loans speech. Alasdair Allan and I looked at each other and thought, “Where was Mary Scanlon in the late 1980s, when we were fighting the Thatcher Government over the introduction of student loans?” However, I think that she has clarified her position on that.

No. On a more important point, I want to reassure Mary Scanlon that there is no reduction in the number of training places for young people. The number of modern apprenticeships is up and we have delivered our commitments to the national training programmes. Also, in accordance with outcome agreements, 70 per cent of college provision will be targeted at 16 to 24-year-olds, which is actually a 5 per cent increase. Liam McArthur and others raised a genuine point about looked-after children. We need to ensure that looked-after children get their fair share of opportunities, whether in the national training programmes or in the modern apprenticeship programme. The third sector has an invaluable role in working with young people who are furthest away from the labour market—

No, I have moved on. I am very familiar with the Barnardo’s works project—in fact, I visited the project in my constituency last Thursday—and I know the work that it does in linking up with employers and reaching out to some of the most disadvantaged young people in our communities. I should emphasise that one reason why the Government funds the modern apprenticeship programme in every framework between the ages of 16 and 24 is, among other things, due to a recognition that quite often care leavers may not be ready to participate in a modern apprenticeship between the ages of 16 and 19 and may be in their 20s before they can do so. As one of the children’s charities highlighted in its briefing paper—Alison Johnstone also raised this point—we need to do more to promote the modern apprenticeship programme among all children and young people. Members may be interested to know that the Scottish Children’s Reporter Administration is a good public sector employer that leads by example in employing looked-after children, but I accept that much more needs to be done. As we go into 2013, as always we must seek to raise our game in terms of looked-after children. Yes, positive destinations for looked-after children have increased from 44 per cent to 55 per cent—those figures relate to sustained destinations—but that is still simply just not good enough. Regarding Mr Macintosh’s speech, I say to him that I think that we agree on the scale of the problem. We know and understand the scarring or life-changing impact of youth unemployment that David Blanchflower has described. I also share Mr Macintosh’s concerns about long-term unemployment. That is why we have introduced, among other things, an employer recruitment incentive. I also share the concerns about underemployment, which is an issue for young people, is bad for our economy and is also an issue for women workers and for some graduates. Like others, I look forward to learning more about the issue from the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s inquiry. I also agree with Mr Macintosh on the importance of capital investment, given that every £100 million of capital investment is estimated to support 1,400 jobs. Yes, the challenge is to ensure that, when we get economic growth, our young people are given the opportunity to benefit from that growth, and that is where procurement comes in. I began work with Mr Neil on the sustainable procurement bill—this is an all-Government approach—and, as part of our legislative programme, that work will continue with Ms Sturgeon. On housing, which is mentioned in Mr Macintosh’s amendment although he did not say much about it in the debate, all that I will say is that our record is better than his. Perhaps, just now and again, Mr Macintosh and others could, with a bit more good grace, acknowledge the positives. We cannot allow ourselves to succumb to a cycle of despair. We must give out a strong and clear message that, whatever the scale of the challenge, we will strain every sinew to tackle the challenge. We must ensure that our young people receive a message of hope and not a message of despair. I would have been more reassured if the Opposition had welcomed the recent drop in youth unemployment—25,000 fewer young people are unemployed now than were at this time last year. I know that this is no time for us to be taking our foot off the pedal, but that is a welcome step in the right direction. Mr Macintosh talks about action. As part of our all-Government, all-Scotland response, we have identified an additional £80 million to assist 23,000 young Scots towards and into work. He talks about evaluation, too. I agree that that is important; we had a debate about that on Tuesday. However, the Labour Party never says which programme is not working, which programme it wants to improve or which programme it would scrap. Our national training programmes deliver a good job, but they can do much better. That is one of the reasons why we are moving towards an employability fund and moving away from a one-size-fits-all approach, and why we are having pre-vocational and pre-employment training that meets the needs of young people—including those young people most disadvantaged and far removed—and local economies. I would have hoped that there would be some cognisance of the record levels of modern apprenticeships, the employment recruitment initiative, initiatives such as community jobs Scotland and the third sector challenge fund. We are taking a plethora of action. Bruce Crawford made the sensible point that the Opposition never says how it will pay for its proposals for additional expenditure. I very much believe in social democracy, but I also know that we have to be able to pay for that. A good thing about the debate is that we have, in a consensual manner, articulated that there are three strands to tacking youth unemployment. First, there is what we can do as individuals. We have heard about the jobs fair. I had one in my constituency and James Dornan had a hugely successful one. Labour members have also organised activities in their constituencies with a view to addressing issues relevant to their local needs. I urge all members to get behind and promote, in their constituencies, opportunities for all and the helpline, our modern apprenticeship programme and the make young people your business campaign, and to promote the employer recruitment incentive among small business, because that is where it is targeted. One change that has occurred over the past decade that has adversely affected young people in the labour market is the reduction of large business and the rise of small business. Small businesses invariably want to recruit those who are tried and tested. There are other structural changes in the labour market that have had an adverse impact on young people. We need to create more entry-level jobs—that ladder of opportunity has been taken away from many school leavers who have reasonable qualifications. We need economic and structural change to tackle youth unemployment. There is a case for structural reforms in relation to the early years, curriculum for excellence, colleges and career guidance. We have to make tough decisions in response to Tory cuts and adversity. However, we are also reforming public services in terms of prevention and early intervention. I hope that all members will unite behind the European Commission’s call and support its proposal for a youth guarantee to all young people up to the age of 25 that, within four months of unemployment, they can secure a place in education, get a job or get further training. That is something positive that we could engage with the UK Government to achieve. I hope that I will receive members’ support for that. Change always happens. If we consider the NEET rate and youth unemployment at a time of economic growth, we see that we need change. Can any member look me in the face and say that it is not necessary? There are other countries in Europe that, despite the economic recession, have youth unemployment levels of less than 10 per cent. I commend the good work that is taking place. We should celebrate the reduction in youth unemployment as a step in the right direction, but I assure the Parliament that we will most certainly not take our foot off the gas. We will, indeed, strive for a Parliament that has the full range of job-creating powers.

Does Kezia Dugdale accept that whole purpose of the make young people your business campaign is proactively to sell the business and economic case for employing young people? Does she accept that the Government has put in place the forthcoming employer recruitment incentive for small businesses, which—if I recall rightly—she welcomed, along with initiatives such as our skillsforce?

To pick up on the point about the reform of the careers service, enabling our very skilled careers guidance staff to work intensively on a one-to-one basis with young people who are furthest removed from the labour market and young people who are most disadvantaged is at the heart of the reforms.

I will be brief, Presiding Officer. I wonder whether Michael McMahon would acknowledge that Skills Development Scotland works hard with employers to ensure that a career guidance service gives young people advice about where jobs are today and tomorrow. SDS has also developed, in partnership with employers and based on employers’ needs, the our skillsforce web service, which is very much about encompassing early identification of things such as skills shortages.

Like other members, I thank Drew Smith for lodging the motion and securing the debate. I understand and very much share his concerns for the workers in his region and across Scotland. Like all other banks in Scotland and beyond, the Clydesdale Bank faces significant pressures as a result of the financial crisis. As we have heard, in response to those difficulties, National Australia Bank—the owner of the Clydesdale Bank and the Yorkshire Bank—announced on 7 February that it would undertake a strategic review of its UK operations. That review was prompted by poor economic and trading conditions in the UK. As Mr Smith said, jobs have been lost. Two business and private banking centres in Dunfermline and Paisley are to close and two satellite centres in Inverurie and Bearsden will also close. We heard from Mr Bibby about the community impact of closures, although I say to him that Renfrewshire receives opportunities for all funding in relation to youth employment. The Clydesdale Bank reports that all bar 14 of the 51 people located in the four affected centres have transferred to new roles in the Clydesdale Bank or the National Australia Bank Group. Of those 14 people, seven applied for voluntary severance and seven were affected by compulsory redundancy. The Clydesdale Bank reports 104 redundancies in Scotland between October 2011 and September 2012, 84 of which were through voluntary severance. The bank’s figures state that, between October and December this year, a further 66 positions were to be made redundant. The number of redundancies is in excess of 170. As Mr Smith said, we have heard about the new positions that will be created in Glasgow. The Clydesdale Bank’s stated position is that, over the review period, which takes us up to 2015, the net reduction in roles in Scotland will be fewer than 100. However, like Mr Smith, I think that any job loss must be regretted. We heard Richard Lyle’s personal account of being a financial services worker who experienced redundancy. James Kelly was correct to articulate the human costs of redundancy, which affect not just individuals but their families and communities. The Clydesdale Bank has articulated its intention that, wherever possible, it is seeking to minimise the number of job losses and is striving to preserve the bank’s Scottish base. The bank has said that it will maintain its retail network of 149 Scottish branches and its retail front-line staffing levels. According to the bank, compulsory redundancies will be made only as a last resort and so far the majority of job losses have been achieved through voluntary severance. Nevertheless, I recognise that every job lost creates enormous difficulty for the employees concerned, particularly at this time of year. There is never a good time for redundancy but it feels so much worse at Christmas, and all our thoughts are with those workers and their families. I wish to reassure Mr Smith and to answer some of Mr Brown’s points with regard to this Government’s support and the contact that we have had with Unite the union and the Clydesdale Bank. This Government is doing—and will continue to do—all that it can to support those who are affected by redundancies and we are maintaining close contact with the Clydesdale Bank, particularly as the review progresses. Both the First Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth spoke to David Thorburn—the chief executive of the Clydesdale and Yorkshire Banks—when the strategic review was first announced and they discussed the protection of employment in Scotland. In May, the First Minister, who chairs the Financial Services Advisory Board, had the opportunity at a FiSAB meeting to be with both David Thorburn and David Fleming from Unite the union. In October, the First Minister had his most recent biannual with the Scottish Trades Union Congress and Agnes Tolmie from Unite was part of that. Yesterday, 19 December, the First Minister met representatives from Unite the union to discuss the situation. The First Minister has also now written to the Clydesdale Bank to seek reassurances that everything possible is being done to minimise compulsory redundancies and that there will be no branch closures as a result of the review. The First Minister’s letter is also supportive of Unite’s offer to work with the bank to make more training opportunities available to workers. In particular, there is the chartered banker professional standards foundation grade—Stewart Stevenson spoke of the importance of banking qualifications. Members will be aware of the role and purpose of the finance sector jobs task force, which works directly with companies to co-ordinate public sector support where restructuring may result in reduction in employee numbers. The task force has offered support to the Clydesdale Bank and will continue to do so throughout the review period. In October, the chair of the task force, Jill Farrell from Scottish Enterprise, also met the Clydesdale Bank. Importantly, the partnership action for continuing employment—PACE—initiative that provides extensive tailored help and support for employees anywhere in Scotland who are affected by redundancy, also stands ready to provide any support that is required. Where PACE can intervene early, even in these difficult economic times it has considerable success in supporting staff who experience redundancy on to further work. I know that the National Australia Bank has appointed Penna PLC to support staff who are at risk of redundancy and PACE has continued to make an offer to Penna over and above what Penna is contracted to do. Penna has said that it will certainly refer to PACE as required. As the skills minister, I am happy to keep a watchful eye on that. James Kelly touched on the important issue of skilled jobs. Of the financial services workforce, 38 per cent are graduates and 50 per cent are qualified at Scottish vocational qualification level 4 or above. One of the challenges for the economy right now is not just unemployment but underemployment, so sectors that employ skilled and qualified staff are very important. We all know that this is a difficult time for the financial services sector in Scotland and globally. However the Government is fully committed to ensuring the success of the industry in Scotland through the work of our enterprise agencies and FiSAB, which is chaired by the First Minister and supported by the highest levels of the industry in Scotland, and we will continue to offer support via PACE. I reassure the members who have participated in the debate and the workers who are currently experiencing or are at risk of redundancy that the Scottish Government most certainly will continue to take a very close interest in the matter. 13:10 Meeting suspended. 14:15 On resuming—

As the Parliament knows, the Scottish Government does not duplicate services for which the United Kingdom Government has the responsibility and resources to provide. Therefore, there is no direct impact on the Scottish Government’s policies to support young people into work. Indeed, we are trying to make Department for Work and Pensions and Scottish Government policies work coherently and effectively in the interests of young unemployed people. The Scottish Government recognises that periods of work experience can be highly valuable to improving the employability and skills of young people, but we have been clear with the DWP that work experience schemes should in no way exploit those who take them up. We are supportive of voluntary, non-sanction based work experience opportunities that do not substitute substantive jobs and which give young people valuable experiences that help them to move towards employment. Clearly, we are not supportive of employers who use work experience as a form of cheap—or, indeed, free—labour.

I am aware of the article that appeared in the Sunday Mail and an article that appeared in the Daily Record last week. Should the allegations be true, Mr Mason is right that the practice would be scandalous, but such serious allegations need to be investigated and the DWP must be given the opportunity to respond. Therefore, I have today written to the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, Iain Duncan Smith, to seek an urgent investigation into the allegations. I will of course be happy to provide Parliament with details of his response when I receive it. If the allegations were found to be true, the situation would be scandalous, but it would be difficult to estimate how many work experience placements to date have displaced real job opportunities.

I believe that everybody should be on the side of those who are seeking work. I have a strong belief in the value of work experience for young people, but—as I have already said—such placements must be voluntary and of a high quality, and they must support the young person’s move towards and into employment. Employers are key partners in that regard, and we are clearly opposed to any form of exploitation. Earlier this year, the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development published a charter and guide for employers on work experience. It is a good-quality guide and it is very clear that work experience should not be used to fill job vacancies. I encourage every employer to apply the guidance that is contained in the document. On a personal note, from my engagement with DWP staff I think that they work hard to try to deliver for unemployed people in very difficult circumstances. However, I am also clear that, where services impact on the lives of people in Scotland, the responsibility for those services should lie with this Parliament and no other.

I am surprised that Miss Dugdale would find me relaxed about anything. I assure her that I am not relaxed by instinct. I will clarify what I said. It was actually a journalist who asked me not about a DWP scheme with sanctions but about the principle of work experience, and I said to him that I thought that work experience could make a positive contribution. In that regard, I was relaxed about it. In providing a comment to that journalist, I was not providing—

Yes, indeed. I simply thought that it was important to clarify the point. There is an issue about time limits. If we believe in the principles that the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development has set out, work experience should be focused on and tailored to the needs of young people, it has to enable them to progress towards and into work, and there should be clear boundaries. We cannot be prescriptive about every work experience scheme, but I would have concerns if work experience continued for protracted periods. I am therefore minded to support time-limited work experience, although flexibility is needed in working with individuals to meet their and employers’ needs.

Having the right people with the right skills in the right jobs is central to growing Scotland’s economy, and an effective careers service is a crucial foundation for that. Scotland has and will maintain careers services for people of all ages and we must ensure that they respond to all service users, regardless of where they are in their careers. Within that, we have a clear and necessary priority of supporting our young people as they move on from the world of education into the world of work. There is a compelling case for modernising our careers services. We know that people who use the services want them to be flexible and responsive and that those people want to access them at a time, in a place and in a way that suits them. Let us not forget that the world of work is changing rapidly. We must ensure that individuals get the support that they need to plan and manage the choices and changes that they are likely to face throughout their careers. The time is therefore absolutely right for modernising Scotland’s careers services. The framework for service redesign and improvement, which I launched last March, provides the blueprint for that. Moving on from school is an important and exciting step for young people. A huge amount of learning and career opportunities is out there. However, knowing which direction to take can be challenging and confusing, which is why it is important for young people to understand their options, what is involved and how they can access those options. Young people will of course look to their parents, peers and teachers to help them to make decisions about their careers. Together with the support that is provided by highly skilled and well-informed careers services, that gives young people access to a valuable package of information, advice and guidance. My aspiration is to have a high-performing education and skills system that is centred on the learner and responsive to employer needs, and which enables individuals to develop the skills that they need to get a job, keep it and progress to a better one, regardless of how far away they are from the labour market. With that in mind, our careers system will deliver a universal service for all young people, with career management skills delivered in the classroom and additional tailored support for young people who are in the greatest need.

Absolutely not. One of the strengths of the careers service as it stands but enhanced by modernisation is that it will be flexible and responsive. With the use of technology, the system will enable people once they have left education to access information and exercise their right to face-to-face contact. Nobody—certainly not anybody in the Government—is abandoning any young person of any age. Skills Development Scotland is, of course, driving forward modernisation, and it is working closely with partners in doing so. Our approach in Scotland can truly claim to be pioneering, in marked contrast to the approach taken south of the border. Indeed, it has been praised by Dame Ruth Silver, who is co-chair of the House of Commons skills commission, as being both “impressively panoramic and highly professional in its ambition for its nation”. She described it as an approach that “trains and hands over to” individuals “the skills to navigate for themselves a changing world of changing options.” I certainly endorse that praise. We need to equip our young people to seek and grasp career opportunities and ensure that they have the agility to cope when their circumstances change and adapt their plans accordingly. We want all young people to have the skills to do that throughout their working lives. Skills Development Scotland’s my world of work online service is at the heart of our universal offer. It is available 24/7 and is a cutting-edge resource that holds a wealth of information about the widest range of possible careers and an extensive range of courses that are available to enable people to move towards and into those careers. We all know that the way in which we communicate and exchange information has changed, and we know that digital devices are ever present in young people’s lives. Young people use the internet to get information on all sorts of things—more than any of us here do—and careers advice is no exception. That is why we are enhancing the careers service with online facilities through my world of work.

Let us be clear that a person does not need to be registered to access the careers service, but of course we want young people to register, as we think that that is in their interests. The tool is good and valuable, and we will promote registration. I believe that the figures to which Mr Smith referred are out of date.

Not just now—I have not finished dealing with Mr Smith’s point. With every month that goes by, registration increases by 10 to 15 per cent. I also take exception to the notion that we seem to be replacing face-to-face contact. We are not. If Mr Smith looks at parliamentary questions from Ms Dugdale that I have answered, he will see that 130,000 young people in secondary 4, 5 and 6 will receive a universal careers service.

No, thank you. Those young people will receive career management skills in the classroom as part of the curriculum for excellence. That is our baseline universal service. In addition to that, we want to tackle the adversity that some of our most disadvantaged young people face in our society. We are determined to use the highly skilled professionals in careers guidance services to help to tackle disadvantage in young people’s lives and to help to improve the life chances of all our young people. Of course, all young people—and, in fact, everyone in Scotland—will continue to be able to use drop-in careers centres across Scotland and to telephone Skills Development Scotland’s contact centre, in addition to having face-to-face contact. All young people will develop career management skills as part of the curriculum for excellence. For those who most need support, intensive services will continue to focus on young people who are at risk of disengaging beyond school and those who have already disengaged. That will involve individually tailored coaching and planning and on-going support to enable young people to find a career path and then take it up and sustain it. Our modern careers services therefore offer a much more integrated approach, including face-to-face contact, web-based resources and contact centres, and enable young people to develop their career management skills as an integral element of curriculum for excellence. I want careers guidance services to be at the heart of our education system. Under this Government, they will no longer be a bolt-on service.

Miss Dugdale will be aware—it is no secret—that Skills Development Scotland has had a voluntary severance scheme, which ended in March 2012. However, there has actually been a marginal increase in front-line staff in schools. [Interruption.] Well, I think that the figure for full-time equivalent staff in schools has gone from 246 to 251, which I would have thought should be celebrated, given the tough times in which we live. It is important that we provide a greater mix and a better balance of support that is firmly focused on individuals’ needs. The new approach is challenging and will require Skills Development Scotland, working with its partners, to build capacity across the learning and support system to ensure that, collectively, they provide the best possible careers services for young people. In doing so, Skills Development Scotland has not sought to reinvent the wheel; rather, it is building on the system and processes that are already in place, including those that several local authorities use to identify individual needs and to tailor and personalise careers services accordingly. As I said, we need to recognise that the world of work has changed and is constantly evolving. Today, on average, a person will have about 10 different jobs during their lifetime, spanning different occupational sectors and geographical locations. As they go through that, they will need to adapt, move and keep pace with a changing industrial base. To operate successfully in an ever-evolving global economy, Scotland needs a responsive and skilled workforce. Our young people, who are our greatest asset and resource, understand that and are moving with the times. Our careers services need to support the change—standing still is not an option. I accept that any organisational change is difficult and can be daunting for staff, which is why Skills Development Scotland is supporting its team of skilled careers professionals through the change. That includes unprecedented investment in a programme of professional development, new mobile technology to aid flexible working and, crucially, the creation of a Skills Development Scotland academy. Together, those measures will ensure that all our careers professionals remain at the forefront of international best practice. The work does not stop there. Careers advice must be supported by a strong understanding of labour market needs. Skills Development Scotland is committed to providing up-to-the-minute information on where the jobs are and where they will be, and on the skills issues that Scottish companies face. That will help us to support individual ambition and drive economic growth. I am pleased to say that our approach for individuals has already been recognised as best practice by the United Kingdom Commission for Employment and Skills.

I am aware of that survey only because it is quoted in the Unison briefing that has been distributed to members today. I have of course seen press comments about the Unison briefing. It is unfortunate that the briefing has not been provided to SDS, the employer. I cannot comment in detail on information that I and Skills Development Scotland have not received. I will say, to reassure Mrs Scanlon, that the survey—

No. The survey had 350 staff—[Interruption.]

I understand that 350 staff participated in the survey, out of a head count of 1,150 staff. The survey took place before the intensive face-to-face engagement of senior Skills Development Scotland staff with their front-line staff and before the commencement of the intensive continuous professional development training that I mentioned. I hope that that reassures Mrs Scanlon, who is understandably concerned about Unison’s concern—[Interruption.]

The Government is firmly committed to high-quality universal careers services for people of all ages. We are committed to services that are independent, impartial and informed and which support individual young people and employers. We should rightly be proud of our careers services, which have been instrumental in achieving a record 87.2 per cent of school leavers sustaining further learning, training or work. However, we still have a job to do and I am confident that if we work together we can build in our young people the capacity to plan and manage their careers, which will improve their life chances and help to grow our economy. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the modernisation of Scotland’s career services is vital to economic recovery in Scotland and to improving people’s ability to manage their careers throughout their lives; agrees that Skills Development Scotland’s service modernisation is in line with the Scottish Government’s careers strategy, published in March 2011, which focuses on offering a modern service for all Scotland’s people, making use of the latest technology, training and labour market information to ensure that individuals get the support that they need to enable them to succeed in their careers; also agrees that this supports delivery of Opportunities for All and plays a key role in ensuring that Scotland’s young people make a successful transition from education into the world of work, and further agrees that the Scottish Government’s commitment to continue working with a wide range of partners, including employers and individuals, will help to achieve its shared ambitions for young people across Scotland in the short, medium and long term.

I am certainly aware of the research that those reputable researchers conducted in 2009, which was actually pre my world of work. Does Mr Findlay accept that an important finding of that work is that young people value both access to web-based information and face-to-face contact?

Will Mr Findlay give way?

As Mr Findlay is so well informed by his trade union and Skills Development Scotland sources, does he accept the commitment that has been given that, in the context of classroom groups, over the course of the next year SDS staff will see every S4, S5 and S6 pupil to tell them about career management skills and to introduce them to my world of work, in addition to which people can come forward to seek more advice? Does he recall what standard of information and advice were available prior to 2008? Is he saying—

Is the member saying that we used to guarantee every young person access to careers guidance pre 2008?

Is Neil Bibby aware of the system that Skills Development Scotland inherited, whereby young people had to request information and guidance from professional careers staff? Even in the good old days, young people did not get advice automatically; they had to request it through an antiquated card index system.

I very much enjoyed the speeches that were made this afternoon by members from across the chamber and across the political divide. Let me start by making some remarks specifically to Ms Dugdale. All that I can say is, “Look at this face.” Every one of my 42 years—and more—shows. I am the Minister for Youth Employment, the mother of one child, I have 64,000 constituents, and I just do not have time to participate in playground politics. Never in my life as an MSP, a minister in the Government or a social worker have I walked around pretending that everything in life is all right. I wonder whether the Labour Party would spend as much time as it spends challenging the Government—something that I am quite comfortable with—in challenging our UK Government counterparts and arguing for more constitutional and economic powers for this Parliament, which would really enable us to tackle youth unemployment. I am proud that, in my first year, I have managed to secure an additional £80 million that will help 23,000 young folk towards and into work, but I have no illusions: there is much, much more to do. I have a vision of a Scotland that will learn from and match the best in Europe—countries such as Germany, Austria and the Netherlands, which, despite the global economic recession, have youth unemployment rates of less than 10 per cent. That is what we should be working towards. As I said, I enjoyed the speeches from members from across the chamber—even some of the more idiosyncratic contributions. I was pleased to hear that Mary Scanlon was advised to be a social worker. I am told that Alasdair Allan was once advised to be an undertaker. [Laughter.] However, in all seriousness, we are fortunate in Scotland to have professionally trained and qualified careers information, advice and guidance staff. We know that, south of the border, they have removed the funding altogether and placed a statutory responsibility on schools. I want to maximise the impact that those professionals can have on young lives by fully utilising the skills that careers staff possess. At the Education and Culture Committee, one of the witnesses commented that they did not expect careers services to change lives. I have to tell the Parliament that I and the Government are in the business of changing lives, and the expectation that we must all have of each other as politicians and of anybody who has contact with and influence over young lives—be they careers staff, teachers, social workers or youth workers—is that we are all in the business of raising hopes and aspirations. What an opportunity exists for our talented, skilled and professional careers guidance staff to work more intensively with some of our most disadvantaged young people. Those staff have the opportunity to improve life chances and indeed to change lives. To me, the issue is one of equality of opportunity, and we need to provide more support to those young people in need. Yes, we will retain a universal baseline service with which we will provide careers guidance to 130,000 young people. I repeat that we are not replacing face-to-face contact with a sole reliance on web-based facilities. We are working with young people; we will work with them differently and we will work with more young people and groups. We need to use technology to not replace people but extend our reach and modernise the way that they work. It genuinely saddens me that we do not recognise that the need to provide the most vulnerable with more support is a way to prevent young people from becoming NEET statistics, which is the point that Joan McAlpine made this afternoon. The red, amber, green methodology is a framework for identifying and managing risk. As I am a former social worker who has worked with risky people and risky situations day in, day out, I know that no risk management tool ever replaces professional judgment. In SDS, ultimately I expect good professional judgment and common sense to prevail. However, we need a framework to work within, to try to prevent young people from slipping through the net and to ensure that no one is left behind. In his opening remarks, Neil Findlay spoke of the need for evidence and I was glad that Ms Dugdale spoke of the evidence from the OECD in 2004. We have had evidence from the European Commission and the World Bank, and indeed the UK Commission for Employment and Skills, which has commissioners who are prominent trade members. The UKCES supports our direction of travel, as does the Smith group, which Joan McAlpine mentioned.

Absolutely. I appreciate any evidence that people have the courtesy to bring me—I have not seen it in full. I assure Neil Findlay that if he brings the evidence to me, it will have my full, undivided attention.

Not just now. [Interruption.]

I am running out of time. I want to be helpful to members and make progress. Let me emphasise that we continue to have more than 40 contact centres. We have a slight increase in full-time equivalent staff in schools and we will use technology to not replace people but enhance their reach. If people are concerned about registration, as I am, I suggest that we work together to increase registration the length and breadth of Scotland.

I am just coming to the Conservative Party amendment. I will accept the Conservative Party amendment because, quite simply, it chimes with what young people are telling me. They want information and advice at an early stage, before they make their subject choices. There are huge opportunities to integrate career management skills earlier, even as early as in primary school. We have huge opportunities to prepare our young people for the world of work better than ever before on the platform of curriculum for excellence. Iain Gray touched on an important point about gender stereotyping and occupational segregation, which are indeed alive and well and with us today. The previous system of careers guidance did not help to tackle or change that. I do not claim to have a monopoly on wisdom or how we ensure equality of opportunity for all our young women, but we will work together. We have had the first ever women’s employment summit and we have introduced the careerwise initiative. Our focus—particularly in public sector reform—must be on tackling inequalities through early intervention and prevention. I appreciated Liam McArthur’s more reasoned and balanced comments and I assure the chamber that we will take on constructive remarks. I will undertake to reply to every member who contributed to the debate to reassure them and respond to their particular issues. In the time that I have left, I want to make some remarks from a personal perspective and make a pledge to Parliament. I personally, politically and professionally believe that modernisation of the careers service is the right thing to do and I—I hope—have the humility and common sense to recognise and acknowledge that all change is difficult. No one, including me, has a monopoly of wisdom on how best to navigate our way through that change. I assure the Parliament that where there are issues of concern—and I have listened to them carefully this afternoon—I and this Government will indeed work in the interests of our children and young people to resolve any difficulties. I also make a pledge to this Parliament that I and this Government will have the tenacity to see that work through, because it is in the best interests of our young people that we equip them with the skills to cope with the many career changes that they are likely to make and not just to survive but to thrive in this world. Our economy and the future of our country depend on it.

Will the member give way?

Does Ms Johnstone accept that it remains the case that the majority of courses remain part-time? Does she accept that childcare funding has increased by 42 per cent? Does she accept that there are no campus closures? Those are all beneficial to women who want to access their local colleges.

Equality aspects of modern apprenticeships are an important dimension of our discussions with our partners and stakeholders about the programme. I have already held discussions on modern apprenticeship starts for disabled people with a number of organisations including Remploy Employability Services. Our engagement with employers is vital in that regard as, in some cases, we are trying to effect a change in cultures and attitudes within the workplace.

I would be delighted to receive that information. As a former social worker, as a constituency MSP and as the Minister for Youth Employment, I am always particularly interested in the cases where the system does not automatically help individuals. I am always more than willing to assist individual MSPs with cases that need some championing.

I will find out that information for Mr Robertson. He has a point in saying that the access to work scheme needs to be better promoted among young people, so that they know whom it could benefit. That is also true of a number of schemes. I would like to undertake work to ensure that young people with disabilities are better aware of the opportunities that currently exist, whether through our national training programmes, our modern apprenticeship programme or other schemes provided by parts of Government elsewhere.

At a core level, for me the ultimate purpose of education is to prepare young people for work, to stand on their own two feet and for an adult life in which they can provide for themselves and their families, make their own way in the world and be independent. As Mark McDonald said, it is imperative—in fact, it is crucial—that any debate that we have on education should not take place in isolation from what is happening in our economy. One reason for my appointment as the first-ever Minister for Youth Employment was to ensure a better alignment between the world of education and the world of work. We cannot look at the supply of skills in education and training in isolation from the demand for those skills. For two years, as a junior minister over three portfolios, I have reported to Michael Russell.

This is where experience and facts come into things. I report to Mr Russell as a junior minister and as a woman. I do not recognise some of the language that has been bandied about in the chamber today about a colleague whom I have worked with and reported to for two years. It is scurrilous and a slur on his character that members of the Parliament have succumbed to such depths. To be frank, I give Mr Russell far more cheek daily than I would ever dare to give Mr Swinney.

No, thanks.

No, thanks.

No.

I want to stick to the facts and the debate’s purpose. I was pleased that Liz Smith recognised that we are living with the reality of Tory cuts. We are indeed making tough decisions now and we are indeed reforming public services such as colleges. However, we are maintaining our priorities, which include student numbers—the full-time equivalents, not the dodgy Labour Party figures. We are prioritising young people in the context of maintaining student numbers. We have record levels of student support, which is second to none anywhere in these islands, and we are maintaining the volume of teaching. We have opportunities for all and we have retained benefits such as the education maintenance allowance. There is no denying that there are budget reductions but, by the end of our second term of office, we will have invested £5 billion in the college sector, although our budget has been slashed by £3.3 billion. It is interesting that we will spend 40 per cent more on FE in cash terms than our Labour-Liberal predecessors did, even though their budget went up by £10 billion. I raise that because the Labour Party, along with its Liberal colleagues, should have reformed the crucial college sector at a time of comparative plenty, but it chose not to do so. What did that increased investment achieve in the first decade of devolution? Do we have a first-class, world-class vocational education system that is highly regarded by young people, trade unions and employers alike? Do we have a world-class vocational education system that is on a par with those of Germany, Austria, Norway and the Netherlands? Do we have a country that, like those northern European countries, has youth unemployment at less than 10 per cent? That is exactly what we should be aspiring to. Important points were made during the debate about women’s participation in education, but the facts are that the majority of students in further education are women—the figure is 54 per cent, as Liz Smith conceded—and colleges continue, and will continue, to offer a vast range of flexible training opportunities. The Government has boosted childcare funds by 42 per cent since 2006-07. We can stand firm and proud, given our record. Our ambition is in recognition of the fact that those from disadvantaged backgrounds are still underrepresented in further and higher education, and that is exactly what we intend to tackle. A group of people that are dear to my heart are adults with learning difficulties, because I started my social work career working in residential care with adults with learning difficulties nearly 20 years ago. It is such a pity that Mr Bibby and Mr Findlay are relying on a report—Mr Findlay is waving it around—that is a year old and which pre-dates the introduction of the opportunities for all initiative. Let me reiterate what Dennis Robertson said and reiterate my commitment. Opportunities for all is for every young person in this country—

No, thank you. The member has been shouting in my ear all afternoon, but he will not get to showboat on my time. Students with difficulties will be supported on any course that they are admitted to. Colleges are highly skilled in such support, and I, for one, do not believe in segregation. We have a good education offering in Scotland. It is not perfect and it needs to be refined and reformed, but we are preparing our young people better than ever before for the world of work. We can look at positive destinations and at the academic achievements of our young people, but what they need now is the opportunity to work, so this debate should be about the economy and who controls it. Over and above our £2.5 billion year-on-year investment in post-16 education and training, the Government will spend an additional £80 million on supporting young people towards and into work. That will benefit an additional 23,000 young people—and that is before we get to the 16,700 modern apprentices under the age of 25 or we count the young people who are benefiting from a college education or opportunities for all. However, the reality is that we need to help tens of thousands more young people, and the answer to that lies in our economy. Liz Smith touched on choices.

No. I am in my last minute. I will happily defend our choices. We should be making the choice to invest additional money in an employer recruitment incentive that will get our young people into work. I wonder whether the Opposition parties will be honest about their choices. How much more money do they want for further education and from where should we make the cuts? Perhaps Mr Brown will answer that in his closing speech.

Of course, colleges themselves have choices, including about the £200 million reserves that they have.

We expect colleges to keep their provision under continual review and ensure a very sharp focus on meeting the needs of the employers, learners and communities that they serve. With regard to direct support for the development of social enterprise, we are providing the Scottish Social Enterprise Academy with £300,000 in each of the next three years to deliver a learning and development programme for the third sector. That funding includes £80,000, again in each of the next three years, for social enterprise in education to reflect one of the academy’s key objectives under this theme, which is to increase awareness of social enterprise in the further education sector.

Ms MacDonald’s very good point is based on the premise of the value of credit unions and, in particular, local credit unions. I know that Ms MacDonald is very familiar with the West Lothian Credit Union, the strength of which is its local base, and I hope, therefore, that she will find what I am about to say pleasing. Under the learning and development programme for the third sector that I mentioned in my previous answer, 70 college staff will attend two understanding social enterprise programmes in 2012-13 with a wider roll-out in both 2013-14 and 2014-15. Understanding social enterprise programmes for young people in need of additional support will also be piloted at Edinburgh College and other student events will also be held. I am happy to provide further detail in correspondence.

The Government places a high priority on quality career services. That is why we published last year “Career Information, Advice and Guidance in Scotland—A Framework for Service Redesign and Improvement”. We are committed to modernising services as a key element of our programme of reform to post-16 education.

It really saddens me that someone of Mr Smith’s ability either misconstrues or misunderstands the important and imperative reforms of career guidance in this country. We are fortunate in Scotland that we have professional careers information, advice and guidance staff. What we need to do is to ensure that more of our young people—[Interruption.] Mr Smith should really listen to this. We need to ensure, particularly in the current climate, that more of our young people get a careers service that actually meets their needs. The purpose of the traffic-light system is to respond to the needs of different young people. Some young people need very intensive support, some young people have deep social problems that need to be addressed before we can get them on a journey to employability, and other young people need a more light-touch approach. Gone are the days when everybody should receive a 10-minute appointment with a professional careers guidance member of staff. The important point is that, despite financial constraints, we are retaining access to a universal service in which any young person who wishes an appointment or face-to-face contact with a well-paid professional will receive that. However, now is the time for us to ensure that we meet the needs of all our young people, from those who are near the labour market to those who are very far away from it.

The development of an employability fund will mean that existing Scottish Government investment in pre-employment training through Skills Development Scotland and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council is brought together in 2013-14 through an integrated skills commissioning process. We are working with partners to finalise priorities for the fund in 2013-14.

I reassure Ms Ferguson that there will not be a further reduction in the way that she outlines. The employability fund is an important development. She is right to identify that, as the draft budget says, £24 million will come from the Scottish funding council, which represents an increase of £6 million. We will ensure that a proportion is ring fenced for the use of colleges. On top of that, I will meet Skills Development Scotland to ensure that all its pre-employability funding comes together with the funding from the Scottish funding council. Via those means, we are augmenting provision to colleges.

The key vehicle through which skills demand is articulated and addressed is the skills investment plan, which the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and Skills Development Scotland jointly developed. The plan has the full support of industry and the energy advisory board. Creating opportunities for colleges and universities to meet the emerging needs of Scotland’s renewable energy industry and its workforce is a high priority. The funding council and Skills Development Scotland are well positioned to fund opportunities and to respond to emerging needs.

I understand that more than 25,000 students in the system are studying science, technology, engineering and mathematics—STEM—subjects. Additional funding of £1.9 million in this academic year has been provided for an additional 300 STEM-related places. That funding and the number of places will increase over the next three years. The member should also be aware of initiatives such as the energy skills academy and our additional investment of £2 million in flexible training opportunities to deal with some of the skills shortages, which relate to industry looking for experienced mid-life engineers.

I am very grateful for the opportunity to open the debate on employability policy. Let me first provide some context. When workforce plus was launched six years ago, there was a focus on developing capacity in seven areas that faced the greatest employment challenges. Since then, I am pleased to say that local employability partnerships have voluntarily grown up in all 32 local authorities. Those partnerships, which are supported and often led by local authorities, include all the agencies with an interest in improving employability, ranging from Skills Development Scotland and the Department for Work and Pensions to health boards, colleges and, of course, the third sector. As such, they have been well placed to create more joined-up and effective services for people who are out of work. At the same time, the Scottish Government has done some joining up of its own. For example, we created Skills Development Scotland out of four separate agencies to act as our national skills body. We have also improved the service for unemployed people by making clearer links between the work of Skills Development Scotland and that of the DWP through Jobcentre Plus. Last, but not least, our introduction of single outcome agreements has significantly strengthened the partnership between national and local government in Scotland. I believe that those changes put us in a strong position to achieve the jobs and sustainable growth for which we aim. A lot has changed since the introduction of the original employability policy in 2006. Austerity cuts and the global economic downturn, combined with sweeping welfare reforms at United Kingdom level, have greatly changed the nature and scale of the challenge that we all face. Those factors emphasise the need for a fresh approach to employability—one in which the continuing challenge of helping people into work is matched by an equal determination to stimulate growth and hence the availability of jobs. That is exactly the focus of “Working for Growth: A refresh of the employability framework for Scotland”. The document was launched only two weeks ago by my colleague John Swinney, when he addressed the welfare to work convention in Glasgow. As the title suggests, “Working for Growth” has a clear focus on jobs within the context of economic recovery. First and foremost, that means that we must simplify and enhance our offers to employers. I understand the frustration that employers still often express about the difficulty of navigating our employment and skills system. I spoke to a range of employers at a business breakfast prior to the launch of the document, emphasising our desire to work closely with employers during these difficult times and beyond—in particular to harness the significant talents of our young people. That commitment is far reaching and is underpinned by our on-going development of skills investment plans for the key growth sectors in the economy.

Yes, absolutely. I was going to come to that point later on. Announcements about our skillsforce are imminent. It is important that skills investment plans are developed in partnership with the public, private and third sectors. I am pleased that two plans—for energy and hospitality—have already been developed. As I indicated to Mr Brown, SDS is also developing our skillsforce—a new service that will pull together a range of information related to employers’ workforce needs. Importantly, the service will feature details of national and local offers. To complement that, we will look to employability partnerships to develop and enhance their own collaborative offers to employers. We have a clear strategic focus on jobs within the context of economic recovery. The next step is to ensure clear and effective leadership in support of those goals. As we highlight in “Working for Growth”, working through the strategic forum and the economy board will be key to embedding employability more deeply into our efforts to revive the economy. The work of the reconstituted Scottish employability forum will also be key—it meets for the first time this month, and it will be chaired jointly by the Scottish and UK Governments and local government. The revised forum will exert much stronger political leadership than before and as such it will be well placed to set the national direction on employability in the coming years. As those joint arrangements recognise, collaboration with the UK Government and its providers remains essential if we are to be effective in helping people into work. For example, the introduction of the work programme has been one of the biggest changes to the employment system in recent years and we will continue to monitor closely how that is being implemented in Scotland. We also recognise that greater flexibility has been afforded to DWP districts recently and we see that as an opportunity for more effective integration of services at a local level. Of course, we are ultimately trying to help people—people who, even at the best of times, may struggle to find and sustain employment. For that reason, a large part of “Working for Growth” focuses on our desire to help as many people as possible to enjoy the benefits of work. There is only time to highlight some of the things that we are doing, or will be doing, in conjunction with a range of partners. To begin with, as the Minister for Youth Employment, I naturally recognise the disproportionate impact that the downturn has had on our young people. Action for jobs, our youth employment strategy, sets out the range of short, medium and long-term actions that we are taking and will take to ensure a better future for all Scotland’s young people. We recently announced £15 million for a new employer recruitment incentive for young people and we will use that to leverage in additional funding—members will also recall Alex Neil’s announcement to Parliament on the additional £25 million of European social fund money. That comes on top of the £30 million that we had set aside previously to tackle youth unemployment in the period up to 2015.

In effect, what we have in mind is a wage subsidy scheme that will be targeted at the smallest employers. We will look to subsidise employment for, say, six months. However, that level of detail is not battened down yet. It is important that I continue my discussions with our partners in local government—because it is important that the scheme is delivered at a local level—and the Federation of Small Businesses, which I met this morning.

There are many potential models. I am certainly familiar with pre-employment training that then links into a wage subsidy programme, whether the subsidy relates to employment or to a modern apprenticeship. One thing that we will have to discuss with our local partners is how to ensure that there is no duplication of resources or services but that there are opportunities to have a pipeline and a progression whereby we maximise opportunities for young people, first and foremost to get them into work or to secure them on a journey towards work. We will also take forward actions to improve female employment, following the success of the recent women’s employment summit and our helpful debate on the subject earlier this week. Disability continues to present a challenge, even though it is well documented that minor adjustments in the workplace can, for many people, make all the difference in the world. Figures suggest that the access to work facility is underused in Scotland, and I am keen that we work with the DWP to address that.

Absolutely. There is a range of equality issues that we need to take on board in discussion with our partners and stakeholders. This is work that I have already begun with stakeholders in terms of disability and race. It is not an easy nut to crack in the sense that, with some employers, we are trying to change cultures and attitudes within the workplace, but there is definitely more that we can do. Much will hinge on our raising employers’ awareness of the programmes that the Government offers and making them aware that it is in their interest to have a diverse workforce. There is a positive business case for supporting diversity, whether in relation to young people, women or people with disabilities. Mainstream employment is, of course, the ideal, and we will continue to promote the merits of the supported employment approach. However, we recognise that it may not be appropriate for all disabled people, so we recently commissioned a review of Scotland’s supported businesses, to be completed by next spring. The review will focus particularly on how the sustainability of such businesses can be improved in a difficult economic climate. Finally, I highlight the continued importance of skills in helping people from all backgrounds to access and sustain employment. Evidence suggests that the possession of skills and qualifications is increasingly important in achieving employment of any kind. For that reason, we are not just maintaining but increasing our investment in skills during the current session of Parliament. Those are just some of the ways in which we aim, with the help of our delivery partners, to improve people’s chances of gaining and sustaining employment. Speaking of delivery partners, I confirm that local partnerships remain central to our goal of improving performance. That is why we launched “Working for Growth” in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. For example, we are well aware of the potential positive impact of community benefit causes. Increasingly, they are being used to good effect in public sector contracts to secure training and employment outcomes for local residents. In “Working for Growth”, we encourage local partnerships to share and learn from the examples of good practice that are available. For our part, the Scottish Government will introduce a procurement reform bill, as announced in the legislative programme. Among other things, the bill will set an expectation that community benefit clauses be considered for all major contracts in the Scottish public sector. That is a major step forward. “Working for Growth” sets out key ways in which we will target our national resources better and includes details of a new approach to employability funding that is better tailored to the needs of people and local labour markets. The new employability fund will from next year bring together our existing employability investments through Skills Development Scotland and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council in a new partnership-led commissioning process. In developing the fund, we will learn from this year’s pilot scheme, through which SDS has commissioned job-focused learning from colleges. There is much work to do, but we are well placed to achieve our goals. Alongside our youth employment strategy, “Working for Growth” is a vehicle through which we can maintain our focus on jobs and growth for Scotland in the coming months and years. I commend the framework to members and look forward to a constructive debate on how we can help more of Scotland’s people into work. I move, That the Parliament agrees that supporting those who are unemployed into work is key to economic recovery and reducing poverty in Scotland; welcomes the publication of Working for Growth: A Refresh of the Employability Framework for Scotland, which recognises the importance of linking employability support with actions to support economic growth in Scotland and the value of further developing a more integrated employment and skills offer to both the unemployed and employers; also welcomes the agreement for shared political governance of the Scottish Employability Forum at UK, Scottish and local authority level and the development of an employability fund, which will move away from a limited range of training programmes and enable regional employability partners to work together to identify and respond effectively to gaps in existing pre-employment support; agrees that measures to support young people into work should remain a priority for the Scottish Government, and further welcomes the announcement of an additional £15 million in funding to develop further employment and skills interventions for young people in the draft budget statement of 20 September 2012 in addition to the £30 million already allocated for 2011 to 2014.

As Mr Macintosh well knows, the Government is committed to maintaining and is maintaining college student numbers at the full-time equivalent of 116,000. That is the most robust figure that is available.

Does Mr Macintosh accept—as I do—that college education is not just for working-class young people, but for everybody? I certainly resent the implication that college education is second best when we are striving for parity of esteem through a reform programme that meets young people’s needs in terms of outcomes.

Will the member give way?

rose.

For the record, as I am sure I would have reported to the committee, I was participating in conversations with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. We already have a good grasp of the type and nature of programmes that work. We also have an imperative to get money quickly to the areas that are most acutely affected. I accept that there are always lessons to be learned but, given Mr Swinney’s stewardship of public finances, the allocation was not made in a vacuum.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does Mr McArthur acknowledge that the great strength of the modern apprenticeships programme in Scotland is its employed status? It is the part of the skills system that I believe responds best to employers’ needs, because employers inform the framework. He is looking at this from the wrong angle.

My recollection is that the Labour Party’s manifesto promised a fund that would create 10,000 jobs for people of all ages and that the fund would not be targeted at young people. Perhaps Kezia Dugdale will concede that the purpose of my appointment was to marshal all available resources and that, since my appointment, I have not just doubled but nearly tripled the available budget, which enables us to move forward with an ambitious wage subsidy programme.

Presiding Officer, I must offer my apologies to you and Anne McTaggart for briefly slipping out of the chamber. It has been a long debate and I confess that I drank a bit too much water. There have been some notable speeches this afternoon. As always, John Park spoke from a position of knowledge and experience. Dennis Robertson made a resounding speech, as did Bruce Crawford. To be fair, Elaine Murray made an important speech, too, in making the link between housing and employability. I will ask the Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities to respond to her wider points on housing, but I must say that this Administration is building more houses than any previous Administration. I am not sure about Mr Johnstone delivering the same speech to Parliament more than once—that is not cricket. I thought that members were not allowed to do that and it is not a practice to be encouraged. On a positive note, we have had a responsible discussion about the statistics. Yes, 10,000 more young people are in employment than this time last year, but youth unemployment has risen, as it is rising across Europe. The employment rate for women is higher in Scotland than in the rest of the UK, but women’s employment has fallen over the last quarter—although that is not the trend over the past year. We must always look at the trends that underlie the headline figures. It is important that we accurately tell it how it is when we discuss statistics and that we do not compound the situation. For me, one unemployed Scot is one too many and I am sure that that view is shared across the chamber. “Working for Growth: A Refresh of the Employability Framework for Scotland” can, in essence, be encapsulated in the statement that it is about our people who are looking for work and that we must make the most of our collaborations and partnerships to ensure a person-centred response to help them on their journey. As John Park described, that response can sometimes be rather fractured and unhelpful, and we must always work hard to ensure that our citizens are not passed from pillar to post. If we are serious about economic growth, we must also be serious about tackling inequality and the barriers associated with age, gender and disability. The debate’s largest theme was about the importance of employers. I have always been clear that, after unemployed people, they are the most important group. There is huge untapped capacity and potential in employers, particularly smaller employers. I know that members are impatient to hear a lot more about our skillsforce, but it is currently being tested by small businesses and will be unveiled very soon.

I know that there are many employers—in this instance, I am thinking of larger employers such as Sir Robert McAlpine—that work together with, nurture and support smaller employers in their supply chain. Another point that John Park and Kezia Dugdale touched on is that we must remove the risk for employers, particularly small employers and sole traders. We must dispel the myths and take away the perceived risks surrounding recruitment, because we have 200,000 sole traders in this country and if we could encourage them and provide more of them with practical support and financial incentives to take on a young person it would do a lot not just for young people but for economic growth in this country.

I would look forward to that very much indeed. The Capital City Partnership is no stranger to me. As the member touched on, the important point here is about the responsibility that individual members have and the work that they can do. Margaret McCulloch is to be commended for organising a jobs fair in her region. I know that Kenneth Gibson is doing the same and that James Dornan is having such a fair this Friday, at which I will be present. I very much welcome what Stuart McMillan said about the companies in the Greenock area in his region—Stepper Technology and MES Marine & Engineering Services—that are leading the way in employing young people. I turn briefly to the amendments. I am not inclined to accept the Tory amendment. [Interruption.] Is that because of Mr Johnstone’s speech? There is a little bit more to it than that. It struck me that the amendment was just a bit mean-spirited and contained the implication that we were wasting money. As I intimated to Gavin Brown earlier, I report to Michael Russell and to John Swinney. Anyone who knows anything about John Swinney will know that it is necessary to be robust to get each penny of expenditure past him. I am just so glad that John Swinney is my boss and not my husband. [Laughter.] Mr Russell may laugh, but I spend so much time having to account to Mr Swinney on value for money and how I am spending my budget that, unlike Labour members, I have never had time to read Mr Russell’s books. We have had an outbreak of consensus in the tone and substance of the debate but, as Bruce Crawford said, the Labour amendment is a bit of a moanfest of an amendment. I assure the whole chamber that this Government is not in denial. We are most certainly not in denial about Tory cuts, which are being made right now. We are making tough decisions and reforming public services such as colleges while maintaining our priorities. We are providing 116,000 full-time-equivalent places and, through opportunities for all, we have given an unprecedented guarantee to every 16 to 19-year-old in this country who needs a place in training or education. Instead of griping, members should be promoting the opportunities for all helpline, which is 0800 917 8000. Instead of showboating on politics, perhaps like Margaret McCulloch and Kenneth Gibson they could be doing something in their constituency to give young people practical assistance. A few days ago, Ed Miliband talked about wanting more apprenticeships. Last week, Johann Lamont talked about cutting them. Let us have some honest politics. How many apprenticeships is Labour going to cut and in which framework? It can give that answer to the 105,000 young unemployed Scots.

I am delighted to have this early opportunity to report back to Parliament on the women’s employment summit that was held on 12 September. The purpose of the summit was to consider the issues that impair women’s access to, and participation in, the labour market, and to identify action. Both the First Minister and Deputy First Minister addressed the 150 delegates, which clearly reflects the fact that women’s employment is an issue of national importance that is at the heart of this Government, and that women are crucial to economic recovery. The other keynote speaker, Professor Ailsa McKay of the University of Strathclyde—a key member of the equality budget advisory group—set out in stark terms the challenge that lies before us, but she also set out the opportunity that we have to move forward from the summit in order to make a real difference to women’s lives. Let me be clear that the event was not a one-off—the summit is a springboard for fresh impetus to identify action in the short, medium and longer terms, as a matter both of equality and economic necessity. I am committed to informing and involving Parliament every step of the way, as we develop a renewed and focused plan of action. I was pleased to see members of the Equal Opportunities Committee attend the summit, and I hope that it was useful, given the committee’s upcoming inquiry into women and work. I want to record my thanks and appreciation to Agnes Tolmie, this year’s president of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, who chaired the summit. I am grateful to Agnes and to the STUC women’s committee for all their work in the lead-up to the summit and on the day. I also want to thank Samantha Ritchie and Rachael Macleod, the two students who made the film that was shown at the summit. The film, which was completed as part of their internships with Unite the Union, was a great snapshot of working women in Scotland today. I also want to acknowledge the young engineering apprentice Jessica King, who talked eloquently about her experiences as a modern apprentice in a non-traditional occupation for women. I will not be able to cover all the discussions from the day, but I will endeavour to give an overview of them. One of the overwhelming messages from the summit was the importance to working parents—working mothers, in particular—of flexible, accessible and affordable early learning and childcare. Childcare is an economic issue. It is a vital part of this country’s infrastructure, which can provide a route out of worklessness and can increase access to rewarding careers. We have already announced changes that will see parents in Scotland being able to access the highest overall level of Government-funded childcare and early learning provision anywhere in the UK. The summit discussions will inform the sub-group of the early years task force that we have set up to help us to develop a long-term vision for family support, family centres and integrated early learning and childcare. It will take into account the many and varied childcare requirements of families today, which include the need for care for children in rural areas, out of school care, care in school holidays and care for children whose parents work shifts. As well as a lack of suitable childcare, many women face other equally significant challenges in entering work. Those who face such challenges include women with disabilities, women from ethnic minority backgrounds, lone parents and ex-offenders. Women need to be supported to recognise their existing skills and talents and how best to build on them. Access to further skills and employment support is crucial. In addition, the strong view was expressed at the summit that money advice is key for many women. It is clear that welfare reform is having a significant impact on women and their aspirations. This year’s report by the Fawcett Society, “The Impact of Austerity on Women”, concludes that the welfare reform changes, combined with the high cost of childcare, are forcing women to give up their jobs, as the cost of childcare outweighs the benefits of work. A survey that was conducted by Working Mums found that 24 per cent of mothers have had to give up work as a result of the changes. For women who are looking for work, the requirement to claim jobseekers allowance means that many are finding it harder to access skills provision. Although the Scottish Government offers up to £1,215 in lone-parent childcare grant to help lone parents who attend further or higher education, the changes to benefits legislation mean that fewer lone parents can now attend college without losing benefits. For women who enter work, occupational segregation is an issue, as the group discussions highlighted. The reasons for occupational segregation are many and complex. A change in culture and attitudes is required, alongside a shift in policy and practice.

Early intervention’s value in changing the hearts and minds of young girls and, indeed, their parents cannot be overstated. Choosing to intervene with young girls before they get anywhere near secondary 2, when they make subject choices, is a choice that I would defend. However, I acknowledge that we need a range of interventions on occupational segregation at every age and stage. That is about what happens in secondary schools, colleges, higher education, and in particular sectors of industry. As Ms McInnes mentioned in her intervention, we are failing to attract women into science, technology, engineering and maths-based careers. Women who do access those sectors often leave, with the result that we are failing to maximise opportunities for women and those sectors. Caroline Stuart of Oracle spoke passionately at the summit about the need to bring more women into jobs in information technology. Currently, only 13 per cent of university students in computing are female and only 17 per cent of the IT workforce are women.

Ms MacDonald has hit upon an important point. As I move forward in my work on developing vocational education, I need to look at those very issues. I am committed to learning from the best elsewhere in Europe and across the world.

Thank you. The fact remains that IT and other sectors offer very good career opportunities for women, but young women in particular are not making those choices, for many reasons. We need to understand better what drives those decisions. A range of factors influence career choice, and there is no doubt that careers advice and guidance is one of them. We want to put an end to the idea that some jobs just are not for women. As Ms McInnes mentioned, at the summit the First Minister announced the new £250,000 careerwise Scotland initiative, which is aimed at encouraging more young women to consider careers in science, technology and engineering. I am pleased to say that it will be in place by April next year. Another area of concern is the apparently low number of women who start up their own businesses. Professor Sarah Carter of the University of Strathclyde chaired a discussion on women in enterprise. I am delighted that she has agreed to chair a series of stakeholder-led workshops to identify what can be done to increase the number of women who start up their own businesses. My speech has been just a very brief flavour or snapshot of what was discussed at the conference. At the end of the debate I will talk about how the outputs from the summit will be taken forward. At this time, I want to make it clear that the event was, for me, just the start—not the end—of a process on which we expect all Scotland to work with us. Elaine C Smith said: “In any country in the world, the key to real change always lies with the women of that country.” I hope that today’s debate will represent another step forward in understanding and overcoming the challenges that face women in the labour market. I move, That the Parliament notes that the Women’s Employment Summit, held on 12 September 2012 in partnership by the Scottish Government and Scottish Trades Union Congress, recognised the significant contribution that women make to sustainable economic growth; recognises that, for many women, a range of barriers to achieving their full potential still exists and welcomes the Scottish Government’s work with partners across Scotland to address those barriers, which include the pay gap, occupational segregation, childcare and difficulties in business start-up, and agrees that the Scottish Government should now work with partners to draw up and implement a cross-government approach to help achieve its short, medium and long-term ambitions for the women of Scotland.

Is Ken Macintosh aware that current provision is embedded in existing legislation, which ties early learning and childcare into schools and nurseries? Does he agree that we need primary legislation if we are to meet the needs of parents—like me and him—across Scotland for flexible childcare that is not necessarily provided in our schools but could be provided outwith school hours and terms?

Will Siobhan McMahon give way?

Will the member give way?

Today’s debate, like the debate on the issue that was led by the Equal Opportunities Committee, has been largely consensual, although in parts it has been feisty, thanks to Siobhan McMahon and my good friend and colleague Christina McKelvie. That is all right, because I strongly resist the automatic stereotype that women have to be consensual on all occasions. As in that debate in June, there has been a focus on the big-ticket items. Childcare has been central. I agree that childcare should not just be women’s work, although I accept that in reality it largely is. We need more flexible working for parents, for both men and women. Maureen Watt made a good point about job sharing and flexibility in working practices. The Government is ambitious and wants to put in place a platform for childcare that can take us forward and allow us to match the best in Europe. However, the reality is that our lofty ambitions will only ever be ambitions if we do not have control over tax and benefits. We can only ever support parents with the cost of childcare via the tax and benefits system. Given that the childcare workforce is largely made up of women and is among the lowest paid, we cannot make childcare more affordable to families at the expense of those low-paid staff. Mrs Scanlon made an important point about support for two-year-olds, but I stress that the Government’s overarching policy is to focus on zero to three-year-olds and, in some cases, pre birth. With that in mind, I remind Parliament of the investment in, and good work of, the family-nurse partnerships, which work with vulnerable women before their babies are born and until they are two years old.

As the mother of a four-year-old, I should be able to remember the answer to that in detail. However, as my four-year-old does not sleep, I will have to get back to the member. [Laughter.] I want to focus briefly on our modern apprenticeship programme because I firmly believe that that programme reflects, rather than reinforces, occupational segregation. I am always willing to hear ideas and proposals about how the modern apprenticeship programme could play its part in addressing occupational segregation, but we must be realistic and be aware that we cannot tackle occupational segregation by focusing on one part of that system in isolation. We have heard some rumblings about the council tax freeze, which is something that this Government is proud to support and to continue with, but there are credible economic arguments that state that putting and keeping money in women’s pockets is the best way to address things such as poverty and child poverty. Malcolm Chisholm made the point that our young women are outperforming our young men in their educational performance in terms of their attainment and the numbers that are going into further and higher education. That begs the question about what happens to women after they achieve high qualifications. What happens to women in particular sectors, whether that is oil and gas or the IT sectors, or the STEM professions? We must use the educational achievement of our young women as the platform for tackling occupational segregation; in no way should we turn back the clock by undermining progressive policies, such as tuition fees, when more young women are now going into further and higher education. On skills shortages, it must be a quid pro quo. I am the first to say that we need to do more to recognise and support the needs of industry, but we must say to those who highlight skills shortages that half of the population’s talents and skills are being underutilised. Last month’s summit gave us an opportunity to start a conversation with women from across Scotland and to seek their views on what should be done to make a real difference. In the coming months that conversation will, no doubt, continue through the Equal Opportunities Committee’s inquiry and, of course, the STUC women’s conference in November. I am confident that those events and processes will very much influence the Scottish Government’s work. In February next year, following a commitment to Parliament in June, the Scottish Government will hold an event to consider what more can be done to increase women’s representation in public life. However, just because we are continuing the conversation does not mean that we will delay taking action now, and that is exactly what we must, and will, do. We cannot make change of the level that is required overnight; we must be in this for the long haul. However, there is action that we can take and, in the coming weeks, we will draw together the recommendations from the women’s employment summit and develop an approach to take those forward and to identify short, medium and longer-term action at all levels of government, whether that is at the United Kingdom Government level or with our partners in local government. We need to be clear about where Government and employers have a responsibility, and where individuals can take advantage of further opportunities. I very much hope that that work fits in with, and is completed before, the Equal Opportunities Committee’s inquiry into women in work at the beginning of next year. I intend to convene a small group of external and Scottish Government policy and practice experts to support me in ensuring that we implement the actions that we sign up to, and I would be very happy to report back to Parliament on the progress that is made in the coming year. We are determined to work with partners across Scotland to tackle those areas in which we have the powers to do so, and to influence change where we do not. It is important that we are clear about the challenges on which we have clear evidence, and where we need to know more. That discussion was taken up in one of the summit’s sessions on research and analysis, and it is being continued. I agree with the STUC that, as well as looking at the headline figures, we need to understand the trends that underlie them and to do more for women in Scotland to ensure that—as a matter of equality and economic necessity—they can play their full part in the workforce.

I add my thanks to Kevin Stewart for bringing the motion to the chamber for debate. He gave a powerful and punchy contribution. All of us who know him know that he is never a man to mince his words. Other members, including Jackie Baillie, Jamie Hepburn, Annabel Ewing and, most evocatively, Fiona McLeod brought more personal accounts; I say to Alex Johnstone that, yes, many of them are heart-wrenching. We have heard the personal testimonies of those who are being unjustly and unfairly treated by the work capability assessment process. The process is clearly flawed when DWP’s own figures show that 40 per cent of appeals against being found fit for work are overturned—a figure that increases to 70 per cent when an individual is represented by an organisation such as Citizens Advice Scotland. We also know that disabled people and their representatives are concerned about the reforms to the disability living allowance and the introduction of its replacement, the personal independence payment, and the potential knock-on effect on carers’ allowances. Those concerns about the proposals and the lack of detail about the changes have—understandably—caused a great deal of anxiety and uncertainty among many of our most vulnerable people, yet the UK Government continues to pursue the sick and the vulnerable and to take no account, it seems, of the reality for people who live with health condition or disabilities. The Scottish Government has made it clear that it wants a welfare system that is simpler, that makes work pay, and that lifts people out of poverty—a system that reflects Scotland’s values. We must acknowledge that being in some sort of meaningful employment is good for the long-term health of most people of working age. Conversely, being out of work for prolonged periods has been shown to be harmful. Jackie Baillie made that point.

I accept that 100 per cent. We should recognise that many people who have long-term health conditions or disabilities can and do continue to work, but those who are unable to work should be supported to enable them to lead dignified lives. Professor Malcolm Harrington’s independent reviews of the work capability assessment process have identified many failings. The DWP has accepted the findings and has said that it is committed to addressing them. However, despite implementing recommendations to improve the process, it is still not meeting its aims of providing a fair and effective assessment. I am advised that Professor Harrington had been commissioned to continue his work and that he issued a call for evidence, which would have been an ideal opportunity to look at those case studies—nothing is more powerful than the real-life testimonies of real people in real communities—but I am told that Professor Harrington has stepped down and that the DWP is considering options for his replacement and the terms of reference. I urge the DWP to pick up the pace, because the situation needs to be sorted out now. Processes for reassessing people who are currently on benefits, such as the work capability assessment, need to be fair and transparent and must treat the individual with respect. They must also be able to distinguish between those who are genuinely disabled to the point of being unable to work, and those who might genuinely believe that they cannot work, but could if they had the right support. Those latter people might have been out of work for a long time and might need significant support if they are to adjust to the prospect of working again. They should not be punished for that, but it is difficult to see how such people will not be punished given the massive £2.5 billion cuts in welfare that will come our way by 2015. Housing benefit will be cut by £100 million to £150 million annually, and the changes that will happen when DLA becomes PIP could result in £250 million being taken from some of our most vulnerable people.

I am sure that Mr Swinney looks at everything in the round, and it is important to recognise that the Scottish Government funds programmes such as making justice work and citizens advice direct. Next week, we will debate the employability refresh: we want to put people who have disabilities or who might need additional support at the heart of that. I know that time is pressing, but I want to focus on Atos. The Scottish Government shares concerns about the work capability assessments as they are administered by Atos on behalf of the DWP, but we need to be clear that Atos delivers within the terms and conditions of a contract with the DWP. It is not making decisions about benefits eligibility and it is not making policy decisions. Atos is, however, responsible for the technology and the assessments. As a former mental health officer, I am quite appalled by the quality of assessment that some personal testimonies have revealed. It is quite clear to me that it is not possible to contract for such work on the cheap, and that we need a range of suitably qualified professionals who have the skills and expertise that are necessary for dealing with all the varied needs of people who receive health-related benefits.

As a former mental health officer and front-line social worker, I have some insight through knowing how long it took me to get to grips with the vast array of mental health problems—never mind learning disabilities. A high proportion of people who claim DLA are learning disabled. The many vulnerable people who turn up for work capability assessments and express their desire and willingness to work—particularly those who are learning-disabled citizens—need particular understanding, support and coaching to allow them to progress towards and into work. There is no point in setting vulnerable individuals up to fail. I know that time is marching on, so I will close by saying that I am very grateful for members’ contributions. I commend the work of the Welfare Reform Committee, CAS, all the disability organisations and even the Daily Record for shining a light on people’s personal testimonies, which should never be dismissed for being anecdotal, given how difficult it is for vulnerable individuals to step forward. I am deeply worried that the Scottish Government’s good work in supporting vulnerable individuals through our social wage initiatives will be undermined by the scale of UK Government cuts, austerity and welfare reforms. We need all the levers of tax and benefits if we are to realise the ambition that we have of having a welfare state that is simple and fair, and which lifts people out of poverty. Meeting closed at 17:42.

West Dunbartonshire Council receives £96,592 to support delivery of opportunities for all, which includes 16-plus learning choices and activity agreements. That funding enables the council to ensure robust transition planning for all young people from secondary 4 onwards, which enables them to access positive destinations. West Dunbartonshire Council is also benefiting from European social fund funding of more than £1.2 million until September 2013 and more than £166,000 of European regional development fund funding until July 2014.

Jackie Baillie refers to only one rather specific strand of funding, although it is important. With my national responsibilities, it is important for me to maximise the use of every pound and to try to reach as many young people as possible. Jackie Baillie refers to the £9 million that was given to six local authorities in areas where the challenges are most acute, although that is not to say that the situation is not extremely challenging in West Dunbartonshire. The allocation methodology was based on high numbers of young unemployed people and high percentages. I reassure Ms Baillie that I very much look forward to meeting Councillor Rooney. All local authorities will have opportunities in relation to future ESF funding, and I am sure that Ms Baillie will be interested in the results of the third sector challenge fund, which will be announced soon.

I am delighted to speak in the debate on behalf of the Government. As well as having an obvious portfolio interest, like other members I have a wider political and personal commitment to ensuring that women have an equal opportunity to get into and progress in work. I welcome the upcoming Equal Opportunities Committee inquiry into women and work, and I look forward to the committee’s discussions and findings. The Scottish Government recognises that women face barriers to not just getting into work, but sustaining jobs in certain sectors, as well as experiencing difficulties with the availability of flexible working and progression opportunities. The Parliament has rightly focused its attention on the rise in female unemployment in recent times. Although the female employment rate in Scotland remains higher than in the rest of the United Kingdom, it has, over the past year, dropped by around 1.2 per cent. The situation is particularly acute for young women. Unemployment is rising faster among young women than among their male counterparts and we are seeing a levelling-out of youth unemployment, with the gender split currently 60 per cent young men and 40 per cent young women whereas, historically, the proportion of unemployed young men has been much higher. I hope that the committee will have the opportunity to consider some of the longer-term concerns in addition to the current labour market challenges. Women are still underrepresented in a number of business sectors. The most recent figures on the pay gap show that women are generally paid around 11 per cent less than their male counterparts, and, despite encouraging increases in recent years, far fewer women than men enter self-employment. The current wave of welfare reform that is being pushed through by the UK Government is also having a particularly detrimental effect on women, with the Institute for Fiscal Studies confirming that women will be more adversely affected than men. However, in the face of those challenging statistics, we must recognise that some progress is being made on several fronts, especially regarding young women. In the past academic year, 90.3 per cent of young women leaving school went on to a positive destination. That is an increase from 86.7 per cent in 2005-06 and is higher than the rate among young men, which is currently 87.4 per cent. Although there are still real challenges around the types of professions that women seek, 56 per cent of new entrants to higher education in 2010-11 were women and a staggering 77.9 per cent of medical students are women. Equality underpins the Government’s economic strategy, which recognises that we must create a fairer society, in which everyone can participate. While many of the powers to help women are reserved to Westminster, the equality and budget group is helping to ensure that we consider the impact of every penny that we spend on key groups, including women. For example, we understand that childcare remains a real problem for many parents. In addition to funding that has been made available to support learning and childcare, we have announced a major medium-term step. The children and young people’s bill in 2013 will increase the current provision of 475 hours of pre-school education to 600 hours of early learning and childcare for three and four-year-olds and looked after two-year-olds, to be delivered flexibly from 2014. Later this month, we will hold a national summit with business representatives to explore how we can promote more flexible working and family-friendly policies in the business sector. I am delighted to note that in the face of a hugely challenging financial settlement last year, the Scottish Government’s equality budget has been maintained at the 2011-12 level—£20.3 million—over the new spending review period, 2012-15. We have increased spending on work to tackle gender inequality by nearly 30 per cent on the level that was allocated by the previous Administration, which I hope provides a clear signal that the Government gives a high priority to that work. It is important to recognise, however, that there is no monopoly of wisdom or concern on this issue. We need to take expert opinion and listen to the views of women throughout Scotland on how we can help to move more of them into sustained work. I am therefore pleased to tell the Parliament that the women’s employment summit, announced by the First Minister in April, will take place on 12 September. The event will discuss issues such as childcare, workforce challenges, employability and welfare reform. We are working with the STUC to develop what we hope will be an inspiring event that generates a range of new policy recommendations for the Government and others to consider. I am sure that the work of the Equal Opportunities Committee will make a vital contribution to that debate.

Like other members, I feel that we have only begun to touch the tip of the iceberg, but I am sure that all our appetites have been whetted for more. The big message that we want to get out from the debate to businesses big and small, the length and breadth of Scotland, is that diversity delivers. Getting more women into work and progressing in work is not just the right thing to do but the smart thing to do. We cannot continue to underutilise the talents and abilities of the majority of the population. Malcolm Chisholm was absolutely correct to mention the wonderful childcare centre in Pilton. I have had the opportunity to visit it, and it is an inspiring project. Claudia Beamish rightly mentioned that it is refugee week, and Richard Lyle touched on the fact that it is also carers week. There are fundamental employability issues to do with carers, refugees and women who are seeking to get into the labour market. Mention has been made of the modern apprenticeship programme. I hope that it is accepted and welcomed that the number of women who participate in the programme has increased. In 2008-09, 2,857 participants in the programme were women; in 2011-12, that figure had increased to 11,383. That is not to say that I am complacent. I accept that if we were to scratch below the surface of those figures, we would see some significant gender differences, depending on the framework. Someone mentioned the very low participation rate of women in engineering. I do not accept that the modern apprenticeship programme reinforces occupational segregation, but I accept that it reflects current occupational segregation in the workforce. I also accept that how we move forward in the modern apprenticeship programme will give us an opportunity to do things differently and to encourage more young women into growth sectors and more technical sectors. I accept that we have much to do on that, in conjunction with the careers information and advice that we give. Of course, we also have a job of work to do in convincing some parents of the merits of various occupations. Maureen Watt, Jean Urquhart and Alison McInnes spoke about women who are in STEM-related professions and about the importance of the work of the Scottish resource centre for women in science, engineering and technology. The Scottish Government supports that centre’s work; we stepped in to fund it when it lost some funding from UK sources. We also heard about the seminal and important work by the Royal Society of Edinburgh, to which the Deputy First Minister will respond formally. We need to be ahead of the game as a nation and as an economy and to take the opportunities that we are afforded by new and emerging sectors. That provides a great opportunity to tackle occupational segregation. It is important to note that an equality statement will sit alongside the renewables route map. Employers and industry-led solutions are key to finding long-term and effective solutions to getting more women into work and making progress in work, particularly in the STEM-related industries, as well as in the energy and renewables sectors. Welfare reform and childcare have been mentioned extensively. I do not want to get into a spat with Mr Macintosh, but I will say that the need for flexibility in how we plan to move forward and in how we deliver pre-school nursery provision is part of why we need primary legislation, although I understand the instinctive urge always to want to do more and do it more quickly. For older children, social enterprises and out-of-school care are an important part of the jigsaw. As for last week’s debate, I understand that Shona Robison’s position was that she—along with others—wanted to meet the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland to discuss the pros and cons of quotas, so the door has most certainly not been shut. At the start of the recession, men experienced 70 per cent of the job losses. However, we now know that joblessness disproportionately impacts on women. That will require us all to act and think differently. I am all for the advancement of women’s economic independence, whether that is through getting more women into work, dealing with occupational segregation and equal pay, getting more women into self-employment or getting more flexible working opportunities. I hope, and my aspiration is, that the women’s employment summit will be a turning point for long-term effective change. I am sure that the Equal Opportunities Committee’s findings will make an important contribution.

Last December, President Barroso, in response to growing unemployment across Europe, urged all member states to develop youth job plans, increase apprenticeship numbers, guarantee education or job opportunities for young people leaving school and redirect European funds to youth unemployment. Well before that, the Scottish Government had responded to the situation by appointing me as a dedicated youth employment minister, committing to 25,000 new apprenticeships a year and announcing the opportunities for all initiative—an unprecedented guarantee of a place in education or training for all 16 to 19-year-olds who require one. We published our draft strategy for youth employment in January. Last month, we announced that we would direct £25 million of European funds to youth employment. Tackling youth unemployment needs short-term responses, medium-term action and a longer-term strategy, all of which we articulated in our youth employment strategy, the final version of which will be published at the end of this month. In the longer term, our investment in the early years and early intervention, the curriculum for excellence and the reform of our post-16 education system will ensure that any systematic problems in preparing young people for adulthood and the world of work are addressed. Over the next few months, we will develop further measures for the increasing number of young people aged 18 to 24 who are unable to secure jobs because of depressed demand in the labour market. Our short-term focus has been on action for those most acutely affected by the recession. I am pleased to say that there has been a hugely positive response to the draft youth employment strategy, which has prompted many into making commitments. I have spent the past four months meeting hundreds of individuals, businesses, social enterprises and others to discuss the translation of those commitments into actions. As a direct outcome of the national economic forum, Scottish Enterprise published its own youth employment plan, outlining actions for supporting businesses and industry sectors to recruit young people. The Scottish Council for Development and Industry has arranged a series of meetings with large employers to explore how it can encourage companies and their supply chains to support the young unemployed. To extend employer engagement and drive action at a local level, I initiated a series of action forum events, starting in Lanarkshire in May. The events bring together local employers, young people and key partners in action-focused discussions on how we can work more effectively across all sectors to support youth employment. On Tuesday, more than 100 people attended the Glasgow action forum at Willie Haughey’s City Refrigeration premises. In the next two weeks, I will lead similar events in Dumfries and Edinburgh. More will follow later in the year as I work across Scotland to drive home the message about supporting young Scots into work. The public sector remains a key employer. Following a meeting of public sector chief executives in March, I received around 100 pledges to take on apprentices, offer work experience and student placements, and increase the proportion of young employees in the public sector. For example, Scottish Enterprise will double the number of employees under the age of 25 in its workforce, Highlands and Islands Enterprise will increase its proportion of young employees to 10 per cent and Perth and Kinross Council will increase its young workforce from 170 to 450 over the next five years. Public procurement projects are also supporting the creation of job and training opportunities for our young people. Of the 380 new jobs that are being created through the new south Glasgow hospitals project, more than 80 so far have gone to 16 to 24-year-olds. Further, 140 of the 180 work placements have been set up for young people, and 90 apprenticeships will also be created. Recognising the distinctive role that social enterprises and the third sector play in helping to deliver our youth employment ambitions, we have invested nearly £10 million to create employment opportunities in that sector through initiatives such as community jobs Scotland. In association with the Commonwealth games legacy fund, a further £5 million will support jobs and other opportunities through major sporting events. That is in addition to the recent announcement by the First Minister of £1 million for the Prince’s Trust to support young entrepreneurs and start-ups, which comes hot on the heels of the £750,000 that was given to the same organisation to support more young people into jobs, education and training, which will benefit up to 7,000 young Scots. To refer to such commitments as “pocket-money announcements” is an insult to the thousands of young people who will benefit from them, and to the organisations that are offering work opportunities.

As Kenneth Macintosh knows, many organisations across the public sector are living with the reality of shrinking workforces. We know, as he should know, that young people are hit the hardest in a recession, and I think that we should welcome what organisations such as Perth and Kinross Council, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and Scottish Enterprise are doing. We have to ensure that others follow them, in order to make sure that more opportunities are provided for young people and that the proportion of young people that such organisations employ is increased. I am clear that the public sector, including the Scottish Government, has to lead by example. Much of the £9 million that has been allocated to the local authority areas that are most affected by high youth unemployment rates and levels will support young people into sustainable jobs with local companies. That will support more young people such as Lauren, who attended my Lanarkshire action forum on youth employment last month. She was about to finish work experience with Serco but had no job to go to. The good news is that she started this week as an administration assistant with a local firm, Assure Alarms, which will receive a 50 per cent wage subsidy from South Lanarkshire Council. I am sure that we all agree that that is money well spent. As I mentioned, we will use the £25 million of European money to provide support to small businesses across Scotland that are willing to step up and offer unemployed young people a job. Last month, the Commission for Employment and Skills published a report that showed that employers in Scotland reported higher levels of work readiness among school and college leavers than those elsewhere in the United Kingdom did. Around a quarter of employers said that they had recruited someone straight from education in the past two to three years, and the majority were satisfied with their work readiness. That demonstrates the positive impression that many young people are making on their first venture into work. However, it also tells us that three quarters of employers do not recruit young people straight from school, college and university, and I want to encourage more to do so. The Scottish Government has confidence in the positive role that young people can play in supporting economic growth. We demonstrate that confidence with our £72 million annual investment in modern apprenticeships, which enable young employees to develop valuable occupational skills in a range of industry sectors and give their employers the opportunity to demonstrate their confidence in them by investing £7 for every £1 of public money that is invested in apprenticeships. Some employers have negative perceptions of young people and are reluctant to recruit anyone from that age group. Of course, there are some young people who do not possess the skills and aptitudes that are most valued by employers and I am committed to doing all that I can to ensure that we address that issue. There are other reasons why some young people are not work ready. Lack of meaningful work experience presents a significant barrier to employment, so it is important that we persuade employers to offer high-quality work placements. To ensure that young people are ready for the workplace, we all need to help build their employability skills. The employer-led certificate of work readiness, which is being developed by Skills Development Scotland, will recognise the work readiness of 16 to 19-year-olds. Central to the certificate will be 192 hours of work experience, which will be supervised in the workplace. Wherever I go, I promote the business case for recruiting young people. Given the pressure on businesses in the current economic climate, recruiting young people might sound counterintuitive, but I have no doubt that companies need to invest in young people to achieve the business growth that will help them to thrive when the economy recovers. I know from the many employers of all sizes that I have met over the past few months that there is a real appetite to support our youth employment agenda. I am determined, as is this Government, to take full advantage of that. Investing in our young people brings returns to businesses in commitment and loyalty. Young people bring creativity, innovation and a willingness to learn, and their flexibility and adaptability help to enhance productivity. I am driving that message home across Government and our agencies. I want us to lead by example and demonstrate the benefits of investing in young people. This year, the Scottish Government will offer young people more than 150 apprenticeship or work placement opportunities, and we are increasing our efforts to ensure that all public bodies do likewise.

I know that Mr Findlay is a relatively new MSP but he, like everybody else in the chamber, should know that to be an apprentice in Scotland someone already has to be in a job. The modern apprenticeship scheme is the envy of the rest of the United Kingdom. It is sad that Mr Findlay does not know that we are operating the same modern apprenticeship scheme that operated under Labour. That is an important point. There are only two differences—[Interruption.]

In fact, we are doing three things differently. We are doing it bigger, we are doing it better, and we are increasing the priority given to 16 to 24-year-olds. The completion rate, which indicates the proportion of young people who complete their modern apprenticeship, is at a record high of 75 per cent. Is that not money well spent? Surely Mr Findlay is not suggesting that we should spend less money on modern apprenticeships when 94,000 young people are seeking work. I want us to unite in the Parliament and to encourage more young people to take up their opportunity, whether it be a college place or a modern apprenticeship. For Mr Findlay’s information, Skills Development Scotland’s board is already doing work to find out the facts, as opposed to the scaremongering and anecdotal evidence that some employers in some sectors discard young people after their training. Most employers are trying to survive in a difficult economic climate and they know that they must get value for money from their investment. Given that it costs £9,000 to train an engineer, why would any self-respecting employer get rid of a young modern apprentice? There is no doubt that our young people face difficult times. I do not believe that anyone in the chamber wants to see a generation of young people defeated by economic circumstances that were not of their making. I include members such as Neil Findlay in that, even if their words do not always replicate that view. This is a matter on which we should unite as a Parliament, because this is not the Scottish National Party’s modern apprenticeship scheme; it is Scotland’s modern apprenticeship scheme. At the Glasgow action forum this week, someone suggested that we should think of Scotland as a family firm, where we all take responsibility for developing young people in our employ. I think that that fits well with our strong tradition of community, and I urge members to join my campaign to persuade employers to support young Scots into work. I move, That the Parliament believes that recruiting young people makes good business sense and is crucial to sustainable economic growth; notes that the employers’ survey carried out by the UK Commission for Employment and Skills showed that the majority of employers in Scotland that recruited a young person straight from school, college or university were satisfied with their skills; welcomes the £25 million of European Structural Funds announced on 9 May 2012 to support youth employment over the next two years, and agrees that this should be focused on supporting young people into work in small and medium-sized businesses.

I take seriously any issue that any member of the Scottish Parliament has with an agency over which I have charge. I give the member that commitment. Will the member have the good grace to acknowledge that this is the first year in which SDS has captured the data in detail? Surely she will agree that it is good news that, according to her press release, 81 per cent of 16 to 19-year-olds started a modern apprenticeship within six months of entering employment.

I offer Ms McCulloch an apology for that. My concern was that, given the number of regional MSPs who have an interest in Lanarkshire, we would end up with 30 MSPs at the event and squeeze out other people. However, on reflection, Ms McCulloch’s point is well made. As we move forward, I can give her an assurance that that will not happen again and that all MSPs will be included in the events. If we need to get extra chairs, so be it.

Will the member take an intervention?

I appreciate Mr Park’s advocacy and support for what are perceived to be traditional apprenticeships. I, too, am pleased that the number of construction apprenticeships has held up, in spite of the recession, and that the number of engineering modern apprenticeships has increased. However, would John Park accept that our provision and alignment of the modern apprenticeship programme must tie in with the Government’s economic strategy and that we must also respond to the needs of employers and provide modern apprenticeship opportunities in other growth sectors such as food and drink, the creative industries, tourism, energy and oil and gas?

Is Ms Marra aware of the methodology? This is the first time she has raised the issue with me. One stream of funding was targeted at six local authorities that have the most acute problems. That is not to say for one moment that Dundee, Fife, West Lothian and West Dunbartonshire do not have problems, but money was targeted to other areas on that occasion. As we proceed to the medium term with our strategy, Jenny Marra should welcome the fact that we have European social fund money with which we can move forward and ensure that other areas of Scotland will also benefit.

The scheme actually ceased last September, so it is sad that Miss Dugdale has taken so long to catch up. In 2009-10, the scheme benefited 291 young people and, in 2011-12, the figure fell to 15. It was costing more to run the scheme than it was actually helping people. Will she retract her silly, wilful and deliberate misunderstanding of the situation and get to the facts?

For clarification, I told the Finance Committee that, in March, I made an announcement at a very public Holyrood conference in the city that we were once again extending the scheme. Please master the brief.

Will the member give way to let me answer that question?

Over the past few days, there has been much excitement in Scotland as the Olympic torch has travelled through our country. A modern apprentice on a business management course called John brought the torch into Hopetoun and, after the week that we have had, my thought was how symbolic that was. The Olympic torch symbolises world peace and understanding, but it is fair to say that we have not had much peace and understanding in the chamber today. Nevertheless, there have been some substantial, heartfelt and considered contributions and, in that respect, I want to pick out a few people. Mark McDonald always speaks from his heart and I assure him that I, this Government and the rest of the chamber share his commitment to improving the life chances of Scotland’s looked-after children. As a former mental health officer, I am glad that Mary Scanlon mentioned the link between unemployment and mental health, and I give her an undertaking that if I do not respond to certain points in my speech I will endeavour to do so in writing. Iain Gray had some golden nuggets in his speech. I am a reasonable person—or at least, as reasonable as a politician gets. I assure him that a consultation on the public procurement bill is imminent. I also assure the chamber that the needs of young unemployed Scots will be up front and central in that bill.

I appreciate that Mr Gray really wants to have an answer to that question. However, as a former minister himself, he will know that, first, certain things have to take place in the Government. However, the consultation will happen soon. He will have something to get his teeth into and we look forward to getting constructive feedback on maximising procurement opportunities. Iain Gray and others also touched on the role of local government. In this all-government, all-Scotland approach to tackling rising youth unemployment, single outcome agreements and my on-going dialogue with local authorities are pivotal. Indeed, part of the reason for having local action forums on youth unemployment was to find local solutions rooted in local economies. The chamber may also be interested to know that Skills Development Scotland is devising youth employment plans with every local authority in Scotland. I will not accept the amendments of the Labour and Tory parties for reasons that I hope become apparent. The draft youth employment strategy was warmly welcomed, but I took on board the views that the Parliament expressed when we debated it a few months ago. I wanted to address, in a meaningful and considered way, some of the equality issues to do with women, young disabled people and young people from the black and minority ethnic community. We accepted that there was a need to sharpen our focus on diversity issues. I do not do such things in a tokenistic manner. I want those matters to be addressed in a meaningful and rich way. I would like to encapsulate what the short, medium and long-term response of this Government is to youth unemployment. Surely the chamber must accept that we needed to act quickly. When I came into my post, we had to make a series of decisions, between December and March, about money that was available for year 1. Surely that was a commonsense approach. I assure members that although we do not need to waste time and effort in reinventing the wheel, we must ensure that every pound spent by the public purse adds value. I can give members that assurance. We needed to act quickly. Are people seriously suggesting that I should wait until we have a finalised youth employment strategy, with every dot and comma checked, before I can allocate much-needed resources to some of our communities in Scotland? Members who criticise the decisions that have been made should say which decision should not have been made. Are they talking about the decision to give £1.5 million to the employment recruitment incentive to support young care leavers into work? Are they talking about the provision of £6 million for community jobs Scotland? I have heard many Labour members talk about the life-changing impact of community jobs Scotland on the young people on that programme, which is currently still in its first phase. We will, of course, be advertising soon, in a timely manner and in accordance with the requests of the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, which has put forward a programme for its second phase. Are members criticising the allocation of £2.5 million to the social enterprise challenge fund, the provision of £5 million for the Commonwealth games legacy or the money that was given recently to the Prince’s Trust? Mention has been made of pocket money. I came into this post with a budget of £30 million. With the identification of £25 million of European structural funds, that has nearly doubled. Crucially, that £25 million has to be match-funded by another £35 million. That rolls up to a budget of £90 million over the next few years. I do not describe that as pocket money. As far as the medium term is concerned, we need to do more, specifically on long-term unemployment, as Jenny Marra and others said. We have a good offering for 16 to 19-year-olds. There is no doubt that the claimant count among 18 to 24-year-olds is rising. Although we do not want to duplicate services that are provided by the Department for Work and Pensions, we must add to what is currently available to young people who are risk of long-term unemployment or who are in that position. Kezia Dugdale rose— I am in my final minute; the Presiding Officer is eyeing me up. A lot has been said about the modern apprenticeship scheme. I make this point in all seriousness: this is Scotland’s Parliament, and our words have consequences. If members talk down the modern apprenticeship scheme, which is highly successful, they talk down Scotland’s young people. I will not stand by and let anyone talk down our young, talented and energetic Scots, who have their whole lives in front of them and for whom we must provide hope and opportunity. Let us work together. My door is always open to people who have constructive ideas and suggestions—we began to hear a few of those today, for the first time, after a week of nonsense—but let us not talk down young Scots, because our young people are the future of this country and they will help us to grow our economy and to grow as a nation.

Mr Park is requesting information that the Scottish Government does not hold centrally. However, as that relates to an operational matter for Skills Development Scotland, I will, in accordance with parliamentary guidance on parliamentary questions, ask the chief executive of SDS to write directly to Mr Park with the details of modern apprenticeships broken down by level. I assure Mr Park that I, too, am very interested in the issue.

I will certainly seek to get that clarification for Mr Park.

Within limited public funding there is a need to prioritise resources. Given the continuing challenges within the labour market for young people, it is important that we maximise the number of 16 to 24-year-olds moving into employed apprenticeships. All approved frameworks in Scotland, including retail, will be funded for that group. We also remain committed to ensuring that the key and supporting sectors have access to a wide range of all-age skills development tools, including apprenticeships, for both new entrants and the existing workforce.

It is important that the key sectors as reflected in our economic strategy are aligned not only with our modern apprenticeships programme but with our wider education provision. I will go away and look at the question on tourism to see what the detail is. I do not know whether there is more than one framework for tourism. However, we will have a detailed look at that, and I will reply directly to the member.

Through the opportunities for all initiative, the Scottish Government is supporting young people to develop the skills that they need for life and work and to progress towards and into work. Opportunities for all gives an explicit commitment to all 16 to 19-year-olds, with an offer of a place in learning or training for those who are not in education, training or work. It is for local partners, including local authorities and their schools, Skills Development Scotland and the wide range of learning and support organisations to support young people to take up the opportunities and sustain the option that is right for them.

I add my congratulations to Woodlands secondary school. The ambition of schools on the employability and enterprise agenda is heartening. Recently, I had the pleasure of visiting Glencryan school in Cumbernauld, which is another school that caters for children with disabilities and additional support needs, and it is doing some fantastic work in the area. I am somewhat surprised that Mr MacDonald has not invited me to see the great work that is going on in Woodlands secondary school. The beauty of the curriculum for excellence is that it is a single curriculum. All children work towards the same objectives and experiences, but it is tailored to their individual needs and talents. It is flexible enough to allow schools to meet the needs of their pupils and their local area. However, I hope that schools within a local authority area and across the country make efforts to share good practice.

The higher education sector in Scotland works closely with industry to identify skills needs. It is for universities to decide on their course provision and encourage participation, and it is for the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to ensure that there is a coherent spread of provision across the sectors that takes into account Scotland’s economic, social and cultural needs.

It is widely accepted that science, technology, engineering and mathematics are priority growth areas, particularly with the growth of new clean energy sectors, for example. To address the issue, over the next three years the Scottish funding council will provide an additional 1,200 funded university places to ensure that Scotland’s graduates have the right skills to meet the needs of our various sectors and industry.

I know that Mr Robertson has a particular interest in the issue, as he represents the north-east and I have heard him speak before about the particular needs of the oil, gas and energy sectors. I point him in the direction of the skills investment plans for the energy sector and other important sectors in his locality and in Scotland nationally. Skills investment plans include demand statements about what industry actually requires, and they are vital if we are to match up the needs of industry with our educational provision for young people.

The Scottish Government will work with all partners across the public, private and voluntary sectors to respond to the national challenge of youth unemployment. We have made an explicit commitment to offer all young people between the ages of 16 and 19 a learning or training place through the opportunities for all programme. That will be supported by an additional £30 million of Scottish Government investment and up to £25 million of European funding to help young people who are seeking work.

I assure Bob Doris that we are making every effort to avoid duplication, which means that our money can go further and support more young people towards and into work. I will make a point that may sound political, but which is actually pragmatic: we could do far more for our young people if skills and employability were the preserve of this Parliament.

In contrast to Dr Allan, who has a self-expressed passion for languages, I was encouraged to do art instead of languages at school. I was also encouraged to do cooking instead of science, but perhaps that is a story for another debate. Like many other members who participated in the debate, when I look back on my education I very much regret my lack of application and, indeed, the lack of encouragement to pursue—or the discouragement from—learning a language. However, looking forward as a mother of a wee boy who will start primary 1 later this year, I am very much enthused by the prospect that, in time, the education that my son and thousands of children like him will receive will include active encouragement to apply themselves to learning not just one language, but two. It is quite clear from the debate that that ambition for Scotland’s children is shared across the chamber and across the political divide. I regret to say that the Government will not be supporting the amendments of Liz Smith and Neil Findlay; I do so with a heavy heart. That is because neither amendment reflects the comprehensive and considered comments that those members made during the debate. As the Labour amendment seeks to delete the part of the motion from “supports”, it supports nothing. The Conservative amendment focuses primarily on foreign language assistants. I make it clear that foreign language assistants are important. They add to teaching, they help children to become fluent, they can bring a language alive and they can contribute to learning across the curriculum. However, foreign language assistants are just one element of our policy; the introduction of the 1+2 model is not dependent on them.

What I dispute is the idea that the policy will stand or fall on foreign language assistants. We can agree that they are a valuable addition to the skills and expertise of teaching staff and that they complement the work that should be being done under curriculum for excellence. I would have hoped that members across the chamber would welcome Dr Allan’s announcement that an additional £4 million will be provided in 2013-14, on top of the £4 million that is already in the system.

Like me, Mr Findlay has been in the chamber all morning, so he will have heard Dr Allan’s extensive remarks about how we will take forward the funding and the planning of the programme. I would have hoped that Mr Findlay and others would recognise that this Government has had the courage and the honesty to provide an honest critique of the position that we start from as we seek to achieve our ambition for children to speak two languages in addition to their mother tongue. Before I respond to the substantial points that other members have made during the debate, in my capacity as the Minister for Youth Employment, I want to reinforce Dr Allan’s central message. In essence, that message is that, in today’s globalised world, learning other languages is more important than ever and that our commitment to our long-term ambition will maximise the opportunities for young people to learn languages. As Stuart McMillan pointed out, multilingual youngsters have a competitive advantage. For example, I am acutely aware that many major international hotel groups are reluctant to recruit on to their trainee management programmes young people who are not multilingual, because they want to have the opportunity to deploy their young recruits in other parts of the world. I am aware that successive CBI surveys have pointed to the concerns that some employers have about the lack of language skills in the workforce. The link between language skills, employability and the corresponding economic benefits is obvious. If we want to compete, we need to show the rest of the world that Scotland is, indeed, open for business. We need a workforce with the right linguistic skills of confidence and the ability to communicate, and outward-looking individuals who understand and are tolerant of difference.

Absolutely, and I hope that Mr Robertson welcomes the Government’s commitment to treat BSL as a language and not just as a mode of communication. While I am talking about skills and employability, I want to take advantage of the opportunity offered by the recent media commentary on our young people’s employability and skills. To be absolutely clear, young people are the future of this country. They are part of the solution and not part of a problem. Our young people will help us to grow our economy and to grow as a nation. They have every right to expect an education system that will enable them to compete effectively at home and abroad. Liam McArthur is absolutely right on that point. Our young people should look at the learning of all languages as an entitlement and not just as an added extra. Many members have spoken about the economic cost to this county, of in excess of £500 million, because we do not have suitable linguistic skills. Many members have also rightly spoken about how learning a foreign language is complementary to understanding our own language better, and vice versa. Dave Thompson spoke eloquently about Gaelic-medium education and how that enables young people to be fleet of foot in learning many different languages. Marco Biagi and Claudia Beamish talked about how learning cannot be compartmentalised and how adults must lead by example. On that note, I encourage Graeme Dey and others and say that, despite their age, they too can lead by example. It is never too late to learn. It is also important to recognise that all children have the opportunity to learn a language. Maureen Watt spoke well about that when she made the connection between language and football, particularly for boys. Recently I had the privilege of visiting Glencryan school in Cumbernauld, which is a school for children who have learning disabilities. Despite their difficulties, those children are also learning languages in the context of the world of work. As well as learning employability skills in the school’s restaurant, they are also learning some modern languages, which will enhance their employability in the local hospitality sector. Linda Fabiani made a useful contribution during which she spoke about Scots being the world’s best diplomats. I might have been sitting in this chamber for too long but that is not something that I have previously been informed about. I thank Kezia Dugdale for the information on European funding. She will know that the Government always takes an interest in European funding and that, recently, we have had some success in unearthing an additional £25 million from the European social fund for young people. Liam McArthur, Maureen Watt and Sandra White also spoke about further and higher education. They are absolutely correct that those sectors need to complement what is currently happening or will be happening in schools. We need that continuity to build on the curriculum for excellence. I assure Sandra White and Hanzala Malik that the Scottish funding council is monitoring language provision in the college and university sector. I am keen on us improving and getting more connectivity between the worlds of education and work if we are going to take advantage of the economic opportunities that lie ahead of us. Dr Allan began the debate by saying that we need to create a cultural and educational environment in which multilingualism is the norm. We are right to be ambitious for our children and young people. We need to be bold and embrace the opportunity for change, and redress the situation in which our young people are losing out. We need to boost our children’s language skills over the next decade if we are to have any prospect of improving their life chances, as well as the economic performance of this country.

Opportunities for all is the Scottish Government’s policy for ensuring that there is an offer of learning or training for every 16 to 19-year-old in Scotland who is currently not in education, employment or work. It brings together a range of existing national and local offers in a coherent way, which will better support our young people’s participation in post-16 learning or training and, ultimately, employment, through appropriate intervention and support. We are prioritising provision for 16 to 19-year-olds in higher and further education, national training programmes such as the modern apprenticeship and get ready for work programmes, and a range of local provision to support young people to progress toward and into work.

Mr FitzPatrick touches on an important point. A sense of progression and achievement for our young people has to be at the heart of everything we do. Let us look at our modern apprenticeship programme, for example. All apprentices in Scotland must be employed, which means that apprenticeships are directly linked to real and sustainable job opportunities. The modern apprenticeship programme is shaped and influenced by growth sectors, so there is a clear link between provision and the economy. Most important is that modern apprenticeships are more than just jobs; they are the first step in careers. Much else in our national training programmes has work experience at its heart.

My concern about Mr Findlay’s request is that he is asking me to duplicate something that the United Kingdom Government took away. I know the local project to which he refers, and I have agreed to meet it in my capacity as a constituency MSP. I think that my reply to Mr Findlay was helpful, but I have no doubt that we will continue to have a discourse on the matter. On this occasion—I wish no disrespect to Mr Findlay—it is more important that I meet the organisation than that I meet him.

Colleges will play a key role in ensuring that Scotland has the skilled workforce to capitalise on our renewable energy ambitions. In recognition of that, no fewer than 22 colleges have already signed up to the recently introduced energy skills partnership that we and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council are funding to the tune of £500,000 over the next three years, and which will provide the industry with a one-stop shop for energy skills needs and ensure that those needs are met as fully and as efficiently as possible.

Annabelle Ewing raises a key issue. The Whitlock centre makes a huge contribution to the renewables sector’s skills needs and, as Annabelle Ewing has rightly pointed out, it sits very much at the hub of Carnegie College’s acclaimed engineering facility at Rosyth. The college is making a leading contribution on the issue; for example, it piloted the modern apprenticeship programme in wind turbine operation and maintenance that is now being used across the UK, and it is introducing a diploma in the subject. As a result, the college is well positioned to support the investment that is being made in Scotland by companies such as Samsung, which in February announced that it will locate its first European offshore wind project at the Fife energy park in Methil. The key purposes of our support to Scottish colleges through the energy skills partnership are to raise industry awareness, to map provision and to provide continuing professional development for lecturers, all of which should ensure that we have the skills for the jobs of today and tomorrow.

As we speak, 22 colleges across Scotland are signed up to the energy skills partnership, which has received £300,000 in funding from the Scottish funding council and £200,000 from the Scottish Government. Every college that is a member contributes £5,000 per annum. The partnership has significant resources at its disposal. I appreciate the importance of ports and the communities around ports, and the part that they have to play in the offshore energy industry, so if Claudia Beamish has specific ideas about how the partnership can best serve Eyemouth and her constituency, we will look at that and get her a more specific response.

We have now defined, and announced publicly, the regions in which colleges will be grouped. Some regions will comprise a single existing college. Some are likely to become single college regions after mergers take place. Other regions will include more than one college. We are considering the form that structures should take in different regions to ensure they are accountable, meet regional need and support effective, efficient and coherent learning. To support that, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council is developing outcome agreements with all our college regions for the 2012-13 academic year. We will make our plans clear before the summer recess.

Yes—I agree with that. We cannot lose sight of the fact that our ambitious reform agenda is about meeting the needs of young people better. We must focus on getting young people into work. Learners and communities in the college regions are all different and, as the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong learning has made clear, one size does not fit all. He is carefully considering the added value to any existing structures.

I assure Mr McArthur that the purpose of college reform is to ensure a more strategic delivery, and not to depart from local provision. I appreciate that in the Highlands and Islands and the area that Mr McArthur represents, local provision is particularly important, given the extremes of rurality that students and learners have to overcome to participate in learning and to move into the job market. Mr Russell is having an on-going and in-depth dialogue with a range of college principals, so it might be more appropriate for Mr Russell to inform Liam McArthur of discussions in relation to his region.

Ms Smith raises an interesting point, which I am sure the cabinet secretary will be interested in. I know from my experience in West Lothian that schools are key partners when it comes to the future of our local college and what we do with it.

The Scottish Government encourages universities to work with businesses in Scotland to ensure that their degree provision is relevant to business need. New graduates are advised to work with their university careers advisers, who offer a range of services to help graduates to find employment in their chosen field.

Whether a young person is a school leaver, a participant in a training programme or a further or higher education graduate, we want to get them into work that is suitable to take full advantage of their skills and qualifications. In addition to being determined to tackle unemployment, we want to tackle full on underemployment and displacement in the labour market, particularly among those who do not have a degree. The universities sector benefits from £1 billion of investment by the Government, therefore we expect the sector to do everything that it can to ensure that young graduates have the right skills. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has produced its “Learning to Work Two” action plan, which includes a number of recommendations to ensure that employability is embedded within all learning and teaching.

We are committed to improving labour market conditions in Scotland and are continuing to liaise with representatives from the higher education sector to support the excellent work being carried out in conjunction with employers from all of Scotland’s key industries, to encourage the provision of good-quality graduate-level opportunities. We are also continuing to provide support for graduate placement programmes. For example, over the past two years, we have provided funding of almost £350,000 to the highly successful adopt-an-intern programme run by the Centre for Scottish Public Policy. The programme matches graduates with businesses offering paid, meaningful and career-enhancing internships in Scotland. Nearly 61 per cent of the centre’s interns have since moved into full-time employment—almost half remaining with the original host organisation.

No learning is ever wasted; all learning has a value. The key purpose of my appointment is to ensure the connectivity between the world of education and the world of work. We want to prepare our young graduates for work.

I last met the chair and the chief executive of Skills Development Scotland on 29 February, and I have continued to have regular phone contact with them since then. We discussed a wide range of issues relating to the training and employability of young people.

I am disappointed that Mr Simpson sees the change as somewhat radical. He is talking about the introduction of myworldofwork.co.uk. We all know that our young people are in many ways far in advance of members in their use of technology. It is absolutely imperative to see myworldofwork.co.uk as an addition to face-to-face services. In a global sense, the reform and modernisation of the careers information and advice service seek to enable talented front-line staff to spend more time face to face with the young people who need the services most. If I can provide Mr Simpson with any information, I am happy to do so.

Through the opportunities for all initiative, we will ensure that every 16 to 19-year-old in Scotland who is not in work, a modern apprenticeship or education is offered a place in learning or training. On top of the £1.8 billion that has already been invested in post-16 education and training, we are providing a further £30 million over the next three years specifically for youth employment. That investment has been bolstered yet further with £5 million to support young people into the opportunities that are linked to major cultural and sporting events that will be hosted in Scotland in the coming years. That will be part of the Scotland-wide legacy of the 2014 Commonwealth games. Greenock and Inverclyde will benefit from that investment and will receive about £105,000 specifically to further support the delivery of the opportunities for all initiative, including its delivery through 16-plus learning choices and activity agreements.

I assure Mr McNeil that no one in the Government underestimates the plight of young unemployed Scots in Inverclyde or elsewhere in Scotland and that we are determined to improve the life chances of all Scots. There was a transparent rationale for allocating that particular strand of funding, which was based on the number of young unemployed Scots and the unemployment rate among young Scots, with a correlation to long-term unemployment. The six local authorities concerned are national hot spots for unemployment. I hear what Mr McNeil says about the 905 young people in Inverclyde. However, North Ayrshire has a claimant rate of 14.8 per cent and more than 1,700 young unemployed people, and Glasgow has 6,865 young unemployed people. In my role, with national responsibilities, I have to look at the whole of Scotland. It is not unreasonable of me to target resources where we have not only the highest number of young unemployed people but the highest claimant count. I have no doubt that I will have an opportunity to engage with Mr McNeil in Parliament and in Inverclyde to discuss issues relating to his area.

Some local authorities have retained their welfare rights services. It is for Mr McMillan to make his point about that. On the overall support that we provide to young people the length and breadth of Scotland, in the forthcoming financial year, £18 million of additional funding is available to support young unemployed Scots, £9 million of which is nationwide and £9 million of which is targeted geographically. That is on top of a more universal provision, such as the £60 million that we spend on attaining 25,000 modern apprenticeships—a target that we have reached and which I am sure we all welcome.

I discussed the work experience element of the United Kingdom Government’s youth contract during the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee meeting on 29 February. I do not think that all unpaid work experience is bad or negative, but I am clear that young people should not be exploited. Work experience must be meaningful for young people so that they want to do it and are able to benefit from it. The Scottish Government has an interest in ensuring that all aspects of the youth contract work well in Scotland. If there are issues that we need to articulate to the UK Government, whether they are about what young people or employers say to us, we must represent them and get improvements in the system. In that regard, I welcome Chris Grayling’s decision last week to withdraw the threat of benefits sanctions for young people leaving work experience placements early.

I think that Mr Harvie has misunderstood my contribution to the debate last week. Mr Harvie asked me to duplicate or replicate the scheme that the UK has on offer through the work experience programme part of the youth contract, to which I replied that it would be living in la-la land to expect me as a minister in a devolved Government to do so. I am not prepared to say categorically that all unpaid work experience is bad. The schemes that the Government supports through the Centre for Scottish Public Policy and TalentScotland are paid internship schemes. That is to be valued. On our commitment to young people on get ready for work training schemes, for example, they are paid a training allowance. The fundamental issue is that if welfare benefits and tax had been devolved to this Parliament, we would most certainly have a system in which all our young people would want to participate, and we would also have a system in which we could ensure that work most certainly pays.

Another point that I made very clearly at the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee meeting last week was that the Government’s position is that employers should not in any circumstances take young people on work experience at the expense of recruiting young people. I could not have been clearer about that. That is one of the reasons why I said at the meeting that it would certainly be in the interests of the United Kingdom Government and young people in Scotland if the UK Government had fruitful dialogue with employers and trade unions to ensure that there is no displacement in the labour market.

In Scotland, all apprentices must be employed, which means that apprenticeship opportunities are directly linked to employers and to the labour market. In order to support that demand-led approach, employers can feed into the development of modern apprenticeship frameworks through sector skills councils; they can have direct responsibility for the selection and recruitment of their apprentices; they can determine that an appropriate and relevant training provider trains their apprentices; they can choose specific training enhancements for their employees; and they can deliver the on-the-job entitlement of their apprentices’ training.

As part of the process to approve frameworks for apprenticeships, the modern apprenticeship group is working to ensure that the sector skills councils improve the number and range of employers that they consult as part of the apprenticeship framework development process. My view is that it is vital that the apprenticeship frameworks are relevant to employers, regardless of their size. That priority can be reaffirmed to the modern apprenticeship group. If Ms Fabiani writes to me giving specific examples of difficulties with companies in her area, I would be delighted to look at the matter. I extend that offer to any member.

Ensuring that our young people have the right skills to meet the short and long-term needs of Scottish employers and the wider economy is a key aim of our work in reforming post-16 education. In particular, we are working closely with employers and employer bodies to determine how we can better reflect their ambitions in the provision that is delivered across the learning landscape.

Yes, I do. Margaret Burgess is right to showcase the innovative partnership that is taking place in her constituency between Irvine royal academy and the University of Glasgow. It will secure for parents and pupils in North Ayrshire the benefits of some cutting-edge practice that exists elsewhere in the world, for example in the United States and Australia. That aligns very much with the well-received Donaldson report on career-long teacher learning and will have far-reaching benefits for our children.

This afternoon, I have a meeting with the joint skills committee of Skills Development Scotland and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. That is about ensuring that the various sector skills councils throughout Scotland meet the needs of learners first and foremost and meet the needs of employers. In my view, the landscape is currently cluttered. My priority is ensuring that the precious funding that the Scottish Government has goes to the front line and young people.

I am happy to look very closely at Mr Hume’s concerns on behalf of his local college and the young people in his constituency. I am very interested in the construction industry—after all, it is an important industry for our young people—but I ask the member to bear in mind the fundamental point of post-16 reform and the regionalisation of colleges, which is to better meet the needs of our young people and employers and to ensure connectivity between the world of work and the world of education.

I hope that today’s debate is another critical step in the development of not only the Government’s but the Parliament’s—and indeed the nation’s—response to rising youth unemployment. When I published the draft youth employment strategy last week at the specially convened national economic forum, I made it perfectly clear that I would bring the strategy to Parliament for debate and, of course, scrutiny. The strategy encapsulates how the Government has prioritised youth unemployment since the economic downturn in 2008 and how we will continue to move forward, develop fresh impetus and ensure an all-Government and all-Scotland response to what is undoubtedly a massive national challenge. I have no doubt that all members can bear witness to the pernicious impact of youth unemployment on families, on communities and on our country, and not least on the life chances of our young people. Our objectives are clear: we want to help young people to get into work, to sustain that work and to progress in the workplace. No young person should leave school, college or university simply to become an unemployment statistic. In essence, the youth employment strategy will build and develop on our post-16 education and training. We are not starting from a standing start, nor are we reinventing the wheel, but there is room—as always—for innovation. The strategy outlines a whole-Government approach, as boosting youth employment is core Government business across all portfolios. It is my job to ensure that I knit all that together. The strategy will demonstrate our commitment to work with all our partners, including the United Kingdom Government, and to marshal efforts across the public, private and voluntary sectors. We recognise that not all young people are the same and that we need a range of interventions to meet the needs of those young people who are furthest from and those who are nearest to the labour market. Fundamentally, the draft youth employment strategy makes clear that the Government is committed to responding head-on to the challenge that we face. We will do so through an all-Government, all-Scotland approach that involves everyone who can make a difference. Our investment of more than £1.5 billion a year in post-16 education and training is critically important in helping our young people to develop the skills and attributes that they need. Our additional investment of £30 million to boost youth employment will provide vital support. However, that is only the start. The strategy outlines the ways in which I will focus my efforts, working hand in glove with other ministers. Those opportunities include working with Alex Neil to maximise the benefits of capital investment for young people; working with Derek Mackay and Fergus Ewing to galvanise the public and private sectors towards supporting young people into work; and working with Shona Robison to take advantage of large-scale events such as the Commonwealth games to provide our young people with meaningful experience to improve their prospects. I reassure the Parliament that that is only the tip of the iceberg. I am absolutely committed to getting into the guts of all aspects of Government and more than willing to come back to Parliament to report on progress. It is fair to say that, apart from young people themselves, employers are the single most important group. We need employers, large and small, to create opportunities—preferably work—for young people. There was significant employer representation at the best-ever-attended national economic forum last week. I have now had the opportunity to meet the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, the Federation of Small Businesses and industry leaders groups. I will continue to work with employers on how we can make it easier for them to take on young people. I will shortly lead a number of regional youth employment events, at which employer input is essential. The Scottish Chambers of Commerce has agreed to help to facilitate those events, which will ensure good participation from public, private and voluntary sectors at a local level. I have made it a priority to consult young people themselves. Indeed, one young apprentice whom I met in Asda this morning suggested to me that I should use the £30 million of opportunities for all funding to build three supermarkets. I told him that, although that was an interesting, innovative idea, I was not confident of full parliamentary support for it. Since taking up post, I have had the great privilege of meeting a number of young apprentices, young people on national training programmes and young people who seek such opportunities. At last week’s meeting of the cross-party group on children and young people, a number of young people spoke eloquently about how volunteering can be life changing, as well as expressing their concerns about the impact of welfare reform. Earlier this week, I also met members of the Scottish Youth Parliament, who will, no doubt, be pleased at the good news about student support that was announced in yesterday’s budget. Providing young people with the best start to their working lives is critical to Scotland’s future economic prosperity. Our policies are designed to support that aim. We have announced opportunities for all, which is an unprecedented offer to our young people. Through that programme, we will ensure that every 16 to 19-year-old who is not in work, education or training can secure a place in learning or training. We are committed to creating 25,000 modern apprenticeship opportunities in every year of this session of Parliament.

John Park has a keen interest in this area. He will understand our obvious concern to prioritise the 16 to 19-year-old group. The majority of modern apprenticeship places are for that age group but, hot on the heels of that, we must consider older young people—the 20 to 24-year-old group—particularly care leavers, a group of young people who are close to my heart. We must also, particularly in certain sectors, ensure that there are all-age modern apprenticeship opportunities. I am pleased to say that we have prioritised places for young people in colleges. We are also ensuring that young people who go to university can access a high-quality higher education without running up debts and having to pay for their education. We will continue to modernise the careers services and work with local authorities to complete the national roll-out of activity agreements to support those who are furthest from the labour market. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning is currently leading a reform of the post-16 education and training system. That reform is designed to ensure not only that all parts of the system are geared towards helping young people into sustainable employment and developing their careers but that they respond to the current and future workforce needs of our employers and economy. In December, the First Minister announced an additional £30 million to boost youth employment. I am determined to ensure that all of our investment in youth employment works as hard as possible. We already have strong support in place for our young people. I want to build on that and take forward the best elements of some of the programmes that we have introduced. Community jobs Scotland draws on and improves on similar schemes such as the future jobs fund by providing employability training for participants. Although the scheme has been running only since August, it has already had a life-changing impact on a number of young people. It is important that we build on the success of the initial pilot of community jobs Scotland within the resources that we have available. That is why I plan to allocate £6 million of the additional £30 million to support a continuation of community jobs Scotland in 2012-13. Beyond community jobs Scotland, our social enterprises and specialist third sector organisations are well placed to provide strong support into jobs for young people across the youth unemployment cohort. That is why I plan to launch a £2.5 million challenge fund to support that type of innovative work. Organisations will be invited to submit proposals for 2012-13 in the weeks ahead. The key criteria for the fund will be a demonstrable track record of success, strong links with employers and innovative approaches that are not replicated elsewhere in the system. Local authorities and community planning partnerships are at the forefront of supporting young people into work. I have seen a range of what is already happening across Scotland to connect young people directly to local labour markets. That is in addition to the work that is going on to support those who are at greatest risk of disengaging through more choices, more chances and the national roll-out of activity agreements. I have had positive discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and will continue to work with our partners in local government to identify how we can do more together to support young people. The current economic conditions are extremely challenging. With stronger economic powers, the Parliament could do more to create the conditions for job creation that our young people need. Nonetheless, I assure Parliament that I will not lie idle but will maximise what powers we have at our disposal to ensure that every young person in Scotland gets the best start to their working life. Since taking on my current portfolio, I have been heartened, encouraged and, at times, overwhelmed by support from a wide range of people and organisations across the public, private and voluntary sectors. There is a demonstrable will to make a difference, and it will only be by working with committed people across Scotland that we will reduce youth unemployment. Our young people deserve no less. I move, That the Parliament believes that the all-government, all-Scotland approach at the centre of Scotland’s Youth Employment Strategy is vital to provide opportunities for Scotland’s young people to enter the workplace, and welcomes the allocation of £30 million of additional investment over and above the Scottish Government’s annual investment of over £1.5 billion in post-16 education and training.

I state for the record that, as I have repeatedly said on the airwaves, we most certainly will not dismiss one third of those young people—the 35,000 who are students in full-time education. One reason among many is that, as we have seen, if we do not get graduates into full-time employment in graduate-level jobs, that causes significant displacement in the labour market. I, for one, do not need Ms Dugdale on my tail to ensure that I pay all recognition to each and every one of those 105,000 young Scots.

I am interested in Ms Dugdale’s commitment to full employment. Of course I believe that our young people have the right to work, but I am interested to know how Ms Dugdale proposes that we can achieve full employment under the powers of a devolved Parliament.

When I attended a recent meeting of the British-Irish Council in Dublin at which Nick Clegg, the Deputy Prime Minister, was present, I said to him and the others who were assembled that the Scottish Government wants to ensure that the youth contract is a success in Scotland and that we will work to ensure that there is no needless duplication.

The debate has been a somewhat curious mix of the collegiate and the constructive, but it has inevitably dipped now and again into feisty exchanges. I suppose that we are all politicians and we just cannae help ourselves. I have enjoyed every member’s speech. Maybe I did not agree with every word that every member uttered but, overall, every member who spoke did so positively. There have been many suggestions and many invitations for me to take members up on. I am glad that the regional events on youth employment have been welcomed, and I am keen to have member involvement in them. I am never one to deny the breadth or depth of a problem. I think that the fact that 105,000 young Scots between the ages of 16 and 24 are unemployed speaks for itself—it shouts loudly. It is not possible to diminish or repackage that fact in any way. I reassure Kezia Dugdale that there are no hidden statistics. We capture the over-18s who do not present to the job centre, because our measures are based on the labour force survey, which relies on young people declaring that they are unemployed. That is why the unemployment rate for young people between the ages of 16 and 24 is 24.7 per cent, not the 6.6 per cent claimant count. I believe that Skills Development Scotland does a good job in tracking young people who do not find positive destinations. I am clear about the fact that, if we are to overcome what I call a national challenge—others can call it a national crisis, but at the end of the day that is semantics—when we talk about young people and how we will overcome the challenges that they face and improve their prospects for the future, our narrative must be solution focused and positive. Therefore, I have difficulty with some of the language and the discourse around the idea of a lost generation. I will not lie down to the politics of despair because, fundamentally, I do not believe that there is any member of the Parliament, regardless of our political differences, who will stand by and allow there to be another lost generation. I know that across the chamber, regardless of party politics, there is a collective memory of the 1980s and I, for one, am not going back there. If Mary Scanlon will forgive me for dipping into feisty political comments, I will not take any lectures from the Conservatives on youth or adult unemployment. At a basic level, the purpose of the youth employment strategy is to ensure that across Government, and across the public and private sectors, we are all on the same page, are all facing in the right direction and are all determined to do the right thing—to defend our young people. The strategy is not a glossy document, nor is it “War and Peace”—that is deliberate. The same is true of the Government’s motion. I deliberately penned a motion that was straight to the point, in the hope, I suppose, that members across the chamber would welcome that. Normally, Government motions are criticised for being long-winded and for bragging about all our achievements. For the record, I could oblige by mentioning the 300,000 training opportunities that the Government has delivered, the 46,500 training opportunities that we will deliver year in, year out for the lifetime of the session and, not least, the 25,000 modern apprenticeships, the 14,500 training places and the 7,000 flexible training opportunities, as well as the opportunities that will be created by community jobs Scotland.

I am pleased to tell Mr Findlay that I am always delighted for members of any political party to write to me about the specifics of what is happening in their community, not least when it is about the constituency that I represent. Mr Findlay will be aware that the project in question suffered not at the hand of this Government, but at the hand of a Government elsewhere, which took away the funding. However, he should not worry—the letter is, indeed, in the post. My issue with the Labour Party amendment, at a practical level, is that it deletes half of my factual and straight-to-the-point motion and then largely reiterates what is already in the youth employment strategy. I would have preferred a more collegiate, upfront recognition of the fact that, despite the bluster that we all participate in, we will stand shoulder to shoulder with our young people and do the right thing.

I welcome Kezia Dugdale’s constructive contribution. I would have been more inclined to support the Labour Party’s amendment if it had included some of the positive suggestions by its back benchers. Siobhan McMahon spoke passionately about her concerns and her interest in young people seeking work who are on the autistic spectrum. Her point is that we could do far more to better link the good work that is articulated in the autism strategy with the youth employment strategy—[Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. This Government—and, I hope, this Parliament—is in this for the long haul. I am aware that, when all-age unemployment was at 4 per cent, youth unemployment was at 14 per cent. We should not allow there to be any collective amnesia about another issue that was touched on at the start of the debate, which was that, in 1999, when the Parliament opened, youth unemployment was 64,000 and, in 2007, before this Government’s predecessors left, it was 62,000. I hope that the Labour Party can forgive my scepticism about its talk about full employment, because no Labour Government—either in Scotland or in the United Kingdom—has ever delivered full employment, either for young people or anyone else. [Interruption.] Those Labour Party front benchers who are heckling from the back of the chamber and spend more time attacking an SNP Scottish Government than they do fighting the Tories will probably find that it will be they who will be spending more time on the back benches, not I. We will all participate in the political bluster, because we all feel passionate about our country. However, at a fundamental level, I believe that our young people have the right to work, and I believe that they will have the right to vote for a Parliament that can deliver that right to work. I will take no lessons from members of the Opposition who complain about the actions or inaction of this Government, when they would rather have us sit back and quietly accept our pocket money from Westminster or try to fight for the economic interests of our young people with one hand tied behind our back. On that note, I will take my seat, with an assurance to Kenneth Macintosh that I very much look forward to becoming, on behalf of this Parliament, that expert on procurement who will be absolutely dedicated to shaking down every available opportunity for our young people.

Since national guidance on developing skills for learning, life and work was published in 2009, considerable progress has been made, especially in secondary schools, in delivering the entitlement of every child and young person to have opportunities to develop their skills for learning, life and work. The Scottish Government and Education Scotland are supporting further progress by regularly publishing examples and case studies of good practice in the development of young people’s skills.

Yes—the Scottish Government indeed supports the voting rights of 16 and 17-year-olds. As someone with a portfolio interest in the prospects of young people, it seems to me absurd that we are denying 16 and 17-year-olds the right to vote at a time when we expect them to take on the responsibilities of adulthood such as work, paying tax, serving in the forces and getting married.

I thank Mr Bibby for his question, but I think that it would be more prudent for me to ask Dr Allan to reply to him in detail on that point.

It is important that, once we get our young people into modern apprenticeships, we do our best to keep them in their apprenticeship. I hope that the member will be encouraged by the overall achievement rate of the modern apprenticeship programme in Scotland, which is 71 per cent, having risen from 52 per cent in 2001-02. Notwithstanding that, there has been important follow-up work from the making training work better consultation. Skills Development Scotland has been asked to look at particular sectors where drop-out rates are higher. We will of course look at a range of ideas with regard to that.

The draft budget for Skills Development Scotland for 2012-13 is £176.4 million, which is a reduction in year 1 of 2.7 per cent.

The disabled students allowance is available to cover the cost of additional educational support related to a particular course of study, and assessments are carried out on that basis. The support is specific to the individual and tailored to their particular educational needs, whereas assessments for incapacity benefit or disability living allowance are more concerned with medical issues related to personal care or mobility.

I am aware of the particular challenges in engaging with young people with developmental disorders, whether Asperger’s or autism, and in ensuring that they get the right support at the right time. With regard to the assessments, I stress that there is nothing to fear: they are very much about the accredited assessor sitting down with the young person and agreeing what support they need while on their course to enable them to achieve their qualification. However, I am more than happy to contact universities and colleges to ensure that the assessments and processes are being presented in the right way. If there is anything that we can do in and around the process to make it more user friendly for young people, we will happily pursue that.

All parents should have the choice of a range of high-quality and flexible childcare, and we are working with all sectors and partners to increase the capacity, range and flexibility of childcare services. The majority of out-of-school care services are run at a grass-roots, community level, so I am delighted that we have announced the first allocation from our £50 million contribution to the early years change fund to provide £1.5 million per annum over the next three years to create a new communities and families fund, which will support local communities in, and give them a direct route for, deciding what services are available locally.

Mr Scott and I have, indeed, been in correspondence on the matter. I welcome the fact that he recognises the need for the workforce that works with children in out-of-school provision to be adequately qualified to ensure that our children get the best start in life. I should also say to Mr Scott that we consulted extensively on the issue, and that 60 per cent of those who responded agreed that the level 9 qualification was appropriate. Indeed, a further 18 per cent suggested that a qualification of a higher nature was required. As the member is aware, the care inspectorate is working hard to support smaller services so that we can be flexible. There is the opportunity for smaller services to share resources. We will keep a watching brief on that because we want to do all that we can to support the out-of-school care network.

Like Mr Macintosh I read with great interest those figures from the care inspectorate. No clear narrative explains the figures, other than the fact that the nought-to-15 population is decreasing throughout Scotland. However, the figures also showed that the use of nurseries and childminders had increased. With regard to out-of-school care, where that care provided an additional service, such as a breakfast club or a holiday play scheme, numbers had increased. The voluntary sector is expanding in the out-of-school network. Nonetheless, this is a big agenda that is very much at the heart of all the Government’s work in the early years. The early years task force will meet for the first time next week.

There have been no meetings specifically on the provision of additional support for learning in schools, but Scottish Government officials meet as required with Glasgow City Council to discuss a wide range of issues.

As Mr Dornan will appreciate, that is entirely a matter for Glasgow City Council. Any school closure is difficult and emotive, not least when it involves an additional support for learning school. The challenge for us all in local and national Government is to ensure that we take great care and engage in meaningful consultation with parents, who are vital partners. Mr Dornan will be aware that any future school closures will have to meet the requirements of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010. The act requires education authorities to consult on the proposed closure of any school, which includes the preparation of a consultation paper and a specific consultation period. He will also be aware that Scottish ministers have a specific role in issuing call-in notices.

Thank you for your generosity, Presiding Officer. As I am sure we are all aware, this week is national adoption week, which aims to raise awareness of the benefits that come with adoption, not only for the life chances of children, but for the adoptive parents. Like many members, I am a parent—a parent first, and a politician second—and, like all parents, my first priority is to provide a secure, stable and nurturing home for my child. I understand the importance of that for his development and future attainment—in short, for his life chances. We might not always realise it but, in each of our interactions with our children, we lay the building blocks for their future and help them to attain their potential. From the moment they are born, as well as the cornerstones of being safe, nurtured and healthy, children need real-life play to develop their physical co-ordination and control; a mum and dad to talk to them about everyday events to develop their language and social skills; and stories, rhymes and songs to lay the foundation for success at school. That is the focus of our work in the early years. However, not all children are as fortunate as ours. Last year, nearly 16,000 children and young people were looked after by our local authorities. Through no fault of their own, those children found themselves in a position in which their birth family could not care for them. They are Scotland’s most vulnerable children and they are the responsibility of us all. We should take our role as corporate parents as seriously as we take our responsibilities as birth parents. As I said in the Parliament last week, “if something is not good enough for our own sons and daughters, it is not good enough for any child or young person growing up in Scotland.”—[Official Report, 27 October 2011; c 2777.] It is not acceptable for children to have extended periods in the care system as a result of the bureaucracy of process. Getting it right for looked-after children should not involve multiple placements. Getting it right for looked-after children means placing their needs, welfare and rights at the heart of every decision that is made, as we do for our own children. Improving life chances for looked-after children is a priority of the Government. As the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning recently acknowledged, it has been a priority for every Administration. We have come a long way since devolution, which is evidence of the consensus in the Parliament on this important area of work, but there is still so much more to do. We have considered the processes and made improvements to secure permanence for children, but we must now address the time that those processes take so that we can secure placements more quickly. In 2006, we considered the Adoption and Children (Scotland) Bill, which was brought to us by Peter Peacock, the then Minister for Education and Young People. Through that bill, we introduced a new flexible court order—the permanence order—that can be tailored to meet the individual needs of a child and to provide them with security, stability and greater predictability in their lives. The Scottish Government brought the legislation into effect in 2009. Along with it, we introduced legislation that for the first time provided recognition for kinship carers, who can also provide stability, security and predictability in the lives and experiences of looked-after children. Parliament has come together to debate the role of kinship carers and the support that they receive. We have discussed the work in which the Scottish Government is involved to secure access to benefits and support for such carers.

As Ms Grant is well aware, local authorities are best placed to make decisions about financial support for kinship carers and children at local level. That is an important part of local democracy that we should support and cherish. However, we must also acknowledge that kinship care is distinct from foster care; fundamentally, it is a type of family care that families have provided for generations. I am sure that we can all look at our family’s history and see examples of kinship care. This Government has done more than anyone else to support kinship carers and we will continue to engage constructively with the Westminster Government, particularly on the issue of welfare reform. No matter where we stand on these issues politically, we all agree that kinship care is another important option in providing permanent care for our children, which is made possible by the looked-after children regulations and permanence orders, both of which are unique to Scotland. I very much cherish the consensus that we have on our looked-after children. I, for one, will not be using our most vulnerable children as a political football. However, if I need to ruffle a few feathers to make progress for our looked-after children, I will do so, because this Government believes that, in partnership, we have to support and challenge one another in this Parliament, in local and national Government and within the voluntary sector. The children looked after statistics show that although fewer children are being received into care, they are coming into care younger and they are being looked after for much longer. Although aspects of that show that we are getting it right for more of our young people—in the sense that more of those at risk are being identified younger and earlier—we now need to focus on the overall care journey and the length of time that it takes. I am sure that we all recognise that formal attainment—and securing improvements in a child’s life chances—are possible only with the secure attachments that a safe, stable and nurturing home environment can provide. Appropriate, timely and child-centred care planning will ensure that such placements are achieved. However, we will all have examples of where intervention could have happened earlier. That issue was highlighted in the “Care and Permanence Planning for Looked After Children in Scotland” report, which was published on 20 June 2011 by the Scottish Children’s Reporter Administration. The report found that children are still waiting for a significant period of time in a system that should be working with their needs and rights at the centre. Two years might not seem long for adults, but it is an eternity for children. Some might say that the timescale is justifiable, but it can never be acceptable for a child to wait more than 10 years for a permanent home, nor can it be acceptable for the majority of children to have waited more than four years, as the report shows they do.

I am sure that Mr Paterson agrees that we can achieve thorough and timely assessments. I can imagine how adoptions, which birth parents often contest in the courts, can take two years, but other options to achieve permanence for children—such as foster care or permanence orders—do not need to take two years. Across the system, we must remember that time is of the essence: our children grow and develop from the day that they are born and have only one childhood. The SCRA report is important. I published the Scottish Government’s response to it on 21 June, outlining our plans to address the issues that it raised. Our aim is nothing less than a radical shift in care planning towards fewer placements for children, early permanence decisions for every child and a system that puts the child at the centre. That offers our children in care the best possible chance of securing an adoptive or permanent placement. Our response lays the building blocks for the care system to provide every child with a safe, stable and nurturing home. A child’s journey through care starts with an assessment of parents’ capacity to provide the consistent care that a child needs to attain their potential. Therefore, we recognise the need for more robust assessment tools to determine parental capacity and to identify the support that parents need to provide that care for their child. Through the work that the early years framework supports, we are committed to identifying children who are at risk and to taking steps to prevent that risk from materialising. We are committed to taking effective action to help parents, families and communities to develop their own solutions, using accessible, high-quality public services—parenting classes; therapeutic support for parents who experience drug and alcohol problems; and support with health and disability issues, to name a few. We want to support every child in their whole journey through care, the transitions that they experience and beyond. We need to ensure that appropriate decisions are made quickly and that support is in place to provide permanent care for children who cannot live with their birth parents. Our response to the SCRA report highlights and shares current good practice. We plan to make extensive use of our new centre for excellence for looked-after children, which launched in September, to do that. We are asking the centre to work with our partners to improve the experiences and lives of all looked-after children, their families and care leavers. It will work to ensure that all those who are involved in the care of looked-after children have the appropriate skills, knowledge and support and that any decisions about looked-after children are well evidenced and always have the child’s welfare and rights as their paramount consideration. The Government places great importance on working in partnership to deliver its ambitions for Scotland’s children. We are in a period of engagement with key stakeholders on how to translate the key areas of work into specific activities. I have written to local authorities seeking their involvement in that process. The Scottish Government has started the work to create a more responsive system. I mentioned the centre for excellence, which will be instrumental in future work. We have also created Scotland’s first national adoption register, which is already providing greater opportunities for placing children in stable and permanent families. I urge all local authorities to make a commitment to use it by the end of this year. I ask each one of us, as corporate parents, to challenge local authorities, health services and third sector organisations in our constituencies to engage with the work that is being undertaken. Every organisation that is involved in the lives of looked-after children will have examples of practice that works to promote the wellbeing of the children it serves. Each of us has a duty to help to identify and promote that good practice as widely as possible. I also intend to increase the pace of change. I will ask all local authorities to provide me with their adoption service plans by April 2012. I will expect an ambitious approach and evidence that every local authority has clear plans to increase the number of young people afforded permanence or adoption.

That is an example of the type of work that we hope is evident in the adoption and permanence plans that local authorities will have to provide to me by April 2012. I will be vigilant on that point. As corporate parents, we are all responsible for ensuring that the care system is child centred, provides appropriate and timely decisions, and secures permanent placements as soon as possible. We owe it to looked-after children to ensure that they have access to the opportunities that that can provide. I move, That the Parliament supports the Scottish Government placing the importance of permanence and stability at the heart of its approach to improving the life chances of looked-after children; acknowledges that there is still some delay in the processes as indicated in the Scottish Children’s Reporter’s Administration report, Care and Permanence Planning for Looked After Children in Scotland; welcomes the Scottish Government’s response to the report, which builds on the work of the Looked After Children Strategic Implementation Group, and agrees that a collaborative multi-agency approach to improving the quality of decisions affecting looked-after children finding permanent placements is required.

The tone of this afternoon’s debate has been uncharacteristically consensual, considered and thoughtful, but it has not been without its challenges or the frustrating sense that we can and must do more. I have sensed from members’ contributions that there are some different perspectives on this very complex and emotive issue. I enjoyed the contribution from Claudia Beamish, who brings to the chamber her experience of working with children on the front line. I say to Mary Fee that, as a former prison social worker, I am well versed in the issues that she raised on behalf of children who are affected by imprisonment. Nonetheless, I would be delighted to meet the cross-party group at a time of mutual convenience. No member in the chamber today can fail to have been touched by the personal testimonies from Gil Paterson and Dick Lyle, who made poignant remarks that are very apt given that it is national adoption week. I am glad that Kevin Stewart, among others, is taking seriously his corporate parenting responsibilities to several hundred Aberdeen children. However, I have news for him and for my other colleagues who continue to be local councillors: now that they are in Scotland’s Parliament, they are the corporate parents to 15,892 children. If that does not keep them awake at night, I do not know what will. Annabel Ewing spoke about the need to strike an intricate balance between the rights of children and the rights of parents. In the complex world of legislation, we have competing obligations, but I come down unequivocally on the side of the rights of the child. In doing the right thing by the child, we will make the right decision at the right time for every child. Anne McTaggart raised some important issues in relation to our proposed bill on young people’s rights. However, I say to her that we are starting that process by deliberately placing the responsibility on ministers to have due regard to the UNCRC so that we can lead by example. That is our preamble before we introduce our more expansive all-encompassing children’s services bill. Although there is, as yet, no definitive list of what will be in—or out of—the bill, it gives us a timely opportunity to consider a wide range of measures that will have an impact on the lives of all looked-after children as well as on the lives of children who are not looked after. I am aware of the issue that Liam McArthur raised about the number of children in foster care placements. We are actively looking at that just now. The children’s services bill—if we call it that; we might just call it the children’s bill—will give us opportunities for sharing information, which is very important, particularly in the context of looked-after children and children with additional support needs or disabilities. We will also seek to place a duty on local authorities and health boards to work collaboratively. Kevin Stewart talked about the need to take a whole-system approach. We can learn a lot from the work on a whole-system approach that has been undertaken in the youth justice system. The Scottish Children’s Reporter Administration report identifies the big issues as being in the making of decisions on permanence, but there are issues in the courts system relating to the timely production of reports, curators ad litem, reporters and all the rest of it. Although there is no substantive evidence of delays in the children’s hearings system, we can all provide anecdotal evidence—probably from our constituency case loads—of hearings being repeatedly delayed, often because parents do not turn up to them. We must focus on the whole system and we must be careful that, in repairing one part of it, we do not cause a problem in another. Nevertheless, I make it clear that our immediate focus is on the making of decisions that lead to permanence. In England, there are lots of delays in the courts system, but the work that has been undertaken by the Scottish Children’s Reporter Administration has debunked the myth that there are delays in the courts system in Scotland. There are comparatively few delays; the issue is how we make decisions and how we work with children. I place on record my thanks to the Scottish Children’s Reporter Administration for its report—it was remiss of me not to do so sooner. The report is a timely and credible piece of work. Although all 100 cases that it considered were completed under old legislation—the Adoption (Scotland) Act 1978 and the Children (Scotland) Act 1995—rather than our new legislation, it has given us some firm ideas of the time that it takes to make imperative decisions about the lives of some of our most vulnerable children. For me, it is not acceptable that the majority of children wait more than four years for a permanency decision to be made, especially considering that 44 per cent of the children in the study were identified as being at risk from birth. Moreover, for every year of delay in the care system, the prospects of adoption and permanency reduce by 20 per cent. That significant piece of work was undertaken by Julie Selwyn at the University of Bristol. We know that the age of someone’s entry to care and the length of time that they spend in care are the greatest predictors of their future success. I am glad that, across the chamber, there is recognition of the fact that the building blocks are now in place and that they were in place even prior to the publication of the Scottish Children’s Reporter Administration report. The credit for that goes to Peter Peacock and Adam Ingram. The Adoption and Children (Scotland) Act 2007 modernised the adoption system, introducing permanence orders, and was implemented in 2009. Adam Ingram led the way on the looked-after children regulations, which crystallised the work on the children’s plan. In addition, 23 local authorities have signed up to the national adoption register. If members want to know whether their local authority has signed up, they can write to me and I will be happy to share that information. A crucial part of our work to drive forward changes for looked-after children is the centre for excellence for looked-after children in Scotland—CELCIS. I will pick out a few aspects of its work that we detailed in our response to the SCRA. CELCIS will take forward best practice issues, which relate very much to thorough and timely parental capacity assessments, and the important work to develop a national risk assessment toolkit for child protection. As Stewart Maxwell said, the history of parents who have already had children taken into care is an important indicator of whether rehabilitation will succeed. CELCIS will support, encourage and evaluate the twin-track assessment and parallel planning that Annabelle Ewing spoke about. Rehabilitation with birth families and permanency planning are not mutually exclusive. As best practice in the Glasgow infant and family team project has shown, we can do both activities in tandem, which is in children’s best interests. We must ensure that at the heart of our policy and practice are attainment, child development and brain development. That is about children, their needs, their growth and their development; it is not about organisations, professionals or bureaucracies. The Labour Party’s amendment focuses on timescales, which I will talk about. After careful consideration, I cannot accept the amendment. If I could have accepted it, I would have; I am sorry that I cannot. The amendment just is not on the money. However, I will try hard to address the issues that Labour members have raised, because I know that they have worked hard in collaboration with organisations such as Barnardo’s. Part of the work that the centre for excellence is driving forward concerns the impact of introducing strict timescales for the decision-making process and the overall time that is taken to achieve permanency. That work will commence this December, and CELCIS and others will report to me by the end of next year. That will be timely in advance of the Government’s introduction of the children’s services bill in 2013-14. On timescales, I am anxious to stress to the Parliament that I am a woman in a hurry. All the work in our response to the SCRA report has a sense of urgency and is to be done sooner rather than later, but it will take however long it takes. I am not interested in papering over the cracks in improving the lives of Scotland’s children. The Conservatives said that measuring improvements is important. My one word of caution is that we are talking about children, not numbers. Adoption is not the appropriate answer for all children. Nonetheless, the national adoption register will give us important information about the demographics of the children for whom we seek to find a permanent home. We will know that we have made considerable progress when our looked-after children have fewer placements, when we make better and earlier decisions on permanence and when our children are at the heart of our system. I want Scotland to be the best place in the world to grow up and I want us as corporate parents to have the same hopes, dreams and sleepless nights for our looked-after children as we have for our own children. I assure the Parliament that I am interested in nothing less than a radical shift in care planning so that we make quicker and better decisions for our children. We will pick up the pace, because children have only one childhood. Our legislative programme gives us an ideal opportunity to make the right decisions at the right times for all Scotland’s looked-after children.

I am delighted to open this morning’s debate. Apart from allowing me to outline the Government’s ambitions for all of our children and young people, it also gives me the opportunity to share a debate with Alasdair Allan for the first time in 20 years. I suppose that it is also the first time that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has let the two junior education ministers out to play. The two core and inextricably linked aims of the education team in this term of government are to raise attainment and improve the life chances of Scotland’s children. At the heart of everything we do and of all our aspirations for our children is to ensure that we have happy healthy bairns who reach their full potential. The guiding principle for us all as parliamentarians in making decisions and expressing views should be that if something is not good enough for our own sons and daughters, it is not good enough for any child or young person growing up in Scotland. Educational attainment is the passport to social, cultural and economic prosperity and we are absolutely focused on the child’s needs throughout their learning journey from the early years to young adulthood. I point out from the outset that in seeking to raise educational attainment we do not have a doom-and-gloom agenda. We have strengths and successes to build on. That said, I reassure the chamber that there is no room for complacency and when it comes to improving the life chances of our looked-after children I will not beat about the bush: the report card for all corporate parents at all levels of local and national Government says, “Can and must do better.” We also need to focus attention on reducing the gap between the lowest and highest attainers in education. Although we can celebrate the fact that our education system performs well internationally; that we have excellence in higher education; that our 15-year-olds perform above the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development average for reading and science; that we have record levels of young people in further and higher education; that statistics and qualifications show that our young people are performing better than at any point in the past; and that—this is for Mr Macintosh, in particular—class sizes are at a record low, I reassert that there is still a job of work to do. That is why, among other things, the cabinet secretary Michael Russell has brought together a small group of headteachers with an excellent personal track record of raising attainment in their own schools across a range of circumstances. The group’s members will distil from their own real-life work experience what works to help our young citizens to be high attainers. It is crucial that we understand and share innovative practice and the group’s work will be concluded speedily. I will also discuss the specific issue of looked-after children with the attainment group. Although I know that next week there will be a debate on permanence planning for looked-after children and that the Education and Culture Committee is holding a very welcome inquiry into the issue, I flag up to Parliament the learning hub. That is a strand of work that is being undertaken by the looked-after children strategic implementation group, which will oversee a variety of activities to boost and drive improvements in educational attainment. Over and above our specific measures on attainment, how will we achieve systematic and radical change for our children, our country and our communities? For me, the starting point is the early years—the foundation years. When it comes to babies and very young children, including pre-birth, we will reap what we sow. If we are serious about giving our children the best start in life, we need to be serious about the fundamental shift both in philosophy and of resources into the early years, early intervention and preventative spend. Apart from independence, preventative spend is the most radical and exciting agenda that the Government is pursuing. It cuts across all arms of Government, both local and national, and across universal and targeted services. This Scottish National Party Government has been brave and bold enough to grasp the agenda, despite the financial constraints that we are all living with. I am currently finalising arrangements with local government and health partners in establishing the early years task force that will oversee a joint change fund of more than £270 million. That will be used to transform the lives of children and communities and to begin to unlock the potential of our universal services, whether in education or health, in prevention as opposed to cure, implementing that transformational change at a local level as envisaged by the early years framework. Our wider programme of reform, including our legislative ambitions, is central to improving attainment. In essence, our future children’s services bill is about how to get all agencies to work together better in making smarter and quicker decisions for all our children. I was struck by recent comments by Professor Buchanan, director of the centre for research into parenting and children at the University of Oxford, when she said that the job of universal services is to grow brains. I could not agree more. GIRFEC—getting it right for every child—and attainment go hand in hand, and improving attainment cannot be divorced from ensuring that children are safe, loved, happy, healthy, included and nurtured, have opportunities to play and are valued and respected. There is a strong synergy between GIRFEC, the curriculum for excellence and the personalisation of services.

Liam McArthur is right that, despite the fact that Scotland is a small country, the implementation of the early years framework and GIRFEC is uneven. That is simply not acceptable. Although this Government is not about micromanaging health boards and local authorities, it is unacceptable that there are uneven outcomes and that children have different prospects depending on the part of the country in which they live. That is why we have a commitment to a children’s services bill and the focus on preventative spend, which goes hand in hand with GIRFEC and the early years framework. I stress that working with and supporting parents is imperative. Parents are the first teachers and the biggest single influence on a child’s educational aspirations and attainment. Continuing our play, talk, read campaign is crucial, as will be the development of a national parenting strategy and ensuring good parental involvement and engagement in the curriculum for excellence. Curriculum for excellence is being successfully embedded and implemented. It is the biggest educational reform in a generation, and its focus on deep and connected learning and continuous improvement will equip our children and young people with the skills for life, learning and work. New qualifications are being developed on time, and a programme is in place to support the workforce and leadership. The McCormac and Donaldson reviews have highlighted that the quality of teaching is central to improved attainment, and the development of a reflective teaching workforce that is ready to innovate and share successful practice is key. I want also to stress the contribution of other professionals to the curriculum for excellence, in particular the community learning and development workforce, which will make a valuable contribution to the post-16 agenda. Sixteen to 19-year-olds are an absolute priority for this Government. As the First Minister said, no young person should go through school only to become an unemployment statistic at the age of 16, and we will not allow that to happen. That is why, through our opportunities for all initiative, all 16 to 19-year-olds who are not in work will be offered a learning opportunity or a training place. We recognise that staying in learning beyond the age of 16 is a young person’s best means of improving their long-term job prospects, and our policies are working to support that. We are driving long-term, systematic improvement through curriculum for excellence, 16-plus learning choices and the transition planning model for the senior phase of curriculum for excellence. That will ensure that all our young people have the necessary personal, financial and career advice, guidance and support to access and sustain an appropriate place in post-16 learning. Our post-16 education reform programme of those education and learning sectors aims to better meet the needs of individuals and employers in changing labour markets, whether through improving the learning journey or ensuring appropriate and sufficient provision.

As Mr Macintosh well knows, this Government, through its work with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, will ensure that the £2 billion that we continue to spend on higher and further education and on the skills agenda will meet this Government’s priorities. Mr Macintosh is also well aware that this Government has given an assurance on student places. There is much that we can do in the college sector. We want to equip the college sector to ensure that it is in a stronger position in this difficult financial climate. The college sector has not had any substantial change in terms of how it operates since Margaret Thatcher was in government. What I detect, from my meetings with and exposure to the college sector, is that there is a desire for reform and change and putting students very much at the heart of the learning journey.

We are meeting our commitments and we will be doing the best by children and young people, starting in the early years and going right through to post-16 education. There is a job of work to do in the college sector. We will be listening carefully to students and to those who work in the college sector. There is a desire to change things; there is no desire for the status quo in the college sector. The really interesting thing is that, over our two terms in government, we will have invested more than £4 billion in the funding of further education, which is £1 billion more than was invested during the two previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Administrations, despite the fact that their budget went up and ours has been slashed by £3 billion. We should celebrate that. I am aware that time is growing short. I want to emphasise that children get only one childhood and we therefore have only one chance to get it right. With the golden threads of our work in the early years, the curriculum for excellence and the post-16 agenda, we will do all that we can to improve attainment and the life chances of all of Scotland’s children so that we can get it right for every child in every community. I move, That the Parliament supports the Scottish Government placing rich attainment at the heart of its approach to enable all Scotland’s young people to improve their life chances and fulfil their ambitions; agrees that for a young child this means giving them the best start so that their cognitive, social and emotional skills enable them to successfully enter and progress in school, and agrees that for a young person this means recognising and affirming successful learning and giving them a passport to future opportunities and that for Scotland it will deliver improved competitiveness and increased opportunity for all.

I remind Mr Macintosh that this Government has invested £4 million in activity agreements that have reached out to children who are furthest away from education and employment. This Government has invested in more than 300,000 training opportunities. That hardly sounds like a Government that is a bastion of vested interests in higher education. Should the member not just give up the ghost and welcome the fact that the Government has retained a higher education system that is based on the ability to learn and not the ability to pay?

What is elitist about our leadership on and investment in the early years? We are the first Government to really grasp the nettle of preventative spend, which will radically change this country.

The Scottish Government has done more than any previous Administration to support kinship carers. We introduced legislation that specifically recognises and defines kinship care, supported it with comprehensive guidance and delivered training with our partners through the concordat. We remain fully committed to our 2007 strategy “Getting it right for every child in kinship and foster care” and we are actively seeking changes to the benefits system to improve and simplify financial support for kinship carers. This year, we launched a service with Children 1st to provide support on non-financial issues and we have extended funding to Citizens Advice Scotland to provide advice on financial and legal issues. Both services can be contacted through a free and confidential helpline.

As the member is well aware, local authorities are best placed to make decisions about the level of allowances and what is needed to support a particular child with a particular carer, but we are sympathetic and committed to continuing to support kinship carers. The key thing is for kinship carers to be treated as parents and to receive child tax credits and child benefit when a child enters their home.

I will address the issue with the minister who is responsible for the energy assistance package.

I am very grateful to Jamie Hepburn for securing the debate, on one of my favourite subjects—or one of my favourite rants—which is the cost of childcare in Scotland. Last week, I had the pleasure of meeting Save the Children to discuss, among other matters, the survey that led to its report, “Making Work Pay—The Childcare Trap”. I could quibble about some of the methodology, given that it is a UK-wide survey and I am not sure how representative the Scottish samples are, but I will not do that, because by nature I am not a pedant. More fundamentally, anybody who has ears to listen and eyes to see will know that a significant proportion of families pay more for their childcare than they pay for their rent or mortgage. As all members who have spoken in the debate have demonstrated, there is an obvious connection, which stares us in the face, between the costs of childcare and leaving or staying in employment. I welcome the work that Save the Children has undertaken and will endeavour to respond to its report, as well as to the concerns that have been raised by members during the debate. In the little time that I have, I will try very hard to demonstrate what the Government has done, what it will do and what it would like to do. However, before I continue I would like to make one broad point. In doing so, I do not seek to be controversial or to disrupt the consensus that often—and rightly—exists in members’ business debates, so I will choose my language carefully. If there was ever an issue that best crystallised the arguments for this Parliament having more powers, surely it has to be the need to provide for and support better our children and families. Let me be blunt; without control of taxation and the welfare benefits system, there will be no quick fix to ease the burden on, or the hardship that is faced by, hard-working parents or parents who wish to work. Nonetheless, I believe that we can do much more to ease that burden. I will touch on welfare reform, which was mentioned by Jamie Hepburn and Malcolm Chisholm among others. The UK Government’s Welfare Reform Bill is substantial and will bring about—if I quote Jackie Baillie correctly from yesterday—“a seismic shift”. The Scottish Government supports benefits simplification and is considering the UK Government’s proposition as to what the universal credit will achieve, but we do not support welfare reform that will impact most greatly on the most vulnerable people. We do not yet know the full extent of the impact of the changes or the effect that there will be on devolved services. Nonetheless, we will continue to engage proactively on the subject with our colleagues at Westminster. Members will also wish to consider the part that they can play in that work. Bob Doris exercised his right to do that tonight. For the moment we must work within our constraints. Liz Smith touched on an important point in referring to what we have managed to achieve collectively as a Parliament. In essence, we have achieved consensus on the need strategically to prioritise the early years. I could have run up the back of the chamber and hugged Hugh Henry when—

I will resist—to save his blushes, never mind mine. It was music to my ears as a mother and as the Minister for Children and Young People to hear that we have excellent practice here in Scotland and that we do not necessarily need to go on study trips to Scandinavia—to Norway or Sweden, for example—or elsewhere. Malcolm Chisholm mentioned the North Edinburgh Childcare family centre. I have visited it twice and have been very impressed by the work that it does. Hugh Henry mentioned Cathkin nursery, which blew me away when I visited it to see the work that it does. Many areas in Glasgow, Dundee and North Ayrshire are doing interesting work with vulnerable two-year-olds. I am aware of a pilot that was commissioned by the previous Scottish Executive that, interestingly enough, showed that extended provision did not have a huge impact on two-year-olds, but did have an impact on supporting parents and helping people to be better parents. That is a significant bit of evidence. I am pleased that over the past four years the Government has increased entitlement of free pre-school education to 475 hours per annum. That amounts to 8 million more hours. More to the point, what are we now going to do? To answer Hugh Henry more substantively, I think that this Government is committed to making the decisive shift to preventative spending. We have an opportunity to be bold. We have created an early years change fund to lead the way on preventative spending, and we will take the work forward jointly with local authorities, the national health service and the third sector. We know that the investment in zero to eight-year-olds, and zero to three-year-olds in particular, pays back countless dividends. I personally will chair the early years task force, which will oversee early years activity, picking up on our priorities of childcare, family centres, play, early learning experiences and supporting parents. I hope that members will be reassured that we are committed to expanding the capacity, range and flexibility of early learning and childcare. We will develop the steps that are needed to make early learning and childcare accessible and affordable to all—obviously within the constraints that I have outlined. I am committed to the fact that there are positives to be achieved, but the bigger prize to be gained for our children is for our Parliament to evolve into full adulthood and to exercise all the rights and responsibilities that go with it. I will quickly say something about our third sector partners. Third sector organisations are crucial partners in delivery, and I am delighted at the allocation of £6.8 million to the early years action fund, which was announced today. That will support the expansion of innovative and exciting models of integrated learning, childcare and family support. My final point is the one that Kenny Gibson raised about child poverty. Although I am pleased that, over the past 10 years, the level of child poverty has dropped from 28 per cent to 20 per cent, I must say that 20 per cent is still far too high. The Government is absolutely committed to doing everything in its powers to eradicate child poverty. Meeting closed at 17:50.

The Scottish Government has provided funding over the period in question to a wide range of organisations. Those organisations have delivered projects to tackle sectarianism and all forms of religious intolerance across all aspects of Scottish society, including in schools. The total funding provided for the years 2007 to 2011 is £1,481,650. However, the specific amount of work in schools cannot be identified as the work of those organisations cuts across many areas.

I appreciate Ms Beamish’s interest in the area; I am aware that she is a former schoolteacher. I reassure her that I have begun conversations with the Minister for Community Safety and Legal Affairs, Roseanna Cunningham, on a number of fronts. I do not want to leave the member under any illusion: our children, particularly our young children, are indeed a catalyst for change. There are huge opportunities, which are rooted in the curriculum for excellence and our approach to early years work. I will continue the dialogue with Ms Cunningham and I will be glad to keep Ms Beamish well informed.

High-quality, affordable and accessible early learning and childcare are crucial both for children’s development and for enabling parents to balance work and family life. That is why the Scottish Government is committed to the continued expansion of early learning and childcare provision, focusing our initial efforts on those from the most deprived backgrounds.

I am interested in the Save the Children report. I met representatives of the organisation yesterday, and I know that there will be a members’ business debate on the report next week, to which I look forward to responding. My colleagues on the front bench will testify that I lecture them at any opportunity about the prohibitive costs of childcare and how that is a barrier to work. I am also particularly interested in vulnerable two-year-olds. The Government will consider ways in which we can extend childcare or early learning experiences. Over the summer, I had the opportunity to visit many family centres in Glasgow and the north of Scotland that are also doing some interesting things to reach out to families with two-year-olds, in an attempt to give them the best start in life. Finally, I must say that, if the Government and the country are serious about changing the lives of our children, we need to be serious about changing the constitution of the country and securing the proper levers of power to address issues of childcare and child poverty.

Liam McArthur will be aware that local authorities are the main drivers on that issue. However, if it would be constructive for us to discuss anything with our local authority partners, I am happy to do so. As well as lobbying this Government, Mr McArthur may—as I am sure he is aware—wish to lobby his colleagues in Westminster, as there are some significant changes to universal credit and pay-in for childcare costs that will have a detrimental impact. If the Scottish Government can show that it is willing to work with its partners to find flexibility—which parents need—wherever possible, I would hope that Mr McArthur can, in that spirit, speak to his Westminster colleagues about the flexibility that we need on welfare reform.

Although there have been no meetings specifically on the subject of the provision of additional support for learning in schools, Scottish Government officials regularly meet Glasgow City Council representatives to discuss a wide range of issues. In addition to those meetings, a representative of the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland is a member of the Scottish Government additional support for learning implementation group.

I certainly agree that the welfare of the child is paramount. Play is a crucial part of a child’s development, and that is all the more true for children with additional support needs. The member may be interested to know that there are no specific regulations for playgrounds other than that if there are more than 50 children, supervision is needed. I must stress that the issue is entirely for Glasgow City Council. However, if the member would find it helpful, I would happily make inquiries of that council, as I am always very interested in how we are meeting the needs, including the play needs, of children with additional support needs.

There is nothing more important than ensuring that our children and young people get the right and the best start in life. Therefore, it is a privilege to follow in the footsteps of my predecessor, Adam Ingram. This morning, I also have the great opportunity to get the last word in at the first education debate in the new parliamentary session. However, this discourse is much more than a debate on education: it is a debate about how we as a nation improve the short-term, medium-term and long-term prospects—the life chances, if you like—of all Scotland’s young people. The Government’s challenge and promise are to translate words into actions. The challenge for the Parliament is to show leadership on what we will and will not tolerate for our children, our young people and their families in 21st century Scotland. A number of maidens spoke, the first of whom was Gordon MacDonald. I know him well. He always tells it how it is, and I was struck by his speech on how free education had transformed his and his family’s prospects. I was also struck by Anne McTaggart’s speech. I am sure that she will bring her skills as a former community education worker to the Parliament and I note her interest in widening access. Jean Urquhart, our other maiden, spoke about education being more than what happens in schools. That is oh so true. A variety of members from all parties sought answers or reassurance on a number of specific points. I will do my best to attend to those, but first I give Dennis Robertson my personal commitment to ensuring that the legislation on additional support for learning is fully implemented. He should also expect a decision on the schools in his constituency that he mentioned to be made next week. John Park has always made an impassioned plea for the skills agenda. We agree with him that the focus has to be on 16 to 19-year-olds in the crucial transition from school to the world of work. However, I also reassure him that the Government has also asked Skills Development Scotland how we can target a proportion of modern apprenticeships on that age group. If I had to answer all Sandra White’s questions, I would be here all day. I am assured that the cabinet secretary will write to her at length. However, on the most important issue that she raised, I say to members that the Government will continue to press the United Kingdom Government on the visa issue. I welcome Stewart Maxwell to his new role as convener of the Education and Culture Committee. By way of a backhanded compliment to him, I reassure Claire Baker that I have no doubts that he will give the Government the appropriate amount of challenge. I reassure Mr Maxwell that we have been working hard with the national parent forum on producing a range of material on the curriculum for excellence. Much of that should be available in schools and the cabinet secretary recently wrote to parents with children who are undergoing that other difficult transition from primary 7 to secondary school.

Mr Macintosh should know better than that because he, along with other then Opposition spokespersons, attended a meeting about it last year. There is no limit on the number of exams or courses in which students in the senior phase can participate. It is a matter for schools, parents and the children. If children want to do more than five courses, we will do our best to ensure that they can achieve that aspiration. Let me get on to Mr Bibby’s reference to the inevitable cuts across the public sector as a result of the Con-Dem policies south of the border. I say to him that this Scottish Government has protected student numbers; this Government has retained the education maintenance allowance; and this Government has led the debate on retaining free higher education in Scotland.

I wish to make progress, Mr Macintosh. I will temper the debate about the funding gap. The Parliament might be interested to note that the University of Glasgow apparently has a surplus of £18 million. I was struck by the tone—until now—of the front-bench speakers. When I heard Mr Macintosh’s opening speech, I thought that he had returned to the Parliament with positivity and a spring in his step, following his decisive win in Eastwood, which was against the national trend and against all the odds. I look forward to continuing to work with him. Elizabeth Smith always makes thoughtful and measured contributions. The one point of hers with which I take issue is that we cannot have both autonomy in the higher and further education sectors and a guarantee on the types and numbers of courses. The Government has put its money where its mouth is by guaranteeing student numbers. We cannot let the debate end without focusing on teachers and teacher numbers. For the first time, the SNCT has safeguarded teacher numbers. Enough places are available for every probationary teacher to apply for. I assure members that the Government put in £15 million extra to help with the negotiations between local authorities and the teaching unions, £11 million of which was used to secure an agreement to limit changes to terms and conditions.

The Scottish Government promised that the money would be made available for every newly qualified teacher—for every probationer—and some more, to eat into teacher unemployment. Mr McGrigor might be reassured to know that jobseekers allowance figures show that teacher unemployment in Scotland has fallen by 6.8 per cent in the past eight months—it stands at 4.2 per 1,000, which is the lowest rate in the UK. In England, the rate is 15.8 per cent.

Not just now—I am summing up; I apologise to whoever that was. I am keen to say something about the early years before 11.40. It is clear that we have a collective commitment to and consensus about the value and importance of investing in the early years and having a philosophical shift towards early intervention and prevention. I look forward to the Parliament’s support and challenge when the education ministerial team presents early years legislation. I am patently conscious that people have only one childhood. That places an imperative on the Government and the Parliament to improve the prospects of all our children. We have mentioned poverty throughout the debate and I was struck by the work of Frank Field on that. In his report, he says that what matters most is “a healthy pregnancy; good maternal mental health; secure bonding with the child”, parental education, good parenting, good old-fashioned love, “responsiveness of parents along with clear boundaries” and opportunities for the child to learn and to develop their cognitive, language, social and emotional skills. All those issues are highlighted in the early years framework, which is our platform for tackling poverty and low educational attainment. I look forward to returning to the chamber in due course—hopefully soon—with our plans to improve the prospects of all Scotland’s children.

Since its publication in December 2008, we have made excellent progress on implementing the framework and over the next five years we will build on the legacy of the previous parliamentary term and continue to push forward with our ambitious early years programme.

I certainly agree with the member. There is very compelling evidence that every £1 spent on the early years saves £9 later on. Of course, there is a moral as well as an economic imperative to early intervention and, as Mr Gibson may know, the Government is committed to introducing legislation and a £50 million change fund.

I thank the member for his interest in this issue. He is right to highlight the importance of the very early years. First and foremost, the Government intends to take the matter forward with its local government partners through dialogue; nevertheless, we have made a very clear commitment to bringing forward early legislation to embed the early years framework and getting it right for every child throughout Scotland. I am more than happy to have a more detailed conversation with Mr Chisholm on the matter.

Under the Education (Scotland) Act 1980, local authorities have a duty to provide adequate and efficient provision of school education for all children residing in their local area. That duty does not distinguish between children and young people on the basis of their asylum or refugee status.

If Mr Wilson thinks that that would be helpful, I am sure that the cabinet secretary and I would be happy to oblige.

Ministers and officials regularly meet individual principals and representatives of the principals convention. I last met college principals on 16 March, when I had the great pleasure of attending the launch of a concordat between the Scottish Agricultural College, Oatridge College, Barony College and Elmwood College.

I am glad that Mr Purvis recognises the implications of the reduction of £1.3 billion in the Scottish Government’s budget by his Westminster Government. However, he fails to acknowledge that, south of the border, colleges are facing a 25 per cent reduction in their teaching grant over four years. Given the commitment by the Scottish Government and the Scottish National Party to try to remove the fear of compulsory redundancies, I would have thought that Mr Purvis would take the opportunity to encourage everyone in the Parliament to unite behind our attempts to secure that prize.

I understand Cathie Craigie’s point. She should be aware that colleges the length and breadth of Scotland have given a commitment to maintain student numbers. Of course, given the difficult economic times, there is increased demand on our colleges. Ultimately, they are at the front line of the economic recovery. I would have thought that Ms Craigie would welcome the fact that, despite the backdrop of the £1.3 billion that has been lost to the Government, we have record levels of student support and a guarantee to protect student numbers.

The First Minister and the previous Minister for Skills and Lifelong Learning, Keith Brown, have enjoyed visits to Borders College. I have yet to meet the principal of the college, but I look forward to an early opportunity to do so.

I am very much aware of the difficulties that Borders College, like other colleges, is experiencing, and I appreciate that it must make savings of around £785,000. I share the member’s concern and join him in recognising that Borders College is committed to maintaining student numbers and ensuring minimal disruption to the learner. With respect to Mr Lamont, I hope that he will also take his concerns to the United Kingdom Tory Government in London, given the savage cuts that we are experiencing. That said, I am politically and personally committed to ensuring that we find a way forward for all of Scotland’s colleges, and I am listening very closely to the 41 colleges across the sector that are calling for change.

Colleges have a very clear understanding of the value of work placements. Only two months ago, I was delighted to launch the education into enterprise programme at Adam Smith College; I believe that Tricia Marwick was there. That is a £1.1 million initiative involving a consortium of colleges and the University of Abertay, which aims to introduce accredited work placement opportunities into many existing courses. It is being supported by the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and the Alliance of Sector Skills Councils.

I did indeed, along with Tricia Marwick, have the opportunity and the privilege of speaking to many of the young people and students who are benefiting from and participating in the programme. There are a lot of positive lessons to be learned, and I am sure that there is plenty of scope for best practice to be rolled out across the country. It is important to say that a great deal of that type of work already exists. The £1.1 million for this project forms part of the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council’s £4.7 million learning to work two programme for wider activities that was announced last year. A lot of work is going on over a range of activities in work experience-led initiatives.

Marilyn Livingstone is right to speak favourably of the school-college partnerships. The Government has asked colleges to focus provision in that area on the secondary 3 to secondary 6 age group, which is very much in order and in keeping with the delivery of the senior phase of curriculum for excellence. It is important to recognise that for school pupils, particularly younger pupils, schools are the primary—although not the sole—provider of those experiences. However, there is another range of partners in the form of youth organisations and youth work to meet that need. Colleges and local authorities are free to respond in their own way to local needs and to do work in that area with the younger age group if they so wish. However, members should be reassured that we are continuing to focus our activity on the S3 to S6 age group with regard to curriculum for excellence. That is consistent with long-standing practice and with the original guidance that the Labour and Liberal parties issued on the lifelong partners strategy.

In April 2007, there were nearly 257,000 children being educated in schools in condition categories C or D. By April 2010, there were fewer than 120,000 children in such schools, which is a reduction of more than 135,000. That has been possible because 330 school building projects have been completed since May 2007: that is more in the past four years than the previous two Administrations managed in the past eight years. I have arranged for a list of the 330 school projects to be placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre; the bib number is 52569.

Yes, absolutely. I am delighted to say that this Administration is spending more on school buildings and refurbishment, and that we are doing it faster and more effectively for the public purse. I am pleased that the constituency member has acknowledged the good work that is going on in relation to Garnock academy.

I am very aware from discussions with my colleague Kenneth Gibson that there has been a lot of politically motivated scaremongering with regard to Garnock academy. Let me reassure Mr McNulty that this Government’s pledge is firmly in place and that we will meet every penny of the £18.8 million funding, which will be delivered on time to ensure construction in 2013-14, despite Westminster’s savage cuts in capital budgets.

There are three pillars to our approach to improving education in Scotland. The first is curriculum for excellence, which has now been successfully implemented in every school in Scotland. The second is financial stability. The Scottish Government has set up an independent review of teacher employment to be chaired by Professor Gerry McCormac, to provide us with recommendations in the summer. That review and the review of teacher education in Scotland will deal with closely related issues, and we will have to consider them together. The cabinet secretary’s appointment of Graham Donaldson to the review of teacher employment group will, I hope, facilitate that process. The third pillar is the continued pursuit of excellence in teaching—the subject of today’s statement. “Teaching Scotland’s Future” was published on 13 January. It is a groundbreaking piece of work. We believe that internationally it is the first to consider, as a single system, the full spectrum of teacher education and professional development. I therefore restate the Government’s thanks to Graham Donaldson and his team—I am pleased to note that Mr Donaldson is in the public gallery today. His report sets out a challenging agenda that the Scottish Government has no hesitation in accepting. We must now work to achieve the vision that it sets out. Graham Donaldson makes it clear that, as we take forward that positive direction, we build on solid foundations. Scotland’s teaching workforce is well prepared and well supported. His 50 recommendations are designed to build on that strong base, ensuring that good practice is spread across the whole system. As we undertake the work, it is increasingly understood that the public, private and third sectors must work together and with young people, families and communities to ensure that the full range of positive outcomes is delivered. There is agreement that early intervention to address risks, using the principles of getting it right for every child, is key to improving the life chances of those who might otherwise not achieve positive outcomes. We need to ensure that, through their education and development, teachers are enabled to contribute to that agenda. I cannot during this statement refer to each of the 50 recommendations that Graham Donaldson made. The full Government response can be found on both the Scottish Government and review websites, and it indicates that we accept—in full, in part or in principle—each of the recommendations. Copies of our response can also be found at the back of the chamber. I will highlight key aspects of the report that we need to take forward to achieve its vision. The most important partners in achieving that vision are teachers themselves. “Teaching Scotland’s Future” offers the opportunity to reinvigorate the concept of teacher professionalism. Local authorities and universities have crucial roles in supporting teachers and working more closely together, and the report also highlights the contribution of national bodies. Making those partnerships work at a time of financial constraint will need detailed planning around implications—financial and otherwise. To take forward many of the main recommendations in the report, the Government will set up a national partnership group for “Teaching Scotland’s Future”. In that spirit of partnership, we have asked the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland and the Scottish Teacher Education Committee—representing the universities—to co-chair the group alongside the Scottish Government. It will include other important national stakeholders, such as the General Teaching Council for Scotland and the new national agency for quality improvement in education. We will also ensure that it includes front-line teachers and school leaders—those who have to make any arrangements work on the ground. The national partnership group will have a challenging agenda. It will look in detail at how partnerships between schools, local authorities, universities and others can deliver the best quality in teacher education across the range of a teacher’s career. An important part of that will be developing opportunities to work towards masters-level qualifications. Through this development, we are moving towards highly successful models of teaching seen elsewhere in the world, encouraging a thirst for knowledge and intellectual ambition in the profession. That is a challenging agenda. That is why we will set up the partnership working group immediately and ask it to report back on its proposed work programme by September 2011. We have also identified two areas in which it would be helpful for the group to devolve some of its work, and two working groups, reporting to the national partnership group, will be set up. The first will look at areas of priority—such as specific curriculum areas or aspects of learning and teaching—that might be important to address at different stages in teachers’ careers. The second specific group will be asked to develop the clear and progressive educational leadership pathway that “Teaching Scotland’s Future” suggests. The important work that the national partnership group will take forward and oversee will set a substantial and demanding agenda into the medium term. However, “Teaching Scotland’s Future” sets out other directions that we need to build on now. That includes inviting the GTCS, as it moves towards its new independent status, as agreed by the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee last week, to consider how it might develop a more coherent approach to teaching standards. The GTCS will also be an important partner in work with the universities to reconceptualise and develop the traditional bachelor of education degree through which many of our teachers, especially primary teachers, come into teaching. A final area in which we need to take steps now is in ensuring that the right people enter initial teacher education. Therefore, the Government will work with partners to improve selection procedures. Universities are autonomous institutions with the right to select their own students; however, they must also accept that there is a legitimate wider public interest in who trains to become a teacher. As we discuss those wider ways forward on selection, there are areas in which we need to take decisive steps to ensure quality. We need to ensure that teachers have secured the higher level of literacy and numeracy skills that they need to develop those skills in others. Therefore, we will build on the existing high standards within the teaching workforce overall by undertaking work to ensure that new entrants to the profession have or develop appropriate standards of literacy and numeracy. We will take that forward vigorously and will aim to pilot approaches with the new student intake in 2012. As we work with our partners, the actions that I have set out today will provide a collective challenge to us all. Professor Lindsay Paterson, writing in last week’s Times Educational Supplement, captures that well. He points to the role that we, in this chamber, must play alongside the universities, schools and others. I conclude with his words: “The stability of purpose needed for lasting reform will require political consensus and strong leadership nationally. This revolution depends on us all.”

I regret the fact that there was so little substance in Mr McNulty’s question. Given the political consensus that existed in welcoming Mr Donaldson’s recommendations, I had hoped that we would hear a bit more from the main Opposition party than some girning and greeting. Mr McNulty will indeed know more than I do about education cuts, given that the architects of the reality that we are living with were in the previous Labour Government. Mr McNulty will be well aware that, although the on-going negotiations between the teachers, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Government have come to a halt, this Government’s door remains open to helping to resolve the situation in any way that we can. Mr McNulty fails to recognise that excellence in teaching is the single most important factor in improving attainment in a classroom. I would have hoped that that would be the agenda that he would pursue this afternoon. As members know, the curriculum for excellence is alive and well in Scotland’s schools. I reassure Mr McNulty that Mr Donaldson is of the view that his recommendations could be met within the existing resources. However, that will be a matter for the national partnership group to explore and pursue in greater detail.

I draw the member’s attention to my statement’s emphasis on partnership working. Universities are indeed autonomous institutions, but it is in the interests of Scotland’s children that we get the right people into teacher training. Mr Donaldson’s report addressed the issue of how some institutions select teachers, and I confess that I was somewhat surprised that some institutions make that selection primarily on the basis of applicants’ academic attainment and not always on the basis of a face-to-face interview. The academic standards of those who wish to become teachers are crucial, but so are their skills. I would have thought that the means by which we select those people would provide us with the best way of ensuring that we get the right people. I would never underestimate the importance of teachers’ academic abilities, but we need people who also have the skills and potential to develop positive relationships with children; who have good communication skills; who are, at heart, lifelong learners; and who have an understanding of the fact that today’s children have many varied needs. In our schools, we have many children who have many barriers to learning to overcome, so we need extremely rounded and skilled people to become teachers. In saying that, I do not for one minute diminish the academic abilities that Scotland’s teachers need.

Margaret Smith is right to highlight the fact that teachers are our primary resource, and she is also correct to highlight the importance of continuous professional development. The strength of the Donaldson review is that it sets CPD in the continuum of wider teacher education. CPD should not be seen as a touchy-feely, nebulous subject. It needs clear parameters, outcomes and aspirations, and particular standards must be met: monitoring is, of course, important to that. There is some great practice on CPD in learning communities and schools, particularly in relation to the use of glow, which I suspect we could use far more effectively. There are many ways to take the agenda forward, and the national partnership group and the teacher employment review will examine those in great detail.

Maureen Watt is right to raise the question of the initial selection, and she reflects in detail on an earlier answer that I gave. Yes: on the one hand, we want academically competent teachers, but we also need teachers who will inspire and motivate. The strength of the Donaldson review is that it talks about leadership. Leadership is not just for headteachers; we now expect teachers to show good leadership skills throughout their careers, particularly with the implementation of curriculum for excellence. Maureen Watt also raised a technical point about clinical aptitude tests with regard to the more personal attributes of potential teachers. I am aware from my former career as a social worker that there are arguments for and against such methodology. I am sure that the national partnership group will look at that closely, as it is an issue that is alive and well.

As Donaldson rightly acknowledged, Scotland’s teachers already have very high levels of literacy and numeracy; we have a good, competent workforce. At the heart of curriculum for excellence is a focus on literacy and numeracy, so it is quite right that we now expect Scotland’s teachers to demonstrate and exemplify throughout their practice the highest possible standards in those areas. As I said in my statement, we will pilot various ways of ensuring that that is achieved. The detail is very much a matter that is to be worked out by the national partnership group. As a Government, we already have an action plan on literacy, and we will collaborate with and consult the literacy commission.

Ms McKelvie is right to highlight that the thrust of all that we do is indeed to get it right for every child, and getting it right for every child is not just the role and responsibility of Adam Ingram, the Minister for Children and Early Years. It is, of course, everyone’s responsibility. Given the variety of needs—whether they are learning needs or health needs—that children present in classrooms the length and breadth of the country, we are now expecting teachers to show a range of skills across a breadth and depth of health and social areas in terms of disability and learning difficulties. It is right that the needs that Scotland’s children present in our classrooms are more adequately reflected in what is taught in initial teacher education, but I am aware that Donaldson was right to say that we cannot teach everything in initial teacher education. That is why the induction of teachers is crucial, as is continuous professional development, which has to be tailored to the day-to-day job and the children with whom a teacher is actually working. On partnership working, we encourage teachers to work with other disciplines, which will, of course, have to be reflected in teacher training.

The issue was highlighted in the statement and is a theme throughout the Donaldson review. I think there is consensus that we need to replace the traditional bachelor of education degree to reflect what we actually need to teach Scotland’s children to ensure that they attain and achieve in ways that equip them for the 21st century. Ms Ferguson is right about the difference between selecting the right people and continuous professional development. Those are quite separate strands, and we need to think about that carefully. On the detail of what should be taught and the replacement for the bachelor of education degree, we need to take it a step at a time. I am not going to stand here and say that I have done all the work in one day or that I have all the answers. That will be an important task for the national partnership group along with other partners, particularly our education colleagues.

As I said earlier, the national partnership group will include front-line teachers and leaders. Given the teaching profession’s emphasis on working in partnership with parents, Mr O’Donnell’s point is very well made. I know that the Government has continued to discuss with its partners the question of who else should be on the national partnership group. I assure Mr O’Donnell that I will raise his specific point with the cabinet secretary. Mr O’Donnell was also right to refer to gender imbalance, particularly in promoted posts. I suspect that I do not have sufficient time or leeway from the Presiding Officer to address that point fully or adequately, but it has been taken on board.

The broader message is that we have great teachers, that we are building on success and looking forward to the future, and that teachers need to be well rounded and developed individuals with good academic and interpersonal skills. I do not think that I can say anything else that would not just be repeating what I have already said.

As Mr Macintosh will be aware, CPD largely—though not exclusively—falls within local government’s remit. However, there is a national responsibility to ensure that its provision in local authority areas is not patchy and, at national level, we want more coherent CPD. I draw the member’s attention to my earlier reference to Mr Donaldson’s comment that his recommendations could be met within existing resources although, of course, the national partnership group will test the issue and look at it in more detail.

Mr Harvie raises an interesting point. The work on progressing Donaldson recognises the importance at times of having national action plans—indeed, we have one such plan for science at the moment. The point about modern languages was well made.

I am sure that in the discussions within or outwith the national partnership group on crucial education and teaching matters we will not consider solely teachers, but will look also at other staff.

I add my thanks to my colleague, Kenneth Gibson, for highlighting to Parliament the importance of ensuring that children and young people with epilepsy are provided with the support that they require and the support to which they are entitled to make the most of their educational opportunities. It is interesting to note that the prevalence of epilepsy is higher among children and very old people. It was interesting that Kenny Gibson informed Parliament that one third of children with epilepsy also have learning disorders. Today’s debate, which highlights the barriers that are faced by those with epilepsy in accessing learning at school, is therefore all the more important. Of course, we must remember that those barriers are faced not only at school but during future learning, skills development and employment. Although the McCrone report specified that first aid and the administration of drugs should not be routinely carried out by teachers, I firmly believe that children and young people with epilepsy have the right to feel supported and valued at all times, unhindered by professional boundaries. As Kenneth Gibson highlighted, teachers spend a lot of time with children in school. Starting with initial teacher education, teachers must develop the core skills that they require to confidently enable the effective learning of all the children in their classes. Those core skills are set out in the standard for initial teacher education, as is the condition that all courses must be designed so that they prepare student teachers to be responsive to the needs of all pupils, including those with medical conditions. As of earlier today, ministers no longer approve programmes for initial teacher education. Legislation was approved by the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee this very day, so that responsibility will be passed to the General Teaching Council for Scotland, which we believe is better placed to approve the detail of programmes of initial teacher education. We must recognise the reality that students in our schools live with a wide range of serious conditions, and we must ask ourselves how realistic it would be for teachers to receive training in each of those conditions before entering the classroom. One strength of the Scottish education system is that each year our teachers are required to undertake 35 hours of continuous professional development and five in-service days. I hope that that ensures that each teacher is best equipped to meet the needs of their students. Graham Donaldson recognised the issue in his recent and valuable report on teacher education. He pointed to the considerable evidence from universities, teachers, students and others that there is already significant pressure in relation to the breadth of the issues that must be addressed through teacher education. He made a number of suggestions for ways forward, but he did not suggest that there is a single clear solution. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will soon set out his formal response to the report to Parliament, and will indicate how the Scottish Government will take forward the agenda. I listened to Alasdair Allan with interest when he spoke of the actions that Epilepsy Wales is undertaking. I believe that the focus on health and wellbeing in the curriculum for excellence will enable many of the initiatives and good ideas to be taken forward. Our schools must be communities in which our children—irrespective of their different abilities and needs—are able to learn and to achieve their full potential. Collectively, the whole school must take an holistic approach to supporting and meeting the individual needs of children with long-term conditions. That responsibility is set out in the comprehensive framework that is in place and which helps to ensure that, among other things, the needs of children and young people are identified as early as possible. The additional support for learning legislation, getting it right for every child, the early years framework and the guidance on the administration of medicine all help to set the scene for the collaborative approach that is required, particularly between health and education, in order to ensure that all staff in schools are confident in their role in meeting the individual needs of all our children and young people, including those with epilepsy. It is important to note that our legislation and frameworks all point to the need for any child who has a difficulty to have one plan that all the various and relevant agencies sign up to. I will illustrate our commitment to supporting improvement in the area. Through the national delivery plan for specialist children’s services, we are funding epilepsy services to increase the number of multidisciplinary staff and therefore to provide better all-round care to young patients. An example of that is a recently appointed epilepsy nurse in the Borders who is providing training to schools to raise awareness. In closing, I again thank Kenneth Gibson for initiating this useful debate and pay tribute to the cross-party group on epilepsy, as mentioned by both Richard Simpson and Alasdair Allan. I take this opportunity to reassure the Parliament that the Government is committed to ensuring that every child and young person—irrespective of their needs—is provided with every opportunity to succeed and to reach their full potential.

The Scottish Government provides a range of support to help unemployed young people back into work across Scotland, including in Edinburgh. For example, Skills Development Scotland has increased the level and range of training places in the city, better to meet local need and consistent with the Government’s wish to ensure that young people have every opportunity to improve their job prospects by staying in learning post-16. At the end of last year, we announced a European social fund grant of £64.6 million towards 21 strategic projects worth £168 million. A joint bid from the City of Edinburgh Council and Midlothian Council received £3.96 million directly from that allocation, which will deliver employability and training services for the unemployed, the lowest paid and the socially deprived, ranging from early engagement through to in-work support and skills development, over two years from 2011 onwards.

The funding to which Ms Boyack refers was additional time-limited funding of £2.2 million that was given to the City of Edinburgh Council for 2009-11 to address regeneration, employability and poverty. I stress that it was additional and time-limited money. Nonetheless, I share her concern that Edinburgh has the highest percentage of unemployed school leavers, although I express my surprise that Ms Boyack and her colleagues yesterday voted against 25,000 modern apprenticeships, 46,500 training places, 1,200 additional college places, a job fund to be delivered through the voluntary sector, £15 million for further education bursaries and the retention of education maintenance allowance, all of which would improve the prospects of young people throughout Scotland, including Edinburgh.

I will be brief. We are considering the microcredit scheme. It might be of reassurance to Mr Harper to know that training programmes in Edinburgh and the Lothians are on the increase. That includes modern apprenticeships, get ready for work and training for work, as well as other programmes including access to industry, passport 156, ProjectScotland and so forth.

I, too, warmly congratulate Joe FitzPatrick on securing this very topical debate on Scotland’s four science centres, which are in Aberdeen, Dundee, Glasgow and, of course, next door to the Parliament in Edinburgh at Our Dynamic Earth. I extend a very warm welcome to our visitors from Scotland’s science centres, who are in the public gallery. It is right that we take time to highlight and celebrate their contribution to supporting Scotland’s economy and wider society; after all, science and innovation are vital ingredients in this Government’s pursuit of sustainable economic growth. Scotland’s world-class, world-leading science base will underpin economic recovery and allow us to progress towards our aspiration for a Scotland that is a powerhouse of technology, innovation and enterprise. However, science in today’s Scotland can and must extend beyond wealth creation, critical though that is, and reach deep into every corner of our society. Even if the connections are not immediately obvious, science is at the heart of the way we live and everything that we do; that point was well made by Stewart Stevenson. The Government’s vision is to create in Scotland a culture of science as well as a scientifically literate society that at all levels embraces and values the contribution and importance of science to everyday life and engages with key scientific issues—

—and a society with a technologically skilled workforce that encourages young people to pursue the study of and careers in science.

I thank Ms Fabiani for highlighting that I must learn to breathe through my ears so that I do not have to draw breath in future. Nevertheless, her point is well made and if she cares to write to me with the detail, I will ensure that Mr Russell takes a close look at it. The benefits of getting our science policy right are potentially significant. They range from better-informed personal lifestyle and health choices to public involvement in science-based policy development and tackling the bigger global challenges, such as climate change and biodiversity. On the risks of getting our science policy wrong, Derek Bok, formerly of Harvard University, said: “If you think education is expensive, try ignorance.” Science learning in school is not only the responsibility of teachers, although I will now have an enduring image of Bob Doris and a Bunsen burner. Many members have spoken about the curriculum for excellence, which provides a framework for partnership working within which the wider science community, including the science centres, has an opportunity to support excellence inside and outside the classroom. The centres provide a source of inspiration—of wow and wonder—help to nurture a fascination with science that people may retain throughout their lives, and provide a shop front for bringing the science of our excellent researchers in further and higher education out of the lab to the wider public. It is interesting that, annually, around 75 per cent of the visitors to the science centres are not children, but other members of the public. Joe FitzPatrick was right to say that the centres are not just for children—although, as a married woman, I would certainly not like to commend speed dating. On a more serious note, I want science centres to continue their excellent work, but I challenge them to be alert to new and important niches of activity where they can add value and help to cement and consolidate important related initiatives. Joe FitzPatrick spoke very well of the new science learning institute at Dundee Science Centre as an excellent example of where that is done. The centre has identified an enabling role that it can play in facilitating partnerships and collaborations between existing and new friends to support science learning, teacher training and continuing professional development across the city and the region that aligns synergistically—I shall move on to the point that Elaine Murray made, as I cannot even pronounce that word. Elaine Murray spoke about the very positive HMIE reports with favourable results for all the science centres. They were very much about assessing the alignment of the science centres with formal education. Nanette Milne spoke very well of Satrosphere in Aberdeen. It is to its credit that it has a new management agreement with Dundee Science Centre and has made new connections with the University of Aberdeen. That has resulted in a far higher profile for it in the city of Aberdeen and elsewhere. Although the current economic climate is extremely tough, I am nevertheless delighted to confirm that, in contrast to what is happening in the rest of the UK, we plan to continue to support the centres in 2011-12 to the tune of £2.6 million in recognition of the invaluable work that they undertake. I accept that not everyone is able to or wishes to visit a centre, so we need to find other ways of bringing science to them. We recognise the challenges of geography and inclusion that parts of Scotland face, so we plan to provide an additional £200,000 in 2011-12 to support transport costs to the centres for visitors from remote or socioeconomically disadvantaged communities. I hope that that is of interest to both Mr Coffey and Mr Stone. I conclude by referring to the science and engineering 21 education action plan process that is currently under way. It is chaired by the chief scientific adviser for Scotland, Professor Anne Glover, and will set a strategic direction for science education and engagement for the coming years. I look forward to seeing the centres, and indeed the wider science community, playing an active role in that process as it moves forward in the months ahead. Before I forget, I will respond to the issue that Sandra White raised. My understanding is that the Glasgow Science Centre has an endowment fund that no other science centre has. If she writes to me in more detail on the issue, I will ensure that she receives a proper and detailed answer to her points. Meeting closed at 17:45.

The Scottish Government has provided record levels of funding for colleges. Funding for the current academic year is up 6.9 per cent on last year, reflecting our wish to make available more learning opportunities, especially for young people.

I thank the member for his concern for his local college. I appreciate that there are difficult times ahead for James Watt College. Colleges are, indeed, having to make tough decisions given the onslaught of cuts that the Scottish Government is having to make courtesy of the United Kingdom Government. I regret the prospect of redundancies at James Watt College and I share the view that was expressed by the college’s principal that, where possible, those will be by voluntary arrangement as opposed to compulsory, although I appreciate that there is, as yet, no guarantee of that. I fully understand the contribution that our colleges can make to our economic recovery and hoped that the member would welcome the fact that the Scottish Government, in collaboration with Scotland’s Colleges, has managed to protect the core funding that is available for FE places.

Like other members, Mr Gibson is a doughty campaigner for his local college. The figure for the teaching grant and fee waiver was in excess of £27.5 million in 2006-07 and just under £30 million in 2010-11. I think that Mr Gibson is correct in saying that the number of student places at James Watt College will rise from 13,000 to 16,000, but I am happy to confirm that to him in writing.

In the current academic year, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has asked colleges to deliver similar activity targets as in 2009-10. Colleges that serve areas of increased unemployment were given additional funds by the funding council and European structural funds with a view to their growing activity above their targets.

I am aware that Mary Scanlon has a long association with Inverness College. I hope that she will take some reassurance from the fact that in our draft budget we have indicated our intention to fund improvements to the college estate, which includes Inverness College. She will be well aware that decisions on the funding of individual colleges are for the Scottish funding council rather than for ministers, but ministers are encouraged by the college board of management’s decision to choose Beechwood rather than Longman Road as its preferred site for the redevelopment of the college.

I assure Mr McNulty that the Scottish Government is, as ever, vigilant to any potential repercussions across the college sector. We are living in unprecedented times. Indeed, he will be familiar with the fact that the Government is facing an unprecedented cut of £1.3 billion. I hope that he will at least join me in acknowledging that, despite the difficult times, our colleges are rising to the challenge and are committed to protecting student numbers. There are indeed difficult decisions across the college sector, but the Government will continue to work collaboratively with every college the length and breadth of Scotland.

Oui, madame. A representative of Compagnons du Devoir met Historic Scotland’s director of conservation on 12 November. Historic Scotland found it to be a useful meeting as the Compagnon scheme shares characteristics of Historic Scotland’s craft fellowship scheme, and both parties agreed to follow up the meeting.

The member is correct to say that the French concept is worthy of consideration. It has some interesting aspects. I would say that the strength of our modern apprenticeship scheme is in the employed status of apprentices, but nonetheless I commend the interest of and the work that is going on in the colleges in her area. Linda Fabiani might be interested to note that Historic Scotland is already involved in the development of traditional craft skills. An example is the funding of nearly £2.5 million from the Heritage Lottery Fund to roll out across Scotland the national progression award in the conservation of masonry.

I, too, congratulate Andrew Welsh on securing the debate. I say with pleasure that the Government certainly endorses the motion. I am glad that members from across the political spectrum have showcased colleges in their constituencies, as we have much to celebrate. It is important to reflect on Mr Welsh’s opening remarks when he spoke of Angus College punching well above its weight. The college is rightly renowned for the high quality of learning opportunities that it delivers to the people of Angus. It is indeed a sector-leading institution and one of which many people in Angus, including Andrew Welsh, are justifiably proud. It is a successful and well-run college and, as has been said, an award-winning one. Under John Burt’s leadership, the college gained not one, but two gold prizes at the recent college award ceremony. One feature that interested me is that Angus has the highest percentage of school leavers going into further education. As Alex Johnstone and Johann Lamont reflected, colleges give a second chance in learning, but they are most certainly not the second-best option. We all know that there will be significant challenges ahead for all our colleges. As well as celebrating our successes, members are right to speak of the challenges that institutions in their constituencies and across the sector face. Next year, Angus Council will have to bear its share of the consequences of the reduction by Westminster of £1.3 billion in Scotland’s block grant, as will other councils. I believe that that budget reduction is too much, too soon, and that it will bring unnecessary pain and challenge to many institutions and put our economic recovery in jeopardy. Notwithstanding that, the Government has protected student support at record levels. In 2009-10, £79 million was invested in student support, which was a record level, and the figure for 2010-11 is £84 million, which is again a record level. The draft budget seeks to protect that. However, the NUS campaign is compelling. Among the quotations on the NUS website, one student says: “Having a bursary while I was a ... National Qualification ... student was the difference between eating and not eating.” We cannot help but be affected by that. Another student says: “When I decided to go to college, it was for a couple of reasons. One was to better myself and the other was so that I could get a job that paid higher than minimum wage so that as a single mother I could provide for my children better than I was at that time.” That shows the life-changing potential of Scotland’s colleges. Elaine Smith talked about the importance of the college sector to young women and young mothers. As we know, budget discussions are on-going. The Government is a listening Government and we all await the result of the budget negotiations. Of course, the budget is finite. We do not have unlimited resources and, as John Swinney reminds us all, the budget ultimately has to be balanced. A number of interesting points were made in the debate. For example, we heard that 55 per cent of college students are women. Although the rate of youth unemployment is lower in Scotland than it is in the UK, we cannot fail to be concerned about the rising number of unemployed young women. During the past year there has been a 12 per cent increase in the number of unemployed young women. We must consider the drivers for youth unemployment. The overarching point about the need for greater integration of employability and skills was well made by Margaret Smith and must be pursued.

I reassure the member that such scrutiny is currently being undertaken in some detail. Our colleges have a track record of rising to challenges, which is why we asked them to refocus their activity so that the current volume of core activity can be maintained next year. I am pleased to say that colleges agreed to that undertaking, which is no small feat, and I commend colleges for their commitment. The approach will provide the space for us to take a critical and robust look at how colleges can continue to deliver for learners this year and next year, as we must do. Many members, not least Elizabeth Smith, talked about the need for more collaborative working. We all know that the reduction of the block grant by £1.3 billion will have consequences. Colleges have huge ambition to do more of what they already do excellently, and some of that ambition might be frustrated. I regret the prospect of job losses and redundancies, as I said. Andrew Welsh said that Scotland’s colleges are “the engine for skills” at home and abroad. He was right to say that colleges have their finger firmly on the economic pulse. The Government has a strong track record of listening to what colleges tell us and acting on what we have heard, including by providing extra resources to address specific pressures. I conclude by paying tribute to Mr Welsh. He has had a long and distinguished career as a parliamentarian. He has been a first-class representative of and advocate for Angus, and he is a great exemplar of what every constituency member should aspire to. He said that in Scotland we have colleges and students that we can be proud of. In Andrew Welsh we also have much to be proud of. Meeting closed at 17:54.

I am very much aware that Robin Harper has an infectious enthusiasm for young people. I have had the privilege of witnessing him interact with young people in schools in and around Livingston. I am glad to support his motion today. As other speakers have said, he is a very colourful character. The motion is typical of his imagination, his flair and his commitment to young people the length and breadth of Scotland. Recession hits young people the hardest. Unemployment can do long-term damage to the young; it scars individuals and communities. We must learn the lessons of previous recessions and ensure that never again is a generation of young people written off. That means that we must support young people, recognising that they all have different ambitions and needs, as Margaret Smith and Hugh O’Donnell stated. For some young people, that is about helping them to create and grow their own business. Self-employment is the lifeblood of our economy. It is hugely important in the current economic climate when the jobs simply are not there. In supporting the motion, the Government will explore ways of establishing a Scottish youth microcredit scheme. As many speakers, including Margaret Smith, Kenny Gibson and David Whitton, acknowledged, the crucial issue in establishing Grameen in the UK is that of resolving problems and interactions with the welfare benefits system. We have to rid the system of any disincentives. We have to recognise that, in supporting young people to transform themselves from a state of dependency to one of independence—a notion that I fully support—transitional funding will be needed. I hope that the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats will take that forward with their Government in London—the UK Government. In the very near future, along with Nicola Sturgeon and Alex Neil, I will meet Lord Freud to discuss a number of welfare reform issues. As Jim Mather said in his opening speech, this Government remains committed to tackling youth unemployment. We have the immediate and pressing challenges that are associated with the recession. Youth unemployment in Scotland is currently at 17.9 per cent. Although the figure is lower than that for the United Kingdom, it remains too high. We are talking about the lives and futures of some 70,000 individuals. I accept Claire Baker’s point that the rate of young unemployment is much higher in some of our communities. We remain focused on the more fundamental change that is needed to tackle the unacceptable and endemic problem of youth unemployment. Although there is no silver bullet, collaboration between public, private and voluntary sectors is essential if we are to reach out to more young people who face particular barriers in their life to ensure that they, too, get their fair share of Scotland’s economic growth. I am confident that this Government has a robust and clear plan, the aim of which is to support young people to make more successful transitions to adulthood and the world of work. In essence, this is about our substantial investment in skills: £120 million for new training opportunities, of which £60 million is focused on modern apprenticeships. Mr Mather described the great work that is being done in schools, whether through the curriculum for excellence or determined to succeed. Unlike Elizabeth Smith, I prefer to think that our cup is half full as opposed to half empty. Of course, our further education colleges promote entrepreneurship, too. They do that at a fundamental level through their hands-on approach to vocational training. Only last week, I had the privilege of visiting Adam Smith College in Fife to help to launch the education into enterprise scheme. The programme will support 1,000 college students on higher education courses to take up work placements with small and medium-sized businesses and third sector organisations.

I will conclude, Presiding Officer. There are many good things that I have not had time to mention, including the retention of the education maintenance allowance and our commitment to free higher education and training. I have listened with interest to comments on funding for student support. This Government has invested record levels in student support—

We are always open to suggestions on how to improve the lives of students the length and breadth of Scotland.

Today’s debate highlights the importance to Scotland of the modern apprenticeship programme. From what Elaine Murray, John Park and David Whitton have said, it is clear that there is little doubt that, across the political parties, we all recognise the value of Scotland’s apprenticeship programme. Apprenticeships are about capitalising on the aspiration of people all over Scotland and channelling it into creating a more successful economy. Through the hard work and dedication of training providers such as Minerva People and hundreds of others across Scotland, we can convert aspiration into genuine achievement. That is why I am delighted to have the opportunity to close the debate, to support Elaine Murray’s motion and, like others, to thank her for securing the debate. I warmly congratulate Minerva on its success at the modern apprenticeship awards in December. I, too, am sorry that the Minerva team did not get to accept its award on the night. Like Elaine Murray, I was struck by the story of Minerva, which is one of two women returning to work. We should always celebrate success, particularly when we have an opportunity to celebrate the success of women in business. The other thing that struck me about Minerva’s story was that, although it has embraced technology through using e-profiles, Facebook, blogging and all the rest of it, it has not done so at the expense of the personal touch. I am interested to note that each and every apprentice is visited regularly on site at their workplace I would also like to take the opportunity to congratulate all the other winners and nominees who participated in the awards ceremony. I will spend a moment or two sharing with the chamber some of their remarkable stories and testimonies. One of the winners was Thomas Rennie, who overcame a devastating bereavement to be selected to go forward to WorldSkills 2011 as a member of the United Kingdom squad. After sending more than 100 letters, Carrie Crawford chose to move 150 miles to start her dream job in fabrication welding. Carrie and Thomas are great examples of the determination of our young apprentices the length and breadth of Scotland. Of course, modern apprenticeships are not just for young people. Barry Adamson, the winner in the over-20 group, was able through the MA programme to change direction in his career after redundancy. We also have a number of companies who have shown long-term commitment to the modern apprenticeship programme, such as Dales Engineering Services in Peterhead, which has been involved in the programme for 15 years and whose former apprentices are now making a significant contribution to the business at all levels. I also make a special mention of the apprentice of the year, Thomas Davidson, who has balanced caring commitments to his family with an extremely successful progression through his apprenticeship with the Scottish Rugby Union. Those people are all committed to the apprenticeship programme and they deserve our commitment in return. The Scottish Government has demonstrated its commitment in maintaining high numbers of apprentices and making another 20,000 opportunities available this year, the majority of which are targeted at young people, although not exclusively. The Government has committed significant amounts of money to modern apprenticeships, investing around £60 million. We have invested at that level because we have made the apprenticeship programme a key component of Scotland’s strong economic recovery. As we have moved through the recession we have worked hard to ensure that apprentices whose employers run into difficulty have the opportunity to complete their training with an alternative employer. That is why we introduced and extended the adopt an apprentice and safeguard an apprentice schemes. The response of employers across Scotland to that has been superb and we have been able to support 1,000 apprentices whose apprenticeships were at risk. I listened with interest to Mr Whitton’s preference for retaining the future jobs fund at the UK level. He also spoke of his commitments here in Scotland. We have to be absolute in our commitment to tackling youth unemployment. The figures that were released today show that youth unemployment in Scotland is now at 17.9 per cent. Although that figure has plateaued and is marginally lower than the UK figure of 18.2 per cent, we are still talking about 70,000 unemployed young people in Scotland. The consequences of youth unemployment for individuals and for communities can have a long-term and devastating impact. In tackling youth unemployment, the modern apprenticeship programme has distinct strengths, such as the employed status in the framework, the long-term training opportunity that it provides for young people, the opportunity that it gives them to improve their skills significantly and the fact that it gives them a qualification that they can be proud of. That is something that John Park spoke about eloquently: the pride that people who have completed an apprenticeship have in the qualification that they receive. The modern apprenticeship programme is well received, recognised and supported by employers, and we should be pleased that the most recent figures show a 70 per cent successful completion rate. We have a credible vehicle for moving ahead and tackling youth unemployment more effectively. I am also, of course, pleased that Elaine Murray secured more apprenticeship opportunities in her area—that is very important. The apprenticeship programme is a collective effort. That is one of its strongest attributes. The programme requires commitment from participants, employers, training providers, funding bodies and the Parliament. Today’s debate has highlighted that the commitment is in place at all levels, which is good news for Scotland, its people and its economy. I support and congratulate Minerva on its continued work with apprentices in Dumfries and Galloway and I once again thank Elaine Murray for lodging a motion to highlight its success. Meeting closed at 17:26.

The Scottish Government has put in place specific measures to support our apprentices through the current downturn, including the adopt an apprentice and safeguard an apprentice schemes. Both schemes have been extended until March 2011. The adopt an apprentice scheme offers employers a £2,000 incentive to employ a redundant apprentice. Skills Development Scotland advises us that, since the scheme's launch in June 2009, it has supported more than 720 redundant apprentices, which has enabled them to find alternative employment and to continue their training. SDS advises us that the safeguard an apprentice scheme, which provides a wage subsidy to small and medium-sized enterprises in the construction, manufacturing and engineering sectors, has supported 320 apprentices who would otherwise have lost their jobs.

I certainly recognise and understand that the Highlands and Islands have been disproportionately affected by what happened to Rok. I appreciate Mr Stewart's concern about that. In the first instance, I would be more than happy to meet him to discuss the matter face to face. In the meantime, I reassure him that all apprentices who might be affected by the Rok situation are receiving additional information and support to advise them best of the available options.

The Scottish Government is not short on ambition for all our young people and children, irrespective of their background or start in life. Although we will happily participate in robust political debate—after all, as Mr Russell highlighted, we have a record to be proud of—we will always honestly and pragmatically acknowledge that there is more to do. Our number 1 priority should be to shine a light and showcase and celebrate the success of Scotland's children and our education and learning community. Before I address some of the issues that members from across the political spectrum have  raised, I will take time to reiterate some of the key achievements of which we should all be proud. We have improved the start that we give to our children in the early years through giving significantly more children an entitlement to free school meals and by increasing free nursery entitlement. We are getting many more children into small primary 1, 2 and 3 classes to give them better pupil teacher interaction. We have maintained record low primary class sizes and made regulations to do away with the largest primary 1 classes. We have driven down primary school pupil teacher ratios from 16.2 to 15.8. All in all, on early intervention, those are examples of the Government acting before it is too late. Mr McNulty, Mr Henry and Ms Alexander spoke at length about the Renfrewshire proposals on using non-teachers to enhance the curriculum. The point that I tried to make earlier to Ms Alexander is that the regulations and the 2001 teacher agreement protect the standard of education in our schools. There is a minimum of 22.5 hours a week of teaching time and teaching can be delivered only by GTCS teachers. That is stated in the regulations. Of course, we should all welcome the opportunity for other people with specialist expertise, whether that is David Miliband, some sporting personality or another appropriately qualified individual, to enhance the curriculum in addition to the core curriculum and the 22.5 hours of teaching. If there is a genuine issue that members want to discuss pragmatically and sensibly, rather than inflaming concerns and sowing unnecessary doubts in the minds of parents, we in the Government are always happy to hear concerns from members from across the political spectrum about their constituencies.

I reassure Ms Alexander that the regulations, in combination with the 2001 teacher agreement, are clear about what the minimum standards are—22.5 hours a week. If she and others wish to have a sensible, genuine, proactive and positive dialogue, we will welcome it. At the heart of all our work we want to maximise opportunities for young people. At the heart of our interests is the education and long-term wellbeing of all our young people.  There was much mention in the debate of the two-hour PE target. As many of my colleagues reiterated, 55 per cent of children in primary schools throughout Scotland are getting at least two hours of physical education a week, compared with a rather meagre 5 per cent in 2004-05. The previous Labour-Liberal Administration introduced that target, but I am pleased that this SNP Government is making progress on it, which is a job that we intend to finish. For members' information, 23 per cent of secondary schools are delivering the PE target compared with 7 per cent in 2004.

If the member does not mind, I want to move on to talk about school buildings, mentioned by Karen Whitefield and others. Despite claims by Opposition parties, no authority, including North Lanarkshire Council, will get less money for schools than has been announced. Unlike the UK Government, this Administration has not and will not cancel any school projects. Of the 330 schools that will be completed by April 2011, 163 have been started since May 2007. I had hoped that members across the spectrum would have celebrated that 120,000 children throughout Scotland have now been lifted out of substandard accommodation. It is a great achievement.

As I said, no authority is getting less money for the schools in its area than has been announced. I thought that many local authorities would have been thankful for the accelerated capital previously announced by this Government.

No, thank you; I would like to make progress—I am already at seven minutes. I thought that there would have been more discussion this morning about the curriculum for excellence. The great irony is that, due to the Labour and Liberal parties' delay and stalling in the previous Administration, it is this Administration that has made progress.

Thank you. We should all recognise that the curriculum for excellence is the most radical reform in a generation and that it will equip our children for the future.  I listened with interest to Mr Whitton's comments. I am pleased to hear that he will be shadowing me closely. I look forward to spending much time in his company.

Mr Whitton should recognise that we are maintaining student support at a record high. Last year, student support budgets were increased by 6 per cent. In times of savage cuts, we are protecting students from the worst of them. We would like to do more for all students in the college and higher education sector but, however much as a woman and a nationalist I dislike the fact, I rely on Westminster for my pocket money. The Labour Party shows great audacity and cheek in raising the funding issue. As I recall, it was the Labour Party that ran away and left us at the mercy of a Tory Government. The Labour Party had an opportunity to form a progressive alliance, but so blinded was it by its dislike—or should I say hatred—of the Scottish National Party, it walked away from its responsibilities. We will get on with the job of governing while it gets on with girning and greeting. There is a phrase, "Vote Labour and you'll get the Tories." This Government has heavily invested time, energy and money in the early years, the curriculum for excellence, reducing class sizes and the school estate and we are leading the world in applying technology to enhance learning, all with a view to preparing children and young people for their transition into adulthood and achieving far more positive destinations than have been the case previously. However, all that early and sustained investment in the early years will be for nothing if access to higher education is not based on the ability to learn, as opposed to the ability to earn. This Government has reinstated unequivocally the principle of free education and we will not cut off opportunities for our young people while they are in their prime. As long as we have breath in our lungs, the democratic intellect—the heart of the Scottish education system—will remain alive and well.

The member will be well aware that the 2001 teaching agreement commits teachers to working a 35-hour week, 22.5 hours of which must be teaching time, and that teaching  time, according to the regulations that were passed by this Parliament, can be delivered only by qualified teachers.

Our draft budget ensures that funding for student support in colleges will be protected at a time when Scotland's block grant is being cut by £1.3 billion. That is a clear indication of the priority that we attach to shielding college students from the budget reductions that we are being forced to make elsewhere. The impact will be that, overall, college students will be supported at the same level of resources as this year.

I thank Mr McAveety for his faith in me and the promotion that he almost gave me. We should welcome the fact that the draft budget that the Government has proposed maintains and protects student support at 2010-11 levels. The budget for this year is £84 million, which represents a 6 per cent increase on last year. Therefore, student support budgets are being maintained at record levels. The member might be aware that, on 21 December, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council announced a further £3.5 million for student support. Although I appreciate that this is a difficult time for colleges and students, given the scale of the cuts that have been levelled at the Government, the member should be assured that we are doing all that we can to support Scotland's students.

In the academic year 2009-10, 620 people in East Kilbride were in receipt of education maintenance allowance.

I think Mr Kerr will find that we have already given that guarantee. I would have thought that he would welcome the fact that, here in Scotland, we are protecting education maintenance allowance while it is being scrapped in England. The member for East Kilbride might  also be interested to know that there has been a 6 per cent increase in the number of young people in his area who are benefiting from the allowance. I hope that he will join us in celebrating that fact.

Careers advice in schools is delivered by Skills Development Scotland. The Scottish Government also funds Lantra—the sector skills agency that is responsible for the land sector—to promote skills development in farming and other land-based industries. A key priority for the sector is to raise awareness of the job opportunities that are available and to promote the sector as a career destination of choice. A series of events with SDS careers staff and skills investment advisers is scheduled to take place during the next 12 months, to highlight the opportunities that the food and drink sector offers and the diversity of career choice, from primary production to manufacturing and processing—in effect, from farm to plate. The approach ensures that staff have the most up-to-date and relevant information when they provide careers information and advice.

I know that John Lamont is a constituency member who has a keen interest in farming. He is right to raise the issue, because, in broad terms, the farming industry needs new life-blood for its future and there is a need to encourage young people into the agriculture and land-based sectors. If we can learn lessons from across the United Kingdom and from other countries, we will be more than glad to do so. The member should be reassured that much good work is going on. The Scottish Government funds Lantra, which runs various successful initiatives, such as the land-based learner of the year awards. Lantra helps the industry to develop  its national occupational standards—including modern apprenticeships. SDS and Lantra work together through various channels, such as websites, contact centres, the network of career centres and the fact sheets that are developed to support the sector. There is also the new entrants to farming scheme, which is available to people under 40. However, the member is right to suggest that there is always more to do and more to learn.

My reply is similar to that which I gave Mr McAveety a few minutes ago. Our draft budget ensures that funding for student support in colleges will be protected, at a time when Scotland's block grant is being cut by £1.3 billion. That is a clear indication of the priority that we attach to shielding college students from the budget reductions that we are being forced to make elsewhere.

I reassure Mrs Peattie that I value greatly the role and contribution of Scotland's colleges in providing education and training opportunities. I appreciate that life is difficult for college students who are taking their first tentative steps into the adult world or the world of work. Some college students are parents, some are part-time workers and others have been made redundant and are taking up opportunities to retrain. The point about the importance of skilling up our workforce for green jobs is well made. It is important that we focus on that as we go forward. The Scottish Government has done well in protecting student support budgets. Clearly, I would like to do more, but the Government operates within the limits of the housekeeping money that it is given by Westminster.

Mrs Baker should be reassured by the action that the Government has already taken. Student support budgets are being maintained at an all-time high and at record levels. As I said to Mr McAveety, on 21 December, the  Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council announced a further £3.5 million for student support. The allocation of those funds is a matter for the individual colleges, which gives them scope and flexibility. We do not have strict eligibility criteria that are operated by a central agency. Colleges can make assessments based on face-to-face contact with students. Colleges the length and breadth of Scotland work hard to support parents who are college students.

Against the background of the interest that various members have expressed, I will now make a statement on the voluntary severance scheme announced by Skills Development Scotland on 16 December. First, I make it clear that a matter of this kind, relating as it does to the staffing of a non-departmental public body, is properly a matter for the board and executive of SDS, having due regard to efficiencies while maintaining operational capability. That approach has held whatever Government has been in office. Nonetheless, the facts are as follows. Skills Development Scotland will need to find savings of £21 million during the next financial year from a budget of £210 million. That, of course, is a direct consequence of the cuts of some £1.3 billion imposed on Scotland by the United Kingdom Government. Let us be clear about the context in which SDS and the rest of Scotland's public sector now has to operate. We face a financial challenge without precedent since devolution, one that represents the biggest reduction in public spending imposed on Scotland by any United Kingdom Government. The voluntary severance programme opened by SDS is a central part of the organisation's plans to meet its share of those significant savings. I accept that it means that jobs will go from the organisation. I regret that. However, there are two important points that I want to make absolutely clear. The first is that the SDS programme is a voluntary scheme with no element of compulsion. The second is that there will be no negative impact on service delivery as a result of the scheme. I have that unequivocal assurance from SDS and I am happy to give the Parliament that unequivocal assurance. What we have is a voluntary scheme about which we have categorical assurances from the board of SDS that service delivery will in no way be compromised. In fact, the very purpose of the scheme is to help SDS to make the efficiencies that it needs to make in order to protect spending on training programmes and other front-line services. Those are the top-line facts.  I turn now to the voluntary severance scheme. The scheme was announced by SDS on 16 December and will run until 28 January next year. The aim is to secure up to 125 full-time equivalent leavers from the organisation. That number will come from an existing base of nearly 1,400 full-time equivalent staff. Staff whose applications to leave are accepted will depart the organisation by 31 March next year. Final decisions on applications made under the scheme will be ratified by a sub-committee of Skills Development Scotland's main board. To summarise: the scheme seeks up to 125 full-time equivalent staff from nearly 1,400, there will be no compulsory redundancies and there are assurances from the board that service delivery will not be compromised. In fact, it is quite the opposite, as the scheme aims to identify the savings necessary to protect front-line services with SDS continuing its commitment to make available 34,500 training opportunities. As I said earlier, we regret the loss of jobs that will result, but this is the sort of tough decision that SDS simply has to take if it is to protect service provision from the full force of the cuts that have been levelled at the Scottish Government. The scheme is essentially about creating a yet more efficient organisation and getting scarce resources to where they are most needed: the front line. In a moment, I will say something about the volume and effect of SDS's skills interventions, but first I will address efficiency. Skills Development Scotland has a strong track record in getting maximum value out of public money since it was set up in 2008. It has achieved £20 million of efficiency savings over the past two years and is on track to deliver its target of a further £19 million this year. For example, Skills Development Scotland and Scottish Enterprise have developed a shared service contract for information technology provision and expect it to deliver efficiencies of around £20 million over five years. What about service delivery? What is Skills Development Scotland's track record on that and why is it so important that we protect it? The interventions that Skills Development Scotland makes are delivering. They are improving outcomes for the unemployed, those who want to improve their skills and young people who face a particular threat from the recession and the Westminster cuts. On that too, let us look at the facts. Skills Development Scotland has demonstrated its ability successfully to direct resources to support people into work, from work to work and to progress in work. It undertakes a number of functions, including, as members know: an all-age careers service that operates the length and breadth of Scotland; support for young people  leaving school and college; a range of national training programmes, including modern apprenticeships, training for work and get ready for work; the individual learning account 200 programme; and the co-ordination of our partnership action for continuing employment—PACE—national redundancy service. SDS plays a key role in our efforts to tackle youth unemployment, which is a continuing priority for the Government. Working with local authorities and others, it helps to ensure that all young people have the opportunity to stay in learning after 16, as that is the best means of improving their employability. Our priority is to ensure that every young person leaving school, college or university has the support that they need for as long as they need it to move into long-term sustainable employment. SDS will help us to deliver that. This year, a record proportion of school leavers—nearly 87 per cent—achieved positive destinations. That is a remarkable achievement in such difficult times. Much of that success is down to SDS's delivery of training. It delivered more than 20,000 modern apprenticeships in 2009-10, exceeding what everybody agreed was a testing target of 18,500 MA places. In doing so, it nearly doubled the previous year's number of MAs. That demonstrates the modern apprenticeship programme's role in delivering a strong economic recovery by supporting individuals and employers in Scotland and ensuring that Scotland has the skills that it needs for future growth and success. This year, SDS is again making available 20,000 MA opportunities. It has also extended its investment in the adopt-an-apprentice and safeguard-an-apprentice schemes until March 2011 to give every apprentice the best possible chance of completing their apprenticeship. Next year—unaffected, as I have made clear, by the voluntary severance scheme—the Government will provide funds to support 34,500 training places. We plan to work with Skills Development Scotland to finalise the volumes for individual training programmes over the coming weeks. That represents the same number of places as Skills Development Scotland's budget supported in 2010-11, which is an enormous achievement, given the scale of the constraint that we face on public spending. Since the start of the recession, our national redundancy programme, PACE, has been significantly expanded through Skills Development Scotland and the service that it provides has been considerably enhanced in response to weakening labour market conditions. The First Minister recently announced a £300,000 package of skills and training support for Moray in response to the uncertainty that was created by the Ministry of Defence's strategic defence and security review.  Following the SDSR announcement, Skills Development Scotland moved quickly to increase its operational capacity in the area and has made it clear that its role is to lead a partnership initiative to assist people whose jobs will be affected. As part of the new funding package, Skills Development Scotland will provide additional training opportunities across the Moray community to supplement the support services already activated through PACE, but, of course, SDS has to make savings somewhere if it is to provide that level of service in Moray and throughout Scotland. That is at the very heart of the voluntary severance arrangements. Skills Development Scotland's scheme will help to create a yet more efficient organisation, ensuring that scarce funds go where they are needed, to help people throughout Scotland.

I thank Mr Whitton for his warm words of welcome. I would, however, have expected that a man of Mr Whitton's vintage would have been far more charming and far less churlish. I am also surprised that Mr Whitton has leaped to his feet to defend a Tory Government in London. I am interested to know what choices Mr Whitton would make. The voluntary severance scheme will save SDS £4.8 million per annum, which equates to 2,300 apprenticeships. Would Mr Whitton rather that we lose 2,300 apprenticeships? As he well knows, SDS has a track record of meeting all its targets, in terms of both providing training programmes and achieving efficiencies. The good news is that this Government and SDS will continue to provide 34,500 training programmes, which are necessary in these difficult economic times. SDS will select those who apply for the voluntary redundancy scheme. There will be no element of compulsion. In fact, as of last night, there were 275 notes of interest for the up to 125 positions that will go.

As I said to Mr Whitton, selecting which staff leave the organisation is an operational matter for SDS, which can ensure that operational capacity is not affected. I am sure that SDS will choose carefully the staff who are permitted to leave the organisation. I am glad that Mr Brown recognises that I have given an  unequivocal assurance to the Parliament that 34,500 training places will be provided. I will continue to discuss the precise detail of that in the very near future with SDS. Mr Brown touched on Mr Whitton's point that this Government is making a brave decision. SDS has a great track record, of which we should be proud. Although it is Christmas, and a bit of bah-humbug is going around, we all should, of course, have the confidence and good grace to recognise that, where SDS has had a success, we should celebrate it. It is that success that is giving our young people a leg up on the ladder of life; SDS is supporting them in taking their first tentative steps into adult life and the workplace.

Is the Liberal Democrat party's concern that there are too few or too many staff in SDS? I am not sure.

I take a very close interest in the comments that the Liberal Democrats have made over the week. Indeed, I am aware that Mr Purvis would like to abolish Skills Development Scotland. Is he proposing 1,400 redundancies? That would certainly be a matter of concern to me. Despite being in office for only a week, I am very aware that my officials in the Scottish Government remain in very close contact with Skills Development Scotland. They worked very hard to seek assurances from Skills Development Scotland that there would be no adverse impact on the provision of training places for our young  people. I assure Ms Smith that I will continue to work closely with my officials and Skills Development Scotland to ensure that there is no adverse impact on the young people whom we are trying to protect from the worst ravages of a Con-Dem UK Government that is introducing slash-and-burn policies left, right and centre. I would be interested to know what Ms Smith's choice would be. Would it be the £4.8 million savings that we are making from our service programme, or is she suggesting that we get rid of 2,300 modern apprenticeships, 130 police officers or 129 junior doctors? The choice is hers.

The member is correct to highlight the fact that not going ahead with the voluntary severance scheme would be the equivalent of losing 2,300 modern apprenticeship places. I grew up in West Lothian in the 1980s, when male unemployment ran at one in four. My father was one of the statistics. There is nothing dearer to me than ensuring that, despite the economic crisis in which we find ourselves, our young people and our workforce have every opportunity to secure their future and to fulfil their potential.

I thank Mr Stewart for the sentiment that he expressed in his question. He is quite right to fight for his local area. The Government shares his concerns about the Moray economy. As I said in my statement, the First Minister recently announced a £300,000 package of support for the area in response to the Ministry of Defence's actions. I look forward to working with Mr Stewart and other representatives of the Moray area to ensure that everything is done to support the Moray community at this difficult time.

The issues that Mr Brownlee raises are essentially operational matters. I draw his attention to the fact that SDS has already met historical targets, both for delivering training places and for efficiency. It is important to note that last year the target for modern apprenticeships was 1,850—a challenging target by anyone's account, but one that was nonetheless exceeded. I will do my best to ensure that targets are met. I have given an unequivocal guarantee to the Parliament. Of course, if there is scope to go beyond targets, we will do our best to grasp that opportunity.

Oh, Mr Purvis. I am beginning to wonder whether Mr Purvis also had his Christmas party last night. The organisation will lose 125 full-time equivalent posts. There have been 275 notes of interest, which does not equate to 275 people needing or wanting to leave at the organisation's request. For personal reasons of their own—which I could not possibly divulge—275 individuals have submitted notes of interest. With respect, I think that Mr Purvis is blistering the issue. I highlight to the Parliament the good job that the SDS does, which is acknowledged even by the Lib Dem Scottish Borders Council—councillors who I am sure are well known to Mr Purvis. They have said: "The concept of combining the various agencies involved in careers development, learning and skills development has been helpful, as multiple agendas have been replaced by a single strategy." Mr Purvis will be well aware of the cuts that are coming, courtesy of the Con-Dem Government in  London. He may well aid and abet a Tory Government, but that is not my role or function.

Ms White raises some practical points, and I am happy to give her all the assurance that she requires that we will be monitoring the situation very carefully.

I do not know the answer to that question, but I will endeavour to find out the information for Ms Grant. We are still at a very early stage and no one, as yet, has been selected for the voluntary severance programme. The programme was just announced on 16 December, and we have 275 notes of interest. It is an operational matter for SDS, but I would have thought that it will give careful consideration to the geographical needs of various communities the length and breadth of Scotland.

Mr Don makes a pragmatic point. We need a range of training and skills opportunities that will equip Scotland for economic recovery, and we have to consider the needs of every sector that serves this country well.

Having had an opportunity to look briefly at the figures that the cabinet secretary referred to, I believe that this looks like a favourable settlement for West Lothian. Could he confirm my mental arithmetic, which suggests that there is a reduction of only 0.35 per cent in that council’s budget? Given the severe weather that we have had this week, I want to ask about winter maintenance budgets. Last year, West Lothian budgeted for £2.2 million but spent £3.9 million. Can the Government accommodate hard-pressed local authorities in any way, particularly if not all local authorities sign up to the generous settlement?

In addition to putting on record my thanks to West Lothian Council staff, I thank Scottish Prison Service staff, whose endeavours in this climate often go unnoticed. The situation of train services in and around Livingston is desperate. The worst example is that no trains have left Livingston North station in the past 10 days, which has forced thousands of my constituents on to hazardous roads. Given that rail services are fragmented—they involve ScotRail, Network Rail, Transport Scotland and so forth—what does the minister think that we can and must do to get rail services in West Lothian and throughout Scotland on a par with those in other cauld and snowy northern European countries?

All politics is personal. At the nub of every debate—and more so this debate—lie our own values, beliefs and life experiences, and they inform how we vote on issues. As politicians, we like to try to rationalise everything, but often the bottom line is how one feels rather than how one thinks and I must confess that my heart usually rules my head. I have found this issue difficult because I have been torn between my own instincts and beliefs and others' personal testimony. If—and I stress that word—the big moral issues of the day can be characterised as a spectrum between individual choice and the sanctity of life, my personal pendulum swings towards the latter and I have to say that, although the debate is not yet over, I intend to vote against the bill at this stage. Before I state my reasons for doing so, however, I should say that I am nevertheless proud to have been one of the signatories who enabled the bill to be subject to parliamentary debate and scrutiny. Nothing should be sacrosanct in this Parliament and, irrespective of our personal beliefs, we should be able to debate any issue and not only be able to defend our own position but allow our beliefs to be open to challenge. That is in the interest of all our constituents and a sign of a mature democracy and—dare I say it—mature politicians. Moreover, as a society, we do not talk  enough about death and dying; indeed, we tend to avoid such matters. My other reason for supporting the opportunity to debate the bill, despite my not supporting it, is deeply personal. I apologise to members in advance for my sentimentality. My father used to say to me that he would rather die on his motorbike with the wind in his hair than suffer a debilitating or terminal decline. That may sound rather brash and matter of fact, but it was his personal and considered position as a result of seeing his brother dying of a lengthy terminal illness. As fate would have it, my father died on his motorbike at the age of 54. I was left wondering for a few days until the post mortem results were returned, but he was a healthy man who was taken before his time by an accident. That left a mark on me. Since then, I have wondered about the rights and wrongs of leaving people to take extreme action when all they want to do is exercise personal choice on how they can die with dignity, whatever that means. There are no easy answers, and as a mother I feel differently from how I feel as a daughter. As a mother I never want to be a burden on my son; as a daughter I never want my mother to feel that she is a burden. After much soul searching, I have come down on the side of those who have lobbied me to vote against the bill. However, I must be honest. I have at times resented the tone and tenor of some organisations, which have blistered the debate and misunderstood the intentions behind the bill. I note with interest that the opinion polls show that 80 per cent are in favour of the bill; in the correspondence that I have received thus far, 10 to one have been against it. The area is difficult to legislate in. That is reflected in the many issues and concerns that the committee report highlights. I was formerly a mental health officer, so the discussions about establishing capacity struck a chord with me, and I take on board the evidence on that from the Royal College of Psychiatrists. I have also considered the concerns about the perception of change in the doctor-patient relationship and, of course, the difficulties in assessing undue influence. The crux of the problem is that the bill tries to deal objectively with some highly subjective issues. In many ways, the issue is simply too much for a member's bill. Margo MacDonald has to be commended for her political and personal courage, but I cannot support this bill at this time. However, I thank her for bringing the issue to Parliament.

I would never argue against a local authority's statutory duty to house the homeless and those in priority need. However, many of my constituents who are financially excluded from the property market are not considered in priority need for council housing, which creates great demand for affordable housing in my local area. Does the minister accept that, for the sake of mixed, balanced and sustainable communities, we need to be able to accommodate hard-working families and individuals who do not necessarily have social problems? Does he further agree that local authorities need to have flexibility in allocating houses? If so, should that not be reflected both in regulation and in law?

I add my congratulations to Mr Purvis on securing tonight's members' business debate. He has worked hard with colleagues such as Keith Brown to establish the cross-party group on supporting veterans in Scotland, which does a good job. I very much like the idea of a veterans charter, particularly as it could encapsulate all that we should be doing at a strategic level for our veterans. Having a charter that plainly states what all public bodies should be striving to do and what their duties are could go some way towards tackling the often inevitable problems that are faced by people who have seen active service, whether those are physical health problems, a disability, mental health problems or associated social issues. Charters are all very well, but actions speak better and louder than words. I very much hope that we succeed in securing a charter. Public  agencies must be persuaded to be willing signatories, and they must then actually do what they have signed up to do. After all, our servicemen and servicewomen do without question what they have signed up to do on behalf of their country. As individuals, as citizens, as a Parliament and as a Government, we should ensure that there is a social contract for veterans, in recognition of what they do for us. I have a particular interest in veterans who end up in the criminal justice system. Colleagues will recall a members' business debate earlier this year on that issue. I hope that a veterans charter would reflect on how the criminal justice system, at every stage from arrest to the worst-case scenario of sentencing and post-release supervision, could be better tailored to support veterans. For instance, community justice authorities could have a veterans champion. With more alert services, we could be doing much more to prevent veterans from becoming involved in the criminal justice system. In that respect, a veterans charter could be a valuable tool. No one is above the law, but we cannot escape the significant mental health issues that are faced by many veterans who end up incarcerated. There is much more to be done in that respect. I take the opportunity to ask the minister what progress has been made on having more reliable data on the number of veterans in Scotland's prisons. In the debate earlier this year, he said that he would pursue the issue at UK level with the new Secretary of State for Defence and the minister with responsibility for veterans, to build on the assurances that the Scottish Prison Service and the Ministry of Defence have given to work together on the matter. We do not want numbers for numbers' sake; we need better information about the profile of veteran offenders, because that will enable us to build up a better picture and have a better chance of rehabilitating veterans who end up on the wrong side of the law. I draw members' attention to a recent report by the Howard League for Penal Reform, "Leave No Veteran Behind: The Inquiry into Former Armed Service Personnel in Prison visits the United States of America", which notes interesting parallels and differences between the UK and the USA in relation to veteran offenders. I should say that on both sides of the Atlantic veterans are far less likely to offend than are the general population, but when veterans offend the offence is more likely to be serious and to involve violence. Veterans tend to serve longer sentences. They also tend to be older: 30 per cent of veteran offenders—a significant proportion—are over 55. Of course, that figure is based on data on the  prison population in England and Wales. We need more information on Scotland. The Howard League for Penal Reform's report floats the idea of a veterans court, a good example of which is in Buffalo in the USA. I am not instinctively drawn to specialist courts, because I think that our courts system should be able to deal day to day with the special issues that are associated with women offenders, drug offenders, domestic abuse offenders and veteran offenders. However, the approach is worthy of consideration, given its success across the Atlantic. I ask the minister to discuss the report with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice.

Will the cabinet secretary comment further on the success of the reforms in cutting the number of abscondees?

I am very interested in Mr Stephen's historical lecture, but what do these historical recollections have to do with the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee report that we are debating? I do not remember discussing the Act of Union at committee.

I am a new member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. On arriving at my first meeting of that committee, I was greeted by a colleague, who inquired what I had done to deserve a free transfer to it. Colleagues may wish to assume that I have been very bad, but, of course, I could not possibly comment on that. One might expect the business of standards and procedures to be a tad arid or turgid. However, much to my surprise, the business at hand is rather fascinating, although, admittedly, complex and at times convoluted.  I, too, thank the committee's clerks, its convener, Gil Paterson, and its deputy convener, Marilyn Livingstone. The committee report before us is an exploration of how to marry some of the recommendations of the Commission on Scottish Devolution, also known as the Calman commission, with procedures of this Parliament. Like my colleagues, namely the convener, my only regret is that because of matters outwith the committee's control more time was not available to engage further with this illuminating topic. The committee should be commended for its focus on the practicalities as opposed to the politics of Calman, and there is much to be thankful for that committee members appear to be pragmatists first and ideologues second, although perhaps that has not been reflected in some of the speeches that we have heard today. In essence, the committee's focus on the Calman recommendations was to examine what works, what could work, what would not work and hopefully to point to where we should leave well alone and not open the proverbial can of worms. The way in which the European and External Relations Committee engages and works with European colleagues is to be commended and it gave lots of pragmatic examples and sound common sense to our committee, as is detailed in the report. If parliamentary privilege and data protection issues were resolved, in theory we could have concurrent meetings of Scottish and UK committees. Members of the Scottish Government have appeared at the UK Government committees and a Secretary of State for Scotland has met committee conveners of this Parliament. As long as there is clarity and a commitment not to blur the boundaries of who is accountable to whom, there could be many doable and desirable opportunities. I was not sold on the benefits of a formal standing joint liaison committee, which was in Calman's recommendation 4.5, and I am glad that the committee steered away from it. Indeed, the thought of such a committee makes me shudder. If we are really committed to better working relationships across Parliaments, having yet another testosterone-filled committee with MSPs, MPs and MEPs all trying to grandstand, outdo and usurp one another is certainly not the way to go. Let me be blunt: we all know who the main protagonists are in every party and Parliament. Quite simply, it would not work. In my experience of human nature and politicians, if we want them to work well together, we need to keep them focused on the task at hand and limit their numbers.

Committees working with counterpart committees on specific tasks and issues, and ministers working with their ministerial counterparts, is a far better way to achieve collegiate working than having an overarching, broad-ranging committee that—again to be blunt and perhaps unkind—I fear would become a circus for the blokes and the media. That is before we even start to unpick some of the more procedural and legalistic issues. The committee was right to reflect throughout its report that there should be strength and simplicity, flexibility and informality. My reflection is that we can have all the protocols and procedure that we want—they are a necessary evil—but ultimately Governments, committees and parliamentarians either want to work meaningfully with their counterparts elsewhere or they do not. Procedures are only one side of the coin, with attitude and outlook on the other. A culture and willingness to work together are as important, if not more important, than the rule book. It is people who make relationships work, which is why procedures about legislative consent motions work. They work because of people such as Bruce Crawford. [ Laughter .] That was unusually sycophantic for me. Irrespective of our political and ideological beliefs, parliamentarians and Governments have a daily responsibility to represent and govern. The priority is the day-to-day job and that requires the ability to work with others in Parliaments in and out of Scotland, irrespective of how and when the constitutional issue is settled. It will always be necessary to have better working relationships with the UK Government, irrespective of whether devolution evolves or Scotland becomes independent. Good relationships are about challenge and change as well as co-operation. I fundamentally believe that as this Parliament grows in maturity, responsibility and power, our willingness to work with other Parliaments such as Westminster, and our effectiveness in doing so, will also grow and flourish.

I congratulate the Health and Sport Committee on its inquiry into clinical portals and telehealth development in Scotland. I do not have the privilege of being a member of the committee. However, having listened to committee members' comments in the debate, I can see that they are a rather feisty and incisive lot. I listened to Dr Ian McKee's speech, in which he spoke about what he  was doing in telehealth 30 years ago, and I suspect that some of them are a bit longer in the tooth than some of us.

I stand corrected; we must get our facts right. The committee has correctly assessed the huge but as yet largely untapped opportunities for portal care, e-health and telehealth. We cannot and must not underestimate the potential to deliver more effective and efficient health care and medical research and a more truly joined-up 21st century health service. Telehealth has given us the opportunity and means to revolutionise the service, with prompt, accessible and preventive health care. The committee is right to aspire to see Scotland as a world leader in e-health and the first country to establish a national-scale telehealth service. I detect its impatience in its report. It is good to be impatient and to demand the best—sometimes that is the only way of moving things forward. Of course, Government must balance a good pace with good footwork, to ensure delivery. As the minister indicated in her speech, good progress is being made and there is a shared vision, not least in the desire to mainstream telecare. Although I understand and accept the minister's decision on HEAT targets, I urge her to consider such targets as a weapon to be retained, if there is a need to cut through the cultural resistance to which Mary Scanlon referred, the pilotitis to which Ian McKee referred or the professional self-interest to which Michael Matheson referred. The financial climate in which we live at present is very challenging—that is probably an understatement—but with every crisis there are opportunities. There are opportunities to develop a shared approach to services, not least in information technology. I reiterate that telehealth is about taking health care to patients, where and when they need it, and not an excuse to centralise services; on that point, I concur with Liam McArthur. I reinforce the remarks that other members have made this afternoon about the great value of technology for remote and rural areas. I know that Livingston is just off junction 3 of the M8 and will not be considered remote or rural, but my constituency is mixed and has a large rural component, where public transport is rather poor. There are also areas in West Lothian where broadband access remains rather elusive. The committee was right to highlight in its report the relationship between the roll-out of broadband and that of telehealth, and the need for those strategies to co-operate. Given that many members have raised the issue of digital participation, I highlight the fact that there is a cross-party group on the subject, chaired by  my friend and colleague Willie Coffey, who assures me that the group is working hard to address some of the issues that have been mentioned. I am sure that members are welcome to attend meetings of the group. I confess that initially I came to the issue of telehealth as a bit of a sceptic. I am the sort of person who would rather speak to someone than send them an e-mail. My initial concerns were probably epitomised by the sketch in "Little Britain" in which a woman sits behind a computer and, irrespective of the customer's question, always gives the answer, "Computer says no." I became a convert when I became aware of the good work that is being done in West Lothian. NHS Lothian, in conjunction with West Lothian community health and care partnership, has been participating in one of the biggest telehealth projects in Europe—a £700,000 project that focuses on the use of telemetry in tackling chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, high blood pressure, diabetes and stroke. To my surprise, the technology is extremely popular with patients, who have the equipment in their own homes. Carers are reassured that their loved ones have more immediate access to health care, and the approach has been proven to improve a patient's confidence and their control over their illness. I will quote one patient who said in an evaluation of the project: "My Doctor phoned me up to say that he had been monitoring my health system and wanted to visit me as he thought I had become unwell. It was great, as I was just about to phone him and ask for an appointment anyway - the system works." Mind you, that sounds a bit more like telepathy than telehealth, so we should perhaps be careful as to what we aspire to. There is huge potential in clinical portals, telehealth, telecare and telemedicine. As has been highlighted in the report from the Health and Sport Committee, we have to grasp the moment and not waste the opportunity to revolutionise health care in this country and turn around the poor health of our nation.

I confess that I have a strong dislike for the words "strategy", "framework" and "action plan". Although those terms convey meanings to politicians and professionals who are involved in the drug and alcohol field, I am not convinced that that terminology means much to the individuals, families and communities whose lives are blighted by drug misuse. Ultimately, people want to know what their Government and council are going to do about the problem. They want to know what we are doing about the chaotic drug user living next door to them, who has a constant stream of visitors day and night—the chaotic drug user who may or may not have children living at home. We cannot and must not underestimate or minimise the scale or scope of the problem of drug misuse in Scotland, given that more than 50,000 people  are using illicit drugs. Facing up to the facts is the first stage in recovery. Neither must we hide our light under a bushel when it comes to the good things that are being done or that organisations and individuals are trying to achieve. It is good news that 100,000 children in Scotland have benefited from the cashback for communities scheme and that the curriculum for excellence is looking at how to promote effective educational programmes, such as choices for life and know the score. We have 1,000-plus more police officers on the street and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency has seized tonnes of drugs, to a value of £26 million. Record investment in drug treatment of £28.6 million is clearly good news, as it is 20 per cent more than before and exceeds the Scottish National Party manifesto pledge. The introduction of HEAT targets is most welcome, such as the target that by 2013 people should be treated within three weeks. The central focus is indeed on recovery. There is a good news story here: the message in our on-going battle is one of hope, not despair, because people can and do recover from drug misuse and change is possible. It is absolutely right to put recovery at the heart of all that we do, given the comorbidity of drug misuse with mental health problems and childhood sexual abuse. However, we also need to be frank in acknowledging that failure is also the norm on the road to recovery. Few people get it right first time—ask anybody who has tried to lose weight or stop smoking. Children have to be at the heart of any framework or strategy. As part of our endeavours, our priority has to be to consider the children whose lives are adversely affected by drug-abusing parents. The problem is endemic and we need to be frank that having a parent who uses alcohol problematically is not and will never be conducive to a healthy childhood. I am not prepared to dress that up in political correctness. The unequivocal message should be, "If you've got bairns, you shouldnae be abusing drugs or alcohol." We also need to be frank and honest with each other about what we can and should do to solve the problem. As we have heard, it is estimated that between 40,000 and 60,000 children are affected by parental drug misuse. We believe that 10,000 to 20,000 of them are living with a drug-abusing parent. I am informed that there is on-going work to try to establish more accurately those numbers and who those children are. Some 65,000 children live with a parent with an alcohol problem. Across the UK, a quarter of children who are on the child protection register  are there because of alcohol or drugs. The figures for children who are looked after, whether at home, in foster care or with family and friends, is comparatively lower. We need to be blunt in saying that we cannot go around every community in Scotland gathering up children whose parents abuse drugs or alcohol. We would never have the capacity to take all the children into care, nor should we. When it comes to protecting children and giving them the best chance, there is nothing worse, or more dangerous, than a one-size-fits-all, blanket philosophy or policy, so what should we be doing? In families where the prospects of recovery are poor, we need to take faster and more decisive action to remove children. However, in the vast majority of cases we should be working with the drug-abusing parent. That is not easy—it is difficult but crucial work. At the heart of the strategy should be the aim to do more about parenting by running parenting programmes with individuals, communities and groups. That work can be done within the community, in the residential setting or in prison. If recovery is to be part of our focus, the other crucial part of that focus should be on parenting. Across the disciplines that are involved in working with people who abuse drugs and alcohol, we need to train more people in parenting programmes.

I remind Mr Kerr that the Scottish Government has made very clear its commitment to the funding of health services. Will he confirm that his position is that he would pass on Barnett consequentials to health?

The legislative programme will build on and consolidate the Scottish Government's record of achievement. We are all well acquainted with the headline highlights: the council tax freeze; prescription charges halved; the small business bonus scheme; 1,000-plus more police officers on  the streets of Scotland; 260 school projects completed since May 2007; waiting times down; and, on average, 100 days more in jail for knife offenders. I believe that one of the biggest achievements to date has been the stability and success of this minority Government. The soothsayers and doom-mongers said that this first Scottish Government would not last six months. Of course, crucial to its success is the ability and determination to work with others, whether it is the Scottish Trades Union Congress, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the police, the national health service or even Opposition parties. Having met 77 of our 90 manifesto commitments, the Scottish Government's record compares well with that of the Labour-Liberal Executive, but we should be setting our sights much higher. The previous Executive may well have brought in the best housing legislation in the world, but it forgot to build the houses. It is this Government that has funded hundreds of new houses in my constituency and thousands across Scotland. We have heard today that there will be no taking the foot off the gas for the Government in the fourth year of this parliamentary session. The legislative programme includes measures of justice that seek to address the centuries-old double jeopardy rule, deal with forced marriages, and modernise death certification to minimise the concealment of unlawful death; and there will be a private rented housing bill focusing on the rights and responsibilities of both tenants and landlords. The dominant issue in the year ahead will, of course, be the budget. It is anticipated that, in the next 12 to 14 years, we will receive £42 billion less from Westminster and, given that it will be 15 years before the budget returns in real terms to 2009-10 levels, I am tempted to suggest that Westminster is part of the problem and not the solution. There is a choice between a decade of despair, and independence. Undoubtedly, difficult times with tough decisions are ahead, but there are also opportunities. First and foremost, there is an opportunity for the Parliament to show the people of Scotland that it can work together to protect their interests against another unelected Tory Government—only this time the Tories are aided and abetted by the Liberals. The severity of the shrinking public finance cake demonstrates conclusively that the status quo is no longer a viable option in terms of what the Parliament can and cannot do. This is where we get to the heart of the matter. My preference has always been to take the constitutional issue to the people—their options and choices for the future— and take it to the people we will. As elected representatives, we would do well to remember that the real debate takes place outside the chamber. We in the SNP will not allow three Opposition parties to deny millions of Scots the right to decide. The Labour Party et al may think that Scots have the right to cheap booze, but I think that we have the right to decide our future. Let us lift the debates of national importance and not appeal to the lowest common denominator. I am an ardent supporter of minority government—as a humble back bencher I think that it is good that Governments do not always get their way—but I am also an ardent believer in conviction, whether on minimum pricing or on a referendum. On the building blocks of life, we must appeal over the heads of the Opposition when it is in the national interest to do so. Minority government brings huge opportunities for the Opposition but, once again, it has missed the boat; the Opposition parties will not say what they will protect and what they will cut. They were even offered the opportunity to draft the second option in the referendum bill, but they were intransigent as usual. Mind you, try explaining Calman on the doorsteps: it is financially complex and economically illiterate; in other words, it is a dug's dinner and nobody truly believes in it. We have already heard from the First Minister that, if Calman had been implemented in 2009-10, we would have been £900 million down. Of course, support for independence does well in comparison with support for Calman, but the majority of polls show that most people want our Parliament to grow—they want change of some description or another. It is therefore beholden on us to bring that debate to the people, so it is shameful that the Opposition parties have consistently said that they would vote down a referendum bill. Either people believe in Scotland as a nation, or they do not. Either they believe that we can manage all our money, or they do not. Either they believe that we have it in us to grow our own economy, or they do not. We should be lifting our eyes to the hills rather than constantly looking down and being afraid of the fall and, to steal the slogan of an opponent, we should be going forward not back. The election in 2007 changed the Parliament and changed the Government; indeed, we got a Government instead of an Executive. The election in 2010 will change mindsets, change confidence and give renewed aspirations to the people of Scotland.

I am glad that the minister recognises that antisocial behaviour orders are not the silver bullet that they are portrayed to be by some. Will he therefore commend the new community safety unit in West Lothian as a sterling example of collaborative working, bringing together the police, the local authority and the West Lothian youth action project? The unit's activities are complemented by a £150,000 investment by the council in diversionary activities for young people on Friday afternoons after school and at weekends.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in favour of amendment 61. Given the fact that the Labour Party voted with the Tories to amend the original Government proposal and take the presumption against sentences of six months or less out of the bill at stage 2, it is entirely proper that Parliament now gets the opportunity to debate the principle of having a presumption against short-term sentences, albeit sentences of three months or less. If the Parliament is passionate about reducing crime and making communities safer, we must cast a cool eye over the evidence and decide dispassionately what works in punishing and changing offenders. All the evidence shows that short prison sentences do not work for low-level offenders. They are counterproductive and costly. We can no longer afford to have a misplaced confidence in prison. I am surprised that members of the Labour Party think that it is entirely appropriate for those convicted of domestic violence to receive sentences of three months or less. If they were really concerned about the sentences that are given to wife beaters, they should not have voted  for proposals to water down the sentencing council. It is interesting that other European countries have walked away from imposing short sentences, other than in extraordinary circumstances. The prison population in Germany is 89 per 100,000, yet in Scotland it is 150 per 100,000. Is there something intrinsically more criminogenic about the Scots? I think not. I remind the chamber that the McLeish commission stated that political factors have more of an influence on high rates of imprisonment than the rates of crime do. On short sentences, it is time for politicians to show leadership and courage instead of resorting to populist and primitive Old Testament views of justice. Goodness me, even Ken Clarke has seen the light. On 14 June, he told The Guardian : "It's not to be soft on sentencing, it's to be sensible on sentencing" and reminded us that it costs more to send a boy to prison than to Eton. In its evidence to the Justice Committee, Victim Support Scotland said that what victims of crime want most is for offending to stop and for no one else to experience what they have experienced. That requires politicians to take their eyes off political expediency and tabloid headlines and have the courage to implement measures that will work in the long term.

I start by declaring an interest. As a former local government councillor, I was a member of the West Lothian children's panel advisory committee for a number of years. The West Lothian CPAC was, in my view, an exemplar in the recruitment and training of panel members. The local recruitment campaign bore far more fruit than the annual national campaign, and great efforts were made—with great success—to recruit men and people with real-life experience. West Lothian panel members represent all aspects of community life, and there is a good spread and variety of professions, backgrounds and ages. The selection process was extensive, and successful panel members have for a number of years now had to evidence their on-going training and development. That was done in recognition of the professional job that we ask volunteers to do. I can say with confidence that the quality of panel members in West Lothian is outstanding. Of course, what exists in West Lothian will not be unique; there will be other areas of excellence. However, I cannot say with confidence that the West Lothian experience is the national experience the length and breadth of Scotland. All change is difficult and, having reflected on my discussions with Senga Kemp, the chair of the children's panel, and Bill MacDonald, the chair of the CPAC, both in West Lothian, I say to the minister that we must ensure that we take the good folk with us. I understand the benefits of moving towards a national supporting body and national standards, but as members on all sides of  the debate have emphasised today, we must not lose the benefits of local activity and knowledge. This morning, I spent a considerable time with a mother in my constituency who feels totally let down and abandoned by the system. Her child was the victim of an incident involving other children. She did not want vengeance or retribution, tempting though that was and is. What she wanted was twofold. At the time, she needed information and support, but they were not forthcoming, so she had to pursue them at a time of great trauma for her daughter and her family. Services were most certainly not seamless and vital information was not shared. Crucially, however, what she wanted to know above all else was that the children who had committed the act against her daughter would not be lost in the system. She wanted to be reassured that everything would be done to turn those children's lives around. She wanted to know that we—the state—would ensure that what happened to her child would not happen to another. Of course, I cannot put my hand on my heart and reassure her that that will indeed be the case. We cannot always prevent bad things from happening to children. However, we need to have a children's hearings system in which we have absolute confidence. Although confidentiality of individuals and families cannot and must not be breached, we need to find ways in which to communicate far more effectively what actually happens in hearings and the range of options that is available. That is certainly reflected in the briefings from Barnardo's and others. It is not just politicians who need to have confidence in the children's hearings system. We need to go out there and convince members of the public that it is not the soft option in addressing the needs of children who are in trouble. Professionals and politicians need to think carefully about the language that we use. We all spend much time talking about outcomes for children when, ultimately, what we are talking about is changing children's lives and giving them the best possible start in life. I am not a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee—that is not a pleasure that I have—so I have not sat through all the evidence from all the stakeholders, which is another word that I hate. However, two things leaped out at me. The first is that it is important to increase powers to address the non-implementation of decisions that are made by the children's panels. As a former social worker, I carry the professional scars of old battles—mainly with health, I have to say—so I read with interest the briefing from the Association of Directors of Social Work, which states that the bill could provide an opportunity to make more tangible the  language of shared responsibility. I suppose that the bottom line is always about improving children's lives. There is an old saying: "You're only young once." Some other interesting briefings were provided by the voluntary sector. I note that, when it comes to decision making and enforcement powers, people want panels to take account of the remits of other agencies. Although I do not disagree with that—it is stating the obvious—neither do I want children's panels to let agencies off the hook. To get the best deal for children, professionals and agencies sometimes have to think and act outwith the box, laying to one side the tick-box criteria and exercising professional autonomy. I hope that the bill will encapsulate that spirit of multi-agency working. Secondly, I was impressed by the introduction of interim compulsory supervision orders, which are far more meaningful and pragmatic than the minimalist place-of-safety warrants. When we need to act, we need to do so quickly and comprehensively. I believe that now is the time to reform Scotland's children's hearings system. The bill gives us the opportunity to hold dear the Kilbrandon principles and move forward to ensure that all children in need have every opportunity to succeed in life. Scotland's children's hearings system has been admired around the world, but time stands still for no one and we should aspire to be world leaders. That will be no mean feat given the financially chastened times in which we now exist, but when cash is tight, it is all important to focus on the very things that matter to us the most.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many GP practices use 084 premium-rate numbers and whether it has any plans to actively discourage the use of such numbers by GP practices. (S3O-10892)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will recall the representations that I have been making on behalf of many of my constituents, who are having to bear the increased costs associated with the use of such telephone numbers by GP practices. Does she agree that it is wholly unacceptable for patients to bear those increases in their phone bills, which, for the many who need to make regular and repeated calls to their doctor's surgery, have been significant?

To ask the First Minister what progress has been made to meet the Scottish Government's target of recruiting 1,000 additional police officers. (S3F-2456)

I am particularly pleased to note that, for the first time ever, there are more than 3,000 police officers in Lothian and Borders. Now that an additional 1,175 police officers are patrolling the streets of Scotland, does the First Minister agree that if we are to support those new officers in striving to make our communities safer, it is now more important than ever that we tackle Scotland's battle with the booze?

I think that most Scots have not just a political commitment but an emotional attachment to our national health service. That is right and understandable. The NHS touches our lives at every age and stage—the good times and the bad. All of us will have had the experience of seeing sick or dying loved ones being cared for by the NHS. The fact that I have a son is due almost entirely to the expertise, skill and care that was available in NHS Lothian. Those are debts that I will never be able to repay, but that is the thing about the NHS—it is not about paying, but about meeting patients' needs, and the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has never deviated from that core value, that belief, that conviction. It is very easy to play politics with the NHS and it is all too easy to scare people and go for the cheap political hit. However, given these financially chastened times and Labour's legacy—an economic and financial mess that it has walked away from, abdicating all responsibility to the Tories and Liberal Democrats in London—we should take some comfort from the fact that there will be no compulsory redundancies, P45s or redundancy notices.

I actually wonder whether Ms Baillie can count. If we want to talk about cuts, let us talk about Labour cuts. It was the Labour UK Government that cut the NHS capital budget by £129 million in 2010-11 as a Barnett consequential of spending in England. Despite the toughest financial circumstances since devolution—and contrary to what Jackie Baillie says—NHS funding in Scotland is at record levels, with a 4.3 per cent increase, if we include the efficiency savings that, unlike other Governments, the SNP Government allows public agencies to keep for reinvestment in front-line services instead of clawing them back or top-slicing them. Despite the £500 million decrease in the Scottish budget, all health boards in Scotland have benefited from a real-terms increase. Moreover, Nicola Sturgeon's amendment clearly states her commitment to apply Barnett consequentials to NHS Scotland if the UK coalition Government's commitments to increase health spending come good. We are clearly in difficult times, but the NHS in Scotland faces them from a comparatively strong position.  I began by speaking about the emotional attachment that all Scots have to the NHS. Historically, the Labour Party has benefited from that attachment. No more, though: the Labour Party tore up its own legacy and reneged on its social contract with the people when it introduced public-private partnerships. It is Labour's biggest shame: it was all about buy now, pay later and it now means having to pay £1 billion over the next five years and getting one hospital for the price of two. Over the next year, the unitary charges for the Edinburgh royal infirmary will be £271 million, or £65 million more than its capital cost of £206 million. That is galling when one thinks that a magnetic resonance imaging scanner costs £1 million to run; that free prescriptions cost £40 million a year; and that £65 million could employ 3,000-plus nurses. After looking at its position on this matter, I do not think that we will be taking any lessons from the Labour Party.

No, I am not accepting any more interventions. I have already given way to Jackie Baillie. The Labour Party also oversaw creeping managerialism; indeed, it was managerialism gone mad. I had the privilege of working for five years as a social worker in a state hospital. It was a great hospital, and we in Scotland can be proud of it. Social workers, like doctors and nurses, work with people, but I found myself having to count things: the number of meetings I attended, things that I was obliged to do under law, and things that had absolutely no bearing on patient care. Of course, somebody else had the job of counting the things that I was obliged to count, so I have to wonder about the ratio of managers to front-line staff. We certainly should not let Labour away with its amnesia, so we should keep repeating that there was no commitment in the Labour manifesto to increase health funding. Instead, every sector, apart from education, was to "cut their cloth". Both recently and in times gone by, there has been much reflection in this Parliament about the economic need for more powers. We need to grow our economy to pay for the social democracy that we want. When it comes to the NHS, the Labour Party might have the past, but the SNP has the future.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is supporting people with Huntington's disease. (S3O-10709)

I am glad that the minister recognises the good work that is undertaken by the Scottish Huntington's Association. As she is probably aware, the organisation undertook an intensive consultation before publishing "'Roon the Kitchen Table'—Outcome of the Consultation with Families Living with Huntington's Disease in Scotland". Indeed, I have a fantastic constituent who participated in the compilation of that report. How will the Scottish Government take forward the issues that the Scottish Huntington's Association identified, namely the need for more specialist nurses and specialist respite and long-term care placements?

Will the member give way?

Does Lord Foulkes not accept that what holds Scotland back is his attitude in harking back to the past—whatever his interpretation of the past is—and using politically sectarian language? Given the Labour party's political blindness to negotiating with others, should he not accept responsibility for the fact that it was you guys who gave Dave the keys to number 10?

I declare an interest: I am what people would call a paint-your-face-blue nationalist. I have believed in independence since I was eight years old—the 1979 referendum campaign had an impact that has been long lasting. As an adult, I can articulate my political, economic and cultural reasons for believing in independence, but the bottom line is that I believe in independence just because I do. In essence, I consider it my birthright to live in a self-determining country. The current devolution settlement is not my final destination, but I voted yes-yes with great pride in the 1997 referendum. Scotland changed and changed for ever and for the better. In day-to-day life, I am a pragmatist—we must do the best with what we have and with what is on offer. There is much talk about respect and positive relationships, which all sounds a bit like marriage guidance counselling to me. Words are important—perhaps more so to women than to men—but words without actions are meaningless. The devil is always in the detail. The Calman report contains much that is positive and consensus exists about a range of discrete and worthy issues, such as powers over drink driving, speed limits and air-guns, on which I have campaigned in my constituency. Of course, we could have made much progress on those issues, but for the previous Labour United Kingdom Government's intransigence. It is a great irony that those who—unlike me—believe in UK plc are at the vanguard of Calman's tax proposals, which would only exacerbate the prospect of conflict. Even if the Scottish Government and the UK Government were of the same political colour, assessing Scotland's tax yield and by how much the Scottish block grant should be reduced would be complex, divisive and unworkable. Many of my colleagues have quoted eminent economists. I will add a quote from Professor Drew Scott, Ronald MacDonald, Neil Kay and Rod Cross, who say: "the fiscal reforms proposed by the Calman Commission are at best an opportunity missed and at worst a recipe for economic instability in the future." The Calman proposals would give the Scottish Government influence over a maximum of 20 per cent of its finances—the same as Scottish local authorities have over their funding via council tax.  That situation would not advance transparency or political accountability. There is strength in simplicity, and fiscal responsibility involves spending what we raise. When talking about finances, the Government's responsibility is to advance our social contract between the people and the Government. People want to know what they pay to which Government and what they receive in return. They want financial responsibility that works.

That is a bit of a Hobson's choice for a nationalist and I have already nailed my colours to the mast and painted my face blue. The devil is always in the detail. Countries throughout the world use many forms of financial responsibility or fiscal autonomy, such as the Basque model. In dealing with the day-to-day business of practical politics, I just want something that moves Scotland forward simply, fairly and comprehensively. I note that the Steel commission went further than the Calman commission did. Yesterday's Scotsman contained an interesting article by Gerry Hassan, who drew historical parallels between the Calman commission and the Scottish Constitutional Convention, which Derek Brownlee spoke about. Gerry Hassan said that the Constitutional Convention was comparatively tame and cautious and that the consequential Scotland Act 1998 was much bolder and much more radical. That is where we are at. We now need a bolder step—we need to move on from Calman and we need comprehensive and sound financial responsibility. I will speak briefly about the Liberal party's amendment, which mentions political reform. I appeal to the Liberals: if they are going to the effort of having a referendum and primary legislation, please could they do so on something that is a bit more radical than the alternative vote? AV's benefits would be only marginal and it would be completely out of step with the more proportional systems for elections to local authorities and to the Parliament. If we have a referendum on the voting system for Westminster elections, perhaps the Liberal Democrats will reconsider their stance on a referendum on Scotland's constitutional future.

Like others, I congratulate my colleague and old friend, Dr McKee, on securing this debate. He rightly pointed out that the family nurse partnership has been well researched over a period of 30 years in the United States. As I understand it, it is somewhat inspired by the system of health visitors in this country. I know that the valuable role of health visitors is appreciated by members throughout the chamber. The way ahead for health visitors has been the subject of debate and will no doubt continue to be so. It is, of course, good news that the family nurse partnership is fully funded by the Scottish Government for three years. I do not doubt that that is money that is well spent on vulnerable first-time parents. As the member for Livingston, I am acutely aware of the high number of young parents in my constituency. I hasten to add that I do not see that as a bad thing—I do not consider the terms "young parent" and "young mother" to be pejorative. Some 38 per cent of 16 to 24-year-olds in West Lothian  have one child or more, whereas the national average for that age range, according to the most recent census, is 32 per cent. Although the figure for West Lothian does not represent huge numbers of people, I note that the rate of teenage pregnancy in pockets of deprivation in my constituency can be three or even 10 times the average. Ian McKee's motion points out that one measure alone will not provide the entire answer to the challenge of working with young vulnerable parents. Young parents do not always access services, which often are not designed for them. Further, public policy is often designed to deter young people from becoming parents too soon, although ironically it has little to say when they do. I am pleased to say that there is a history of good work with parents in West Lothian. The Broxburn family centre has done much pioneering work, combining parenting input with educational input, and the sure start programme has worked well with the department of adolescent and child psychiatry and the department of psychological services at St John's hospital. I am aware that Barnardo's Scotland has an excellent test programme called you first. One of the two test sites is in Blackburn in West Lothian, just outside my constituency. Crucially, the you first programme, like the family nurse partnership, enshrines the belief that young parents are part of the solution and not part of the problem. They are a resource with whom organisations should work in partnership. All the evidence shows that the relationships that the skilled workers—whether they are nurses or social workers—form with the participants, and the skills that they deploy, are often more important in achieving outcomes than the course content. The you first test project has had tremendous outcomes. All the participants are on course to achieve qualifications. There are reports that participants have developed better relationships with their children, and 80 per cent of the parents are receiving the benefits to which they are entitled. They have bank accounts, and they have been put in touch with the local credit union. A general point about the evaluation of programmes such as the family nurse partnership and the you first programme is that we should evaluate not only the outcomes for parents but the outcomes for children. The key objective of all services that work with parents is to improve the life chances of children. One small caveat to supporting such initiatives is that, as Richard Simpson said, we have to guard against endless pilots. We need to ensure good integration and co-ordination of services, whether those are statutory services, the health  service or services in the voluntary sector. We need to avoid duplication, because that is important in these difficult financial times, and because we need to ensure that we have a good geographical and equitable distribution of services. It is always worth making the point that parenting, and ensuring that children get the best parenting possible, is everybody's business: every department of Government, local government and the health service.

Men and women from throughout Scotland who serve in the armed forces make huge sacrifices on behalf of all of us. While no one is above the law, we nonetheless have a moral responsibility to those who risk everything for their country. To do the best by our troops, we need honestly to acknowledge the trauma of active combat and the personal cost for some in terms of physical and mental health, substance misuse, relationship problems and resettling into civilian life, all of which can be the root cause of offending by veterans. If we are to do the right thing by veterans whose front-line experience relates directly or indirectly to their offending behaviour, as with all offenders we need to know who they are, where they are and what works. Of those leaving the forces, 15 per cent experience transitional and coping problems. As parliamentarians, we should be concerned about a recent survey and anecdotal evidence that suggests that there are a large number of veterans within the criminal justice system. That body of evidence exists in England and Wales, and we should seek the same information in Scotland. A recent joint study by the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Defence found that 3 per cent of the prison population in England and Wales had served in the armed forces. However, the National Association of Probation Officers estimated that the figure was 8 per cent; the Veterans in Prison  Association estimated that it was 9.1 per cent; and one study in HM Prison Dartmoor in 2007 estimated that it was 16.5 per cent. What of Scotland, with her strong military traditions? According to the most recent figures from the Scottish Prison Service, there are 135 veterans in a prison population approaching 8,000. That is 1.7 per cent of the prison population who self-report if asked whether they have an armed forces history. As a former prison social worker, I instinctively think that those figures are an underestimate. Indeed, the SPS, to its credit, appears to acknowledge that. I am grateful to the Cabinet Secretary for Justice Kenny MacAskill and the United Kingdom defence minister Kevan Jones for giving me their assurance that they will work with the Scottish Prison Service to ascertain accurately how many veterans are in prison in Scotland. The most thorough study in England and Wales involved the matching of MOD and Ministry of Justice databases. If the findings were similar in Scotland, the number of known veterans in our criminal justice system would at least double. However, the figure for the number of veterans who are serving community service and probation orders is unknown. I will reply to Kevan Jones's helpful letter and will seek the minister's support in encouraging a comprehensive study of veterans throughout the criminal justice system in Scotland. We need to know the number of veterans in prison and elsewhere in our justice system to ensure that the appropriate spectrum of services for veterans at risk of offending is available, from arrest referral, diversion, alternatives to custody, and through-care and aftercare provision for those for whom there is no option but custody. Of course, much harm could be prevented with the right support to veterans, pre and post release from service. Whatever the statistics, veterans will make up a small part of the overall prison population. However, NAPO states that a significant number of veterans have seen combat and that most incarcerated veterans appear to suffer from a combination of post-traumatic stress disorder, depression and alcohol problems. Evidence suggests that armed services personnel are more likely than the general population to drink dangerously. Combat Stress deals with a staggering 4,200 veterans with profound trauma across the United Kingdom. Our armed forces often have experiences of the most harrowing and disturbing nature, so it should be no surprise to us that ex-service personnel who commit crimes are usually struggling with trauma issues. Having worked in both the criminal justice system and the mental health system, I am not convinced that prison or  mainstream mental health services are always best equipped to care for and to rehabilitate veterans whose offending relates to combat trauma. Understandably, veterans would rather speak to other veterans about their experiences. More effective means of preventing and treating psychiatric service-related disorders are required, as it can be 13 years before a veteran is referred to an organisation such as Combat Stress. We know that combat-related mental health problems can be missed or misdiagnosed. At a recent joint meeting of the mental health and veterans cross-party working group, I heard that more education is needed among general practitioners and that, in some instances, the use of benzodiazepines can lead to flashbacks and violence. Some excellent work is undertaken. Recently I was blown away by a visit to Erskine; Veterans First Point is another hugely impressive organisation. The appointment of veterans champions in local authorities and the national health service is welcome, but criminal justice authorities may need to do likewise. I thank the academics and the veteran, criminal justice and mental health organisations that recently gave up their time to participate in a summit that I held in Parliament. I am most grateful to those members who signed my motion and are participating in tonight's debate. I also appreciate the contributions of the many individuals who have contacted me on the matter, subsequent to an incisive article by a young freelance journalist, Rachel Money. I firmly believe that we are only at the beginning of the journey on this matter. Sadly, given the nature of the conflict in Iraq and, in particular, the theatre of war in Afghanistan, if we do not take pre-emptive action we will see more traumatised veterans in our prisons in Scotland.

I think that I am about to run out of time. I have been watching the clocks, but they are all over the place. I end by quoting a Combat Stress poster: "without our help—for some the battle will go on forever".

To ask the Scottish Executive what is being done to address bullying in schools. (S3O-10229)

I thank the minister for his comprehensive answer. I have a constituency case that involves 12 individuals subjecting a  fellow pupil to cyber-based bullying tactics, including the posting of unauthorised images and comments. The police say that it is a school matter and the school says that it is a police matter. What advice would the minister give and how does he suggest that families best protect their children from that type of bullying?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made towards meeting its 40 per cent recycling target. (S3O-9640)

I am pleased that the cabinet secretary appreciates the vital contribution of local authorities, particularly West Lothian, but can he confirm whether the zero waste plan will allow councils to adopt the most efficient form of recycling, or will the 60 per cent 2020 target have to be achieved through the more expensive, and potentially less carbon-efficient, kerbside recycling route only?

The Equal Opportunities Committee's report has begun to articulate the different challenges of working with women offenders. However, the report, as well as the Scottish Government response and this debate, should be viewed as only the beginning of the discourse. The committee report ended on a poignant and pragmatic note when it quoted Sacro, which stated in written evidence: "Perhaps too much emphasis has been given in the past to analysing the profile of women offenders rather than devising solutions to the problem." To give women realistic opportunities to address their offending behaviour is not just an equality issue; it is also about making our communities safer and in many instances creating more secure and stable families.  Politicians need to acknowledge the enhanced vulnerability of women offenders as well as the need to engage effectively with and empower women to take responsibility for their lives. We do women no favours if we infantilise them and frame our discourse with them purely in the context of their victimhood. No one is above the law. However, as the committee said, we need to understand clearly and address the consequences of the different ways in which women enter the criminal justice system and are subsequently treated. As we heard, the female prison population has doubled in a decade, whereas the male prison population has increased by only 16 per cent. Front-line practitioners report higher tariffs for women and we know that, historically, women have been more likely to be imprisoned for a first offence. The impact of imprisonment is greater for women than it is for men, because women are more at risk of losing their children and homes, and because women offenders' lives are far more chaotic, as has been frequently reported. We know that the proportion of male offenders who have drug and addiction problems is high; the proportion is even higher for women offenders, 98 per cent of whom have such problems. It is reported that 75 per cent of female prisoners have experienced childhood abuse. The impact of such abuse, domestic violence and mental health and addiction problems is profound and is most acutely exemplified by women who enter prostitution. The underlying seam, of course, is the comparative powerlessness of women in society. I am pleased that the committee put strong emphasis on the mental health of women offenders. I think that the issue first came to prominence in the 1990s, when there was an alarming suicide rate at Cornton Vale. The issue is not just that there are more women in prison who have what are broadly and glibly described as mental health problems—some 80 per cent of women prisoners have such problems, as opposed to 50 to 60 per cent of their male counterparts, depending on which of numerous surveys we accept. The issue is that, proportionally, twice as many women prisoners as male prisoners are experiencing severe and enduring mental illness. Severe and enduring mental illness requires concerted, co-ordinated and robust treatment in a hospital or from community care services. For the most part, women with severe mental illness pose a greater threat to themselves than they do to other people. I agree whole-heartedly with what Robert Brown said about that. We can improve mental health services in prisons. I am glad that in time the NHS will become responsible for the health care of  incarcerated men and women. However, prison can never replicate hospital care, nor should it do so. I have some sympathy in relation to the reluctance of mainstream mental health services to take on offenders, given that they are not always best equipped to do so, but the practice of sentencing women to prison in the absence of appropriate mental health services is unacceptable. The notion that we should send women to prison for their own protection is fundamentally not right. I spent most of my previous career in social work working with male offenders, including mentally disordered offenders. It was not uncommon to come across men who were in the wrong system—there were men in prison who should have been in hospital and vice versa. However, even I was alarmed to read the evidence of Sue Brookes, a former governor of Cornton Vale, who talked about the frequency with which "women arrived at reception in Cornton Vale clearly not knowing who they were, let alone where they were".—[ Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee , 5 May 2009; c 1005.] That is a fundamental issue of justice. We cannot have women going through the criminal justice system who do not comprehend the court process. It sounded as though the women whom Sue Brookes described were clearly not fit to plead. The report considered whether there is sufficient high-security provision outwith Cornton Vale to treat violent or seriously ill women. Justice cannot be done to that complex issue in this debate. I urge a degree of caution, because the number of women who require maximum-security hospital care such as was provided at the state hospital is very small. Indeed, the number is so small that, when the state hospital was redesigning its campus, the long-term plan was to close Alexandra ward, which was the women's ward. Some time before becoming an MSP, I had the privilege of working on that ward. It is worth noting that most of the women in it had a significant and profound learning disability and could have been cared for elsewhere if the facilities had existed. The development of medium-secure forensic services is welcome, but how those services currently meet the needs of women is questionable. It remains to be seen what more can be done on that issue.

Does Mr Aitken agree that it is wholly unacceptable to send women to prison for their own protection?

Will the member give way again?

Perhaps therefore there is a need for better services, such as medium-secure units, for female offenders who have mental disorders.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will ensure that courses developed under the curriculum for excellence meet eligibility requirements for Scottish Qualifications Authority awards. (S3O-9516)

Does the cabinet secretary share the concerns that have been expressed that some of the new highers that are being developed under the curriculum for excellence are at risk of appearing to be highers in name only, first, because they do not contribute to the national statistics on school performance and, secondly, because some pass marks equate to only 45 Universities and Colleges Admissions Service points, which is not even the equivalent of a C pass?

The First Minister will be aware of the disturbance at HMP Addiewell in my constituency earlier this week, which resulted in injury to two prison officers. I am sure that the he will join me in paying tribute to all the staff at HMP Addiewell. However, we can only minimise, not eliminate, the risk to prison officers, given their very difficult and, at times, dangerous job. Therefore, will he state how the Government will ensure that prison staff, irrespective of whether they work in the public sector or the private sector, continue to receive the support and resources that they need for the job that they do on our behalf?

In supporting the motion, I will concentrate on the parts of Paddy Tomkins's independent review that focus on flood rescue. As many members do, I have an interest in both flood prevention and flood rescue, primarily due to the devastation that was caused by extreme flooding in my constituency in August 2008, so I am pleased that in his motion and opening speech the minister stated quite clearly that the Government accepts the need to act on the recommendations of Scotland's water rescue review. The review makes some eminently sensible and pragmatic suggestions that will, if fully implemented, improve responses for people who need to be rescued in the future. The recommendations also provide the building blocks for a more co-ordinated multidisciplinary service in which all the players are clear about their roles and duties, and in which it is clear who does what and, crucially, who is in charge.  I am all too aware of the fire and rescue services' crucial role in rescuing constituents of mine who were trapped and in severe danger as a result of the severe flooding in Broxburn. The review estimates that each year throughout Scotland the services attend about 200 water incidents, resulting in five public fatalities, 16 public casualties and 30 public rescues. Fire and rescue services have developed flood rescue capability, firefighters are among the most expert in this area and the services already have a statutory duty to rescue persons who are trapped by severe flooding, so it is entirely appropriate that they should lead in the execution of flood rescue. That expert role complements the more strategic role and function of the police, who in such incidents co-ordinate other agencies and resources. A recommendation that, for me, sprang out of the report and which has not been missed by other members, is the need to compile a comprehensive list of rescue assets across all sectors. I do not want to be flippant about boys and their toys, but we need to know how many toys are in the cupboard and what they are. After all, in a small country such as Scotland, we have to learn to share in the interests of those who need to be rescued and, indeed, the taxpayer. As James Kelly was, I was interested to note the suggestion that instead of public bodies purchasing hugely expensive equipment to deal with extreme situations, only for it to remain underutilised for most of the year, it might be appropriate to have contracts with the private sector. The caveat is that such equipment must be accessible quickly, easily, unconditionally and at a fair price—we cannot have public services being held to ransom. As always, of course, the devil will be in the detail. Having heard the testimonies and accounts of elderly constituents who were rescued, I was pleased to read in the review that the Scottish Ambulance Service—for which I have enormous respect—is developing a water incident support capability. We cannot understate the dangers of, and trauma that is caused by, flooding. Often, paramedics provide the initial post-rescue assessment, care and treatment. We certainly must not dismiss or diminish the experience of those who have been rescued from severe flooding by concluding that they are just a little wet and cold. Some constituents of mine who were affected were elderly, were vulnerable or had pre-existing medical conditions. They rightly feared for their lives as they saw their homes and a lifetime of possessions being destroyed. As we know, flooding also brings with it contamination, the spread of pollutants and all the health risks associated with such things. The Scottish  Ambulance Service must be commended for attempting to develop the service and for seeking to improve medical care not only for people who are being rescued but for the other emergency responders who face the challenging and hazardous conditions that are caused by severe flooding. I welcome the fact that Paddy Tomkins's review acknowledges the voluntary sector's role in flood rescue. After all, its resources range from the highly trained RNLI to more local organisations that rally round in response to events. The right balance has been struck between the appreciation that local needs are best met with local plans and informed by local knowledge. We must also remember that local canoeists, anglers and suchlike can provide invaluable support in prolonged search and rescue operations. Nonetheless, the review was quite right to state that the collation of local plans must also amount to a coherent national strategy. Like John Farquhar Munro, I think that there is a need to emphasise on-going public education and personal responsibility for water safety. Members will no doubt have seen the news a week or so ago, when it was revealed that a driver drove his car down the frozen Union canal in West Lothian—an act so stupid that it renders me almost speechless. I am pleased to note that that matter of extreme irresponsibility is being dealt with through the courts, as is entirely appropriate, given the potential risks that it presented to those who responded to it, particularly the emergency staff. I am pleased to participate in the debate. I support the motion and will end my speech on that note.

I am proud and privileged to represent the constituency in which I was born, and I regret deeply the decision that has been taken by Bausch & Lomb to push ahead with the closure of its award-winning manufacturing site in Livingston. It is a devastating blow for the workforce and for the local economy in West Lothian. When I was growing up in West Lothian, in the early 1980s, male unemployment in the area was one in four. Indeed, my father was one of those statistics. I therefore take seriously any job losses in my constituency. I thank members across the political spectrum for supporting the motion that is before us tonight. Members will be aware that the first 45 of the 500 planned redundancies took place during the holiday period. Losing one's job is hard at any time of the year is hard, but it is harder still at Christmas. While there is stoicism among the workforce, there is also immense dignity and pride. The decision to transfer production from the site in Livingston to Waterford in Ireland represents an injustice to a committed and highly productive workforce, given Bausch & Lomb's success in Livingston. Bausch & Lomb acquired the Scottish  contact lens manufacturer Award in 1996, and based its operations in Livingston, which remains highly productive and efficient. The SofLens product meets the high quality standards for the Japanese market, and only 20 contact lenses in a million are lost. Livingston is a lean operation—local management certainly do not jet about in first class. Bausch & Lomb was highly regarded, and was supportive of other local businesses and the wider West Lothian community. However, despite its reputation, success, efficiency and prudence, the Livingston site still lost out to Ireland, and we must ask ourselves why. Bausch & Lomb is owned by Warburg Pincus LLC, a New York private equity company, which, in response to the current economic downturn, crunched some numbers and decided that it needed to reduce its manufacturing sites from three to two. There is not much that we can do about that—until we scratch the surface and look a little closer. Bausch & Lomb was never going to close its corporate headquarters in Rochdale in New York, which is the mother ship, with a large research and development base. It was therefore a choice between Livingston in Scotland and Waterford in Ireland. The significant factors in Ireland's favour include lower corporation tax and the ability to access Government grants. In contrast, West Lothian lost its assisted area status in 2006. It also costs more to make workers redundant in Ireland. When will we truly learn the lessons of the importance of corporate HQs, investing in R and D and considering how best to compete with the world? When will we learn that, to protect Scottish jobs, we need a Parliament with the economic and taxation powers to do so? The 90-day statutory consultation period has expired, and Bausch & Lomb, Unite and staff representatives have agreed on an enhanced redundancy package. A range of training programmes has been made available, and a job shop and advisory centre has been set up on site, supported by partnership action for continuing employment. The first phase of transfer of production will commence this month and the process will continue into 2011. However, I believe that where there is life, there is hope, and I urge the Scottish Government and Bausch & Lomb to leave no stone unturned to see whether some remnant of the business can remain in Scotland. After all, acorns grow into oak trees. If we cannot save jobs, we have to find sustainable ways to create them. I will therefore focus on the opportunities that are afforded by the clawback of the regional selective assistance grant of £1.1 million. I am already on record as advocating that that money should be utilised to create jobs in West Lothian. Indeed, there is  precedent, as that is exactly what happened when Motorola left the area. I remind the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth that West Lothian has the highest unemployment in a generation, above both the Scottish and United Kingdom averages. Youth unemployment is in excess of 8 per cent, and we have one of the largest more choices, more chances cohorts in Scotland. I began my speech by reflecting on the West Lothian in which I grew up, and I will end by reflecting on the determination that there is to succeed in West Lothian. There is an economic partnership between the local council, college and chamber of commerce, all of which contain people with experience, commitment and the will to drive us through these difficult times. To me, West Lothian is like Scotland: it is small and beautiful in parts and has so much to be proud of. However, like Scotland, it could do so much better. I hope that the cabinet secretary can help us to achieve that better future and give serious consideration to the use of the RSA clawback.

On balance, I agree with the Aberlour Child Care Trust's conclusions on the evaluation of GIRFEC so far. It states in its briefing that much has been achieved but that there is still a job of work to do. When it comes to Scotland's children, there is never room for complacency. The GIRFEC pathfinders give a significant early indication of better outcomes for children. As Margaret Smith has acknowledged, the number of children on the child protection register has fallen; reports are being submitted on time; children are seeing their supervising officers within target times; and the length of wait for adoptive and permanent placements has fallen. The HMIE report is very much welcome, as it has provided us with the clearest and most comprehensive picture of how child protection services throughout Scotland are performing. It is based solely on the first reports, as opposed to any of the follow-up reports, in which sense it is slightly behind the times. Nonetheless, it has established a baseline from which to test progress. I noted with interest how the 30 councils had performed across the 18 quality indicators—graded from excellent to unmet—which gave a total of 540 possible grades. There were only 12 grades of excellent and, at the other extreme, 13 of unmet. The bulk of the grades—438—were very good, good or satisfactory, straddling the middle of the range. That is a good start, but we should be aiming for excellence. We should aspire for good, very good and excellent because, to be blunt, even satisfactory is not good enough. It would not be good enough for my son if he were ever in need of care and protection. Why should we not aspire to and achieve the best child protection system in the world? The question remains: how do we do that? We talk about outcomes, but what we actually mean is how we can keep more  children safe and how we can improve their prospects. I recall the findings of the report "For Scotland's children", which said that the children who were most in need of services were those who were least likely to receive them. Although there are issues around difficult-to-engage families, there are also issues around difficult-to-access services. One of the positives to come out of the GIRFEC pathfinder pilots is the fact that the families have reported benefiting from and appreciating the support and care that has been provided through a one-team approach. Of course, we need to look through the eyes of a child to shape the services, but there is no getting away from the fact that, as adults, we must take the responsibility to do what is in the best interest of each child who is at risk. The importance of universal and core services should never be underestimated. Public pressure and media scrutiny can result in politicians grabbing for the new trend, fad or initiative despite the fact that, in times of crisis, it is more important than ever to invest in and replenish bread-and-butter services. I cannot think of Baby P and others like him without getting angry. His injuries should have been obvious because they were so appalling and were sustained over time. It is correct and proper to focus on the high-profile, extreme cases to learn lessons, but the danger is that professionals and services can focus so much on the extreme cases that they neglect or miss the more numerous situations in which the symptoms and signs of abuse are far less obvious—more subtle but just as damaging. Our focus must be on prevention as well as on investigation. It should not surprise us that risk assessment is the area that we need to improve the most. Risk assessment is complex: it requires skills, knowledge, experience, instinct and good old-fashioned common sense. It is mutlifactorial, interdependent with and underpinned by the achievement of other quality indicators, the obvious one being the timely sharing of information. To date GIRFEC has built the foundations for such assessment and, when fully implemented, it should deliver consistent assessment across professional and local authority boundaries and provide a shared language and understanding of risk. Yesterday, we debated violence against women and many of us commented that gender-based violence is a cause and consequence of women's inequality. We described it as a human rights violation. I agree 100 per cent with Children 1 st that there should be zero tolerance of violence against children in all its forms. Similar to the work on domestic violence and abuse, we need to challenge some of our cultural values and assumptions about children. Children need the  safety and security of boundaries, consistency and routine. I have never subscribed to the view that children should be seen and not heard—many members who have met my two-year-old will say, "Just as well". We should take pride in raising our children and young people to question, challenge and change their lot in life.

To ask the Scottish Executive what specialist health services are available to children with epilepsy in West Lothian. (S3O-8727)

Epilepsy West Lothian has recently told me that there is only one paediatric nurse who specialises in epilepsy for the entire Lothian region, with a caseload of 900 children. Consequently, only three clinics for children who have epilepsy are held at St John's hospital per year. Although I will write to NHS Lothian about that, how can we best improve provision for children in West Lothian, given the growing number of children in the region and the fact that one in 100 children has epilepsy?

Does Mrs Mulligan agree that the real issue is that we have to ensure that violent perpetrators go to jail for more than six months and that a sentencing council would help us to ensure that violent offenders are sentenced in a much more consistent fashion? Therefore, the issue of the presumption against short-term sentences is largely redundant.

Will the member give way?

I hope that the debate will give a national focus to the many local campaigns that are contributing to the international campaign of 16 days of activism against gender violence. As has been said,  violence against women is both the cause and consequence of women's inequality, linked to disparities in employment, health, wellbeing and participation in public life. It is continuously related to poor mental health and substance misuse. Crucially, it disables women from being everything that they are and want to be. We should not and must not underestimate the social and economic costs of gender-based violence, as well as the harm that is caused to individuals and their families; Marlyn Glen referred to that. In essence, violence against women continues to be a human rights violation. The motion rightly celebrates the work that is being undertaken in communities the length and breadth of Scotland, supported by the Government. I will, therefore, touch on the cutting-edge work that is being done to create sustainable services for women survivors and their children in West Lothian. Resources and skills are shared across a strategic partnership involving social work, police, health, education, criminal justice, housing and women's aid. West Lothian is one of the local authorities that include the issue of violence against women in their single outcome agreements. Crucially, there is an acknowledgement that survivors are diverse and not a homogeneous group and that there are multiple forms of abuse and deprivation. Therefore, services across various disciplines, while encouraging disclosure, must provide a supportive and single point of contact for multiple services. Substance misuse services in West Lothian now screen all women's service users to establish whether there is a need to refer them to violence against women services. Locally, there will be moves towards implementing routine inquiries of abuse across key priority settings such as mental health, accident and emergency, primary care, sexual and reproductive health and maternity services. The practice of just asking the question struck a chord with me. Given the focus that there is now on the impact of domestic violence on children and young people, I thought that colleagues might be interested to know about the excellent preventive educational programme that is being delivered in all West Lothian secondary schools and the West Lothian domestic abuse children's screening group, which, in 2008-09, received a staggering 2,000 referrals of children who had been exposed to the physical and psychological dangers of domestic abuse and violence. For me, that is a stark reminder of the pervasiveness of violence against women and children. It is well known that one in four women will experience gender-based violence at some time in their life. As has been stated, 54 per cent of survivors report repeat victimisation.

I listened with interest to the arguments that were made in favour of establishing domestic abuse courts throughout Scotland, but I would like the practices of such specialist courts to become routine in every court the length and breadth of Scotland. I am glad that the minister acknowledged the need for more refuges, given that Scottish Women's Aid recently reported turning away 52 per cent of women who were seeking a place of safety. Surely it cannot be beyond our wit to ensure that the affordable housing investment programme provides a focus and impetus for the building of purpose-built facilities. Like Shirley-Anne Somerville and others, I raise the issue of women who are refused accommodation and support because they have no recourse to public funds. The UK Government has announced the pilot sojourner project, which is available to women who have entered the UK under spousal visa, but what happens to women who are fleeing violence who have entered the UK as students and workers? What about asylum seekers and trafficked women? What representations will the minister continue to make to the UK Government in that regard? With regard to violence against women, I believe that we have begun to climb the mountain, but we have not yet reached the summit. I end by quoting the former UN Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, who said: "Violence against women is perhaps the most shameful human rights violation, and it is perhaps the most pervasive. It knows no boundaries of geography, culture or wealth. As long as it continues, we cannot claim to be making real progress towards equality, development and peace."

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will ensure that colleges receive sufficient bursary, hardship and child care funds. (S3O-8611)

I am sure that the minister is aware of the two excellent colleges in my constituency, Oatridge College and West Lothian College, which are awaiting the outcome of their requests to the Scottish funding council for bursary funds for the next year. As overall funding for the college sector has increased by £45 million, can the minister give any indication of how much of that 6.9 per cent increase will actually go towards  funding college bursaries? Can he give us any further clarity as to when we will know?

To ask the First Minister what efforts the Scottish Government is making to reduce the number of air-gun incidents. (S3F-2054)

The First Minister will be well aware of the white paper that was published yesterday by the UK Government in which it refuses to introduce legislation to transfer life-saving powers on air-guns prior to the next general election, and of the response of the Conservatives, who have indicated that, if elected, they will delay legislation. Will the First Minister therefore set out what action he is taking to introduce legislation immediately? Will the Scottish Government consult on how control over air-guns could be applied in Scotland?

If we are passionate about reducing crime and making communities safer, we need to cast a cool eye over the evidence and dispassionately decide what will work and what measures will bring about lasting change in our communities instead of resorting to populist, primitive, Old Testament views of justice. Justice requires proportionate punishment, but punishment alone does not work. By necessity, we need to focus on the control, change and care of offenders. The bill is an attempt to strike the correct balance. In many regards, the tide has begun to turn, with more police, recorded crime being down by 11 per cent over the past two years, cashback for communities—or, as one of my constituents describes it, cashback from crooks—and the fact that we now have a serious organised crime task force. However, if we are to secure real and lasting changes, we need to make some bold decisions. It is time to show some leadership and courage. Often, in such debates within and outwith the Parliament, there is much talk about who is tough and who is soft in the rather macho world of politics, but I put it to members that the soft ones are those who take the easy and lazy option: those who opt for political expedience and pander to the right-wing reactionaries as opposed to taking tough decisions and showing leadership in tackling real concerns. One of the things that the McLeish commission demonstrated is that political factors often have more influence on high imprisonment rates than crime does. I would think that that would be a good, solid reason for a sentencing council. I would also think that a sentencing council would have a valid role in, and be a sensible vehicle for, introducing some good, robust guidelines on knife crime and domestic violence. Women offenders have already been mentioned. Why is it that, since 1997, the women  prisoner population has risen by 90 per cent? Have women all of a sudden become more bad? I diplomatically suggest that it may have something more to do with how the judiciary views women and women who offend. Therefore, society needs to have some say in how sentencing is operated.

Mr Aitken knows that I am no fan of benevolent paternalism in that many of the issues that women offenders face are exactly the same as many of those that the poor young white men in our prisons face, whether mental health or illiteracy. I am no statistician, but I would be interested to know whether Conservative members support the Equal Opportunities Committee's work on women offenders, led by Margaret Mitchell. Perhaps the Conservative party could address that in its closing speech. I support the Scottish Prisons Commission's view that prison should be used wisely and sparingly. We have a misplaced confidence in prison. As Stewart Maxwell said, it is counterproductive and, as Robert Brown said, it disnae act as much of a deterrent. I commend the Government and the cabinet secretary for showing leadership in the bill and not being feart to lead the way and lead the debate. I want to raise three issues, but I suspect that I will have time to raise only one of them, which is the proposal to raise the age of prosecution instead of raising the age of criminal responsibility. In my view, that just does not go far enough and is therefore not in keeping with the bill's ambition. While unruly certificates will be gone and children will be remanded in local authority care in secure units and not prisons, I note the Commissioner for Children and Young People in Scotland's concern that the proposal may not meet our international obligations. I agree with my colleague Aileen Campbell that children are not mini-adults.

I will finish on that point.

Like other members, I am grateful to Margaret Mitchell for securing the debate. I appreciate the work that has been done by Deafblind Scotland on the issue and its success in encouraging so many of my constituents to correspond with me. As we have heard, there are at most 5,000 deafblind people in Scotland—a small but not insignificant group of people who have a unique and profound disability. It should therefore not be beyond our wit or our finances to make what would amount to a small change in transport policy. As my constituent, Mr Laird, from Stoneyburn, said to me, small changes can have a big impact. Mr Laird got to the heart of the issue when he wrote in a letter to me: "Even the very brave, able, deafblind person rarely travels alone. In most cases their companion is a skilled guide/communicator who acts as the deafblind person's eyes and ears." Despite the necessity for deafblind people to travel with a skilled companion, the companion is eligible only for some discount and only in some local authority areas. The situation becomes very complex because, in some areas, the discretionary local authority rail travel concession is available only within the local authority's boundaries. Of course, the whole point of rail travel is to enable us to tackle longer journeys comfortably and in a more reasonable timescale, and to access more direct routes. It is also often necessary and desirable for deafblind people to use rail transport as opposed to other forms of transport. I am pleased that concessionary rail travel for deafblind people's companions is available in West Lothian and, I note, also in Falkirk and Edinburgh. I wonder whether those authorities, which share boundaries, could extend their schemes into one another's areas, or whether they currently do so. That might be an important question to ask. The crux of the issue and the motion is the principle that deafblind people's companions are valuable and essential and should be able to travel for free by rail and by bus. I am told—and I am sure that my constituents will correct me if the information is wrong—that it costs £1 for a companion to travel on the train from West Lothian  to Edinburgh, but if that person wants to travel from West Lothian to Glasgow, they have to pay half the full fare. In my constituency, there have been big improvements in the Bathgate to Airdrie line, which offer enormous opportunities to people across West Lothian, and it would be a missed opportunity if deafblind people could not also receive the maximum benefit of those improvements. The national concessionary travel scheme is one of Parliament's successes, partly because of its universal eligibility for older people. However, although I support the universal aspect of the current scheme for older people, I regret that some people are excluded. The minister knows my views about the exclusion of people with learning disabilities who are on the lower rates of the disability living allowance, and I have the same view about the exclusion of disabled people's companions. It is fantastic that someone who is over 65, irrespective of their health and financial position, can travel anywhere in Scotland for free, but surely the same principle should apply to all Scotland's disabled people and their companions whether they are travelling by bus or by rail. I note that deafblind people are not specifically defined in the Transport (Scotland) Act 2005, and I wonder whether the minister would consider the benefits of changing that. The Scottish Government has conducted a major review of concessionary travel, the report of which was published in May. Although the review considered the need for additional companions on buses and whether to extend the scheme wholesale to rail, it did not specifically consider extending the funding to cover companions on rail for blind or deafblind people. As some months have passed since the publication of the review, I wonder what the minister's current thoughts are and whether he will consider addressing that issue.

To ask the Scottish Executive what has been—oops, I am reading the wrong question. I will start again. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made with the non-statutory pilot to elect board members of NHS Lothian. (S3O-8311)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary agrees that the non-statutory pilots provide an ideal opportunity for boards—in this case, NHS Lothian—to increase patient involvement and further democratise health boards. Does she accept that patient forums could, for example, be expanded and used as a constituency from which to elect board members? If so, is the suggestion worthy of fuller exploration and consideration?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it endorses the people's charter as supported by the Trades Union Congress. (S3O-8227)

The minister will be aware of the laudable objectives that underpin the  charter, which in essence is a campaign for change that aims at reconstituting the fabric of our society. What does the minister see as the best route to delivering the people's charter in Scotland?

I completed my higher education degree first and enrolled in West Lothian College some years later, and I must say that my college course made a far more direct contribution to my future studies and career as a social worker than did my university course. If I am blunt, I can say that what I learned during my undergraduate years can be summed up as a few unhealthy lifestyle habits and a passion for political activism. It is right to acknowledge that Scotland's colleges are crucial and central to economic recovery. That is reflected in the £45 million that is allocated to the further education sector in the  draft budget, which represents a welcome 6.9 per cent increase in these turbulent economic times. West Lothian College, in my constituency, is committed to working with the Government on its sustainable economic growth agenda. The scale of enrolments in Scotland's colleges is staggering—the best part of 500,000 students were enrolled in 2007-08—and colleges such as West Lothian College have the capacity and willingness to deliver even more for their communities. Unemployment is at its highest since 1996 and West Lothian has one of the highest levels of unemployment among school leavers and the more choices, more chances group. I have written to the cabinet secretary on the matter. I welcome the additional 270 places under the get ready for work programme. The cabinet secretary said that she met apprentices at West Lothian College this morning, so I have no doubt that she has a good understanding of the desire in West Lothian to do more. The recent announcement by Bausch & Lomb that it will shed 500 jobs in Livingston is a salutary reminder that global factors can have a devastating impact on a local economy. The announcement also underlines the importance of colleges in rebuilding local economies. Scottish colleges have successfully used additional funds to maximise training places, many of which are targeted at young people who need more choices and chances. At West Lothian College, 60 per cent of students are under 19 years old, and throughout the college sector in Scotland 24 per cent of students come from the most deprived areas. A success of the sector is its strong links with employers. Some 76 per cent of employers who have taken a college graduate have said that their new recruit was well prepared for work. In my area, the development of school-college partnerships has brought many benefits for secondary 3 to S6 pupils, who have the option to study for national qualifications in a college environment. It is clear that student support funds are under strain, despite the Government's action to increase hardship funds by £1 million a year and despite investment of £9.5 million this year. West Lothian College reported to me that its bursary funds ran out early this year. The college's principal also told me that some regulations of the Department for Work and Pensions disadvantage students, who lose direct and related benefits when they come to college. Like Margaret Smith, I might well write to the cabinet secretary on the issue, which needs to be addressed. Like other members, I have received correspondence from people who are calling for a  statutory right to child care for parents who attend college. I will pay close attention to the proposed Government review of child care support for students. Child care is crucial and I am glad that I attended college many years before my son arrived. There is much success to celebrate in the college sector. Good or very good results were recorded in 99 per cent of Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education college reviews from 2004 to 2008, so we can be reassured that our colleges deliver good value for money and a high quality of education. We can be left in no doubt that Scottish colleges represent real value for the public pound.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will consider changing the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 with regard to land maintenance companies. (S3O-7981)

I thank the minister for his answer and for the time that he took yesterday to meet me and campaigners. I therefore know that he is well aware of the tens of thousands of homeowners in my constituency and elsewhere in Scotland who have no practical recourse to measures to remove land maintenance companies. Given Lord Gill's report on the failings of our civil justice system and the length of time that the Consumer Focus Scotland test case will take, will the minister give a commitment that this Government will continue to seek a solution to the problem sooner rather than later?

I, too, commend Rhona Brankin for and congratulate her on securing the debate. It appears to me that campaigns to raise awareness of breast cancer or to improve services  for women are often led and championed by women. That is how things should be, of course, although the support of our male counterparts, whether they are doctors, researchers, campaigners or loved ones, is no less valuable. We must not forget that, although the number is comparatively small, men suffer from breast cancer too, as Christine Grahame intimated. I welcome the high visibility and profile of the women's health campaign that we are discussing, but it leads me to reflect that there is perhaps more need for more men's health campaigns to be led by men in a way that has resonance for them. Many people enjoy the fun in the breast cancer wear it pink campaign, but different approaches may be needed for prostate or testicular cancer. I should not generalise too much about men and women: I mistakenly read "Men are from Mars, Women are from Venus" and found that, with my tendency to offer solutions at the expense of really listening to the problem, I am more akin to a man. A constituent asked me to participate in this debate. She wrote to me to describe the tragic loss of her mother, who was only 56 when she died as a result of secondary cancer, after developing breast cancer for the second time. In her letter, she said that she has a teenage daughter and two young nieces, and that she wants them to have a future "without the curse of breast cancer". My constituent wants to know from the Government what it is doing to increase awareness of breast cancer, especially given the findings of the recent survey by Breakthrough Breast Cancer indicating that awareness is alarmingly low. We have already heard about some of the survey's alarming findings—one in six women are unable to name one sign or symptom of breast cancer. My constituent would also like to know what plan the Government has to ensure that more women participate in the breast screening programme. Around 30 per cent of women in Scotland do not attend screening, which is vital if they are to get the early diagnosis that will improve treatment outcomes. My constituent spoke of the importance of screening for her mother. I would be interested to know how the Government intends to reach harder-to-reach groups. I thank Breakthrough Breast Cancer and the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign for their briefings. I am sure that the authors of both documents will understand when I say that my copies are now looking a wee bit worse for wear, as my two-year-old son was also keenly reading them last night. Thankfully, he did not scribble over them—he usually saves that for correspondence from a cabinet secretary. Both briefings were not only informative but focused on  how we can best prevent and, most important, beat breast cancer. Ultimately, the message was one of hope and aspiration.

The First Minister will be well aware of Bausch & Lomb's announcement of the closure of its Livingston site and the transfer of all production to Ireland. Will he guarantee that the Scottish Government will continue vigorously to explore all options with a view to saving jobs in Livingston? Does he agree that there has been an injustice to the 500-strong workforce, who have been crucial to the success, efficiency and productivity of Bausch & Lomb in Livingston?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making with regard to devolving powers over firearms to the Scottish Parliament. (S3O-7707)

In my constituency air-guns cause havoc and harm. The cabinet secretary may be interested to know that F division of Lothian and Borders police reports that there were 40 incidents in West Lothian over the past year. In light of his answer, how does he intend to persuade the Home Secretary to reconsider his position, and what would he do if he was successful in securing the devolution of air-gun regulations to Scotland?

Like other members, I associate myself with the minister's tribute to Ewan Williamson. Many firefighters in my constituency knew and worked with Ewan. I also take the liberty of drawing to members' attention the motion that has been lodged by my colleague, Shirley-Anne Somerville, which supports the call for Ewan Williamson to be posthumously awarded the Queen's gallantry medal. I urge members to consider giving their support to the motion. The FBU briefing contains the salutary statistic that in the 27 years from 1979 to 2006, only two firefighters lost their lives in the line of duty yet, in  the relatively short period between 2007 and 2009, the figure was four firefighters. As other members have done, I thank the FBU for the briefings that it has distributed, which—as is its style—are both informative and straight to the point, rarely missing a target. I have been impressed not only by the FBU's steadfast focus on representing the interests of its members, but by its commitment to making our communities safer. It disappoints me, therefore, that some of our fire and rescue authorities are not as inclusive as they could be in their decision-making processes. They could do far more to listen to and consult the FBU, which would be in the interests of all stakeholders, not the least of which are our communities. I listened with great interest to the minister's comments when he advised us that the Government intends to review the integrated risk management planning process. I am told that the IRMP process is meant to enable fire and rescue authorities to identify risks in their areas and put in place the resources to address those risks. That sounds grand in theory, but the reality in my constituency has been very different, where the IRMP process has been used to identify the euphemistically entitled "efficiency savings"—more commonly known as "cuts". There has been a downgrading of services at the Craighill station in Livingston, despite the fact that the new town has a growing population and a growing number of residential homes, businesses and nursing homes, as well as a hospital at the heart of the town and a nearby motorway. The IRMP process was used to justify the cut, but I fear that the reality was that a political decision was made. The minister is well aware of my views on joint fire and rescue boards, which disadvantage smaller areas such as West Lothian in relation to their larger neighbours. There has also been inconsistency in how the IRMP process has been developed, and the differing approaches to the process have contributed to divergences in response standards, although I note that national incident response standards were abolished in 2005, as members have previously stated. Like other members, I have considerable sympathy for the idea of common or national incident response times, given the concerns that exist about postcode-determined fire services. Given that the Scottish Ambulance Service can work to national response times of 13 and eight minutes, it seems odd that response times for fires in identical buildings differ in Scotland's cities because of local determinations of resource application. My last grumble—in the current debate, at least—relates to training. I note the minister's comments about unnecessary duplication in training and information technology. This is where I will sound like a broken record, but I make no apology for that. The minister is well aware of my  objections to the proposal by the Lothian and Borders fire and rescue board to build a new multimillion-pound training centre at Newbridge while it cuts front-line services in my constituency. I believe that that would be a fickle use of public money, given the proximity of Lothian and the Borders to the national training centre in Gullane. I will end on a positive note. The facts that the minister has announced his intentions regarding the pensions commutation problem and that he has previously ended speculation in relation to control rooms are to be celebrated. I also record my appreciation for the firefighters in my constituency—in particular, the retained firefighters in Broxburn, who had to deal with the severe flooding that occurred in the community last year.

Like many members, I have my own barometers to test public opinion, whether my mailbag, my inbox or the people I speak to at my surgeries and at meetings with local groups and organisations. Many teachers in my constituency have advised me of the debates that have been held within their classrooms. People have spoken to me at the shops in Livingston shopping centre and I must be candid and say that visiting some of my relatives is akin to attending a public meeting. Although there are clearly opposing views about whether Mr al-Megrahi should have been sent home to die, contrary to what is reported in the media and by the political classes, I have found there to be calmness in the community. There has been close interest in, and scrutiny of, Mr MacAskill's decision, but calmness nonetheless. By inclination, I prefer to speak to people rather than refer to opinion polls, but a trend in recent polls has struck a chord with what my constituents have told me over the past few weeks. Before Mr MacAskill made his decision, The Sunday Times published a poll that found that 11 per cent of respondents supported compassionate release. However, since the decision, further polls have shown that 32 per cent and 40 per cent support compassionate release and, of course, there is the poll that shows that 56 per cent of Scots do not think that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice should quit. That reflects my experience of a growing understanding among people on the street of why the justice secretary released Mr al-Megrahi home to die. The television images of saltires being flown in Libya turned many folk against compassionate release. Conversely, the interjections by the United States increased support for the justice secretary. I have also found that there is an informed understanding and critique of UK and US foreign policy as a result of the aftermath of the war in Iraq and the mass opposition to that war. It has not escaped the notice of many that Hillary Clinton recently welcomed a member of the Gaddafi family—the national security adviser for Libya—to Washington saying that she valued the relationship between the US and Libya and the opportunities to broaden and deepen that relationship. The duplicity of doing one thing and saying another is not lost on the general public. Although we all must accept that we exist in a global geopolitical environment—that is the point that Margo MacDonald has been making—the justice secretary took his decision purely on the law and policy on compassionate release. The decision to send Mr al-Megrahi home to die was taken by the book. The procedures were followed, Mr MacAskill received advice and he considered it  accordingly. He made his decision on the grounds of justice, not politics. It is significant that the justice secretary received unanimous recommendations from the Parole Board, the medical report, prison social workers and the Scottish Prison Service. Members should believe me that that is not always the case. The grounds for compassionate release were clear—the prisoner had a terminal illness, death was likely to occur soon and the prisoner was incapacitated—but the criterion that interests me the most is the statement that compassionate release would be considered where continued imprisonment "would, in the light of the conditions in which" the prisoner "is being held, endanger or shorten his/her life expectancy."

That rather neatly brings me on to some of the so-called alternatives that have been put forward by the Labour Party and the Conservatives. While standards of health care in prisons are much improved, issues of security and environment mean that prisons are not and cannot ever be a hospice. The suggestion that Mr al-Megrahi could have gone to a hospice is rather disingenuous and offensive because of the adverse impact that that would have had on innocent dying people. We then go to the Newton Mearns option. We have already heard that that would have required a minimum of 48 police officers, at a cost of £100,000 a week. I know that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice said that costs and financial implications were not part of his decision. However, I also know, from speaking to members of the public in my constituency, that it would not have been well received that, in a tight financial climate, we were spending hundreds of thousands of pounds to protect a convicted criminal.

No, thank you.

I will indeed. I would have had more respect for Opposition leaders if they had declared their decision on compassionate release prior to that decision being made, as opposed to waiting to see which way the wind blew.

There have been countless reports in the media and comments from members concerning the  availability of information on the case prior to last week's announcement. In order to bring to an end baseless accusations, will the cabinet secretary once again confirm when the medical report and other reports from the Parole Board, the prison governor and social work, on which his decision was based, were received and the timescale in which the decisions were made?

I congratulate Christina McKelvie on securing the debate. She is indeed a champion of the good work that social workers undertake throughout Scotland. Historically, the social work profession has not explained itself well or articulated the daily balancing act that must take place in dealing with competing rights and demands. Working with people and families is complex; it requires fine judgments that are based on the most robust information available at the time. The good work is often overshadowed by the headlines when things go wrong. Work with people is never risk free. Nonetheless, as a profession, we are not flawless and must be accountable for the decisions that we make. The quid pro quo is that politicians must be accountable for resourcing, policy and legislation. I was proud to be a social worker. Like Trish Godman, I am a former mental health officer and have speculated with her—privately, of course—about who in the Parliament may be liable to detention. There were times in my career when I advocated vigorously for the rights of prisoners or detained patients to receive appropriate, humane care and treatment. However, there were equally times when I pursued a course of action that infringed on the liberty, privacy and rights of my clients. That, of course, was unpopular with clients and, at times, with other professionals, whether in the Scottish Prison Service or the health service, but social workers—like politicians—have to make unpopular and hard decisions. I was always  fortunate enough to have some very good and supportive managers. I make a special mention of Mr Ed Finlayson, who is currently the team manager at the state hospital at Carstairs. He had a lot to put with in managing me. There were many highs and lows in my career and a low point that I will never forget was the first time that I had to make an application to detain a young mother under mental health legislation. Some months later, she went on to commit suicide. We always wonder whether we could have done things differently or better but, for some people—as Trish Godman will know—mental illness is terminal. I also have many positive memories and achievements. One is that a young offender whom I supervised on a probation order used to say to me in all earnestness that he would rather have spent six months in Saughton than see me every week. That is a good example of effective community sentencing. I never worked in a social work team that was fully resourced; there were always vacancies. I hope that, when people criticise social workers, they remember the serious workload and resource issues. However, I was somewhat heartened last night when I attended a school awards ceremony for a primary 7 class and, among all the boys who wanted to be footballers and jet pilots and the surprising number of girls who wanted to be beauticians and hairdressers, there was one pupil who wanted to be a social worker and another who wanted to be a social care worker. So perhaps there is hope for the future. I add my support to the many social workers who, unlike me, continue to practise and to make daily the best, albeit hard decisions.

Although the crux of the bill is to ensure that the one-year time bar applies to human rights claims brought under the Scotland Act 1998, and although—notwithstanding issues about chemical sanitation—slopping out has become a thing of the past, I will for the record state my objections to the practice, as it forms an important backdrop to the bill. The situation that we are trying to rectify has arisen not only as a result of the House of Lords judgment but because of the time it has taken to end slopping out. Anyone who has ever visited a prison and has had to interact with prisoners in cells with buckets of human waste sitting in the corner will know that the practice of slopping out adds absolutely nothing to the rehabilitation or punishment of offenders. The fact that it took so long to end slopping out was detrimental not only to our justice system but to public confidence in the system, as it created a situation in which people could make claims under human rights legislation. The SPS's original target was to end slopping out by 1999, but a review in 2002 of the prison estate and plans to build two new prisons pushed the date back to 2008 at the earliest. In 2004, the  Napier case established that slopping out was indeed a breach of human rights. In 21 st century Scotland, should it really have taken human rights legislation to end a Victorian practice? In that respect, we—and I mean that collectively—made a rod for our own backs to the detriment of taxpayers. The reticence of and feet dragging by politicians and the SPS showed what happens when we frame justice debates in terms of hard or soft measures instead of focusing on what is proportionate, what is right, what is just and what actually works. I hope that we can all learn this salutary lesson for future debates on the criminal justice system. I have no doubt that, in overturning the Court of Session judgment on the Somerville case, the law lords were very erudite in the legal points on which they based their decision. What I did not understand was Jack Straw's reticence and the view that he expressed in December 2008 that he was not persuaded of the case for changing the law. As the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has made clear, it was wholly unjust and unacceptable for the Scottish ministers to be the only public authority in Scotland—and, indeed, in almost the whole of the UK—to be exposed to claims for damages under human rights legislation outwith the one-year time bar. I am glad that the situation has been resolved and that, as a result of the bill, savings will be made to the public purse. Many people were alarmed to hear that the SPS had to set aside £67 million to deal with just over 1,200 outstanding cases and that it expected to deal with 200 new cases a month. I look forward to hearing how the cabinet secretary plans to put the savings to good use. For the record, I hope that some consideration is given to making extra funding available for community sentencing. Although I have never subscribed to the view that money alone can solve all the ills and difficulties faced by criminal justice social work departments and those who are tasked with supervising offenders, I think that, in introducing enhanced community payback orders and ending unconditional automatic early release, we have an opportunity to invest further in innovative and imaginative practices that will enhance public confidence in the criminal justice system.

Because of the short time available and given my previous life as a mental health officer, I want, like some other members, to focus on disability hate crime. However, I make clear my support for the eradication of all forms of hate crime. As others have said, the bill is not an end in itself but another crucial step on a journey and—unusually for me—I echo Bill Aitken's call for a review of the impact of the legislation. Any crime that is committed because the victim is a member of a minority group deserves to be treated as an aggravated crime, because it is an assault not only on the person but on their identity. Like Bill Kidd and Bill Butler, I realise that in many ways the bill is playing catch-up and creating a level playing field for disabled and LGBT people. As statutory aggravations already exist for other forms of hate crime, it is incumbent on us to level the playing field for other excluded groups. At this point, I thank Leonard Cheshire Disability for its particularly illuminating briefing. There are 800,000 disabled people in Scotland, 59 per cent of whom are women—I am advised that that is because we live longer than our male counterparts. However, as every study makes clear, a disabled person is five to 10 times more likely to experience hate crime as a non-disabled person. We have already heard the statistics that  show that those with mental health issues are 11 times more likely to be victimised and that 90 per cent of people with a learning disability report experiences of being bullied. What is absolutely clear is the persistent and repetitive nature of the offences against and harassment of disabled people. In the past, there has been some confusion about what has been considered, treated and responded to as antisocial behaviour when offences should have been prosecuted as hate crimes. It is interesting to note that the perpetrators of hate crimes against disabled people are often strangers. They often participate in groups and the crimes are often committed in public places, although there is some differentiation between rural and urban areas. In rural areas, the crime against the disabled person is more likely to occur in a domestic setting. Like Michael McMahon, I think that we need to be alarmed and concerned at the number of disabled people who accept harassment as part and parcel of their impairment. Leonard Cheshire Disability eloquently talks about the need to prevent attacks on disabled people by shining a light into a dark corner of our society. By passing the bill, we will ensure that hate crime will not be shielded from the public view. There is some information on the prevalence of the attacks on and the offences that are committed against disabled people, but I believe that it only scratches the surface. The bill is vital in uncovering the hidden world of hate crime that, unfortunately, exists in our society.

Will the First Minister congratulate the SNP-led West Lothian Council—[ Interruption. ]

In West Lothian, teacher numbers are going up and class sizes are going down faster than almost anywhere else in Scotland. Will the First Minister therefore encourage other councils to follow West Lothian's good example, which demonstrates that under the concordat councils can bring real improvement to schools and the pupils for whom they are responsible, if they have the political will to do so? [ Interruption. ]

I thank Helen Eadie for giving me the opportunity to speak in the debate, as I would like to record my appreciation of the world-class work that the Simpson centre for reproductive health at the Edinburgh royal infirmary does to help and support childless couples. Thousands of babies are born as a result of in vitro fertilisation treatment. The latest figures, from 2005, show that 10,000 babies were born throughout the UK as a result of IVF in that year, of whom 942 were born in Scotland. Of course, all children are special and all parents boast, but I have no doubt that the mothers of IVF babies have more bragging rights, because their miracle babies are a triumph not only of medical science, but of faith. I have always believed that being a parent is a privilege and not a right, but everyone should have the same right to treatment. Equity of access is a founding principle of our national health service. I am therefore interested to hear from the minister what progress has been and will be made to ensure universal implementation of the recommendations of the expert advisory group on infertility services. As Mrs Eadie said, variations in the upper maternal age limit and in definitions of a treatment cycle are unacceptable. We know that, for clinical reasons, unexplained infertility will not be diagnosed until three years have elapsed. A woman living in the Lothians will then have an additional three-year wait for treatment. For a woman in her 30s, six years is far too long to wait. If someone has unexplained infertility and is in their 20s, there is a 50:50 chance that treatment will be a success. If they are in their early to mid-30s, that reduces to one in three. If they are in their mid to late 30s, it reduces further, to one in four, and for those over 40, it reduces to one in 10. Speedy treatment is therefore imperative. I know of no couple who go into treatment blind to those statistics. To put oneself through treatment is to let the genie of hope out of the bottle when, for many people, there will be no baby at the end of the rainbow—only disappointment and despair. For that reason, I commend Infertility Network UK on the work that it does not only in assisting couples in accessing treatment but in supporting them to live with its consequences, good and bad. I hope that the minister can advise us what support is currently available to such organisations. The funding and availability of fertility treatment—like all health services—invariably rightly becomes wrapped up in political issues of choice and priority, but it should not become a political football. As a back bencher, I want to do all that I can to push fertility treatment up the list of political priorities, but I have the luxury of not  having to make the hard decisions for which the minister must account. However, for those who have had to work harder than most at conception and have eventually been blessed with the safe arrival of a real wee person who looks so unique but so familiar, we know how lucky we are. As Mrs Eadie stated, it costs approximately £4,000 per cycle of treatment, but our children are priceless. Fertility treatment may not be life saving, but it is certainly life giving, in more ways than one.

To ask the Scottish Executive what it considers the benefits will be of the recently announced changes to individual learning accounts. (S3O-7048)

How will those recent changes promote sustainable economic growth in West Lothian, given that it has the highest unemployment for a decade, the biggest more choices, more chances cohort in Scotland, a rising population, demand for training that outstrips supply and comparatively low salaries?

To ask the First Minister what lessons can be learned from operation algebra. (S3F-1707)

In addition to ensuring the rigorous monitoring of known sex offenders, what measures will the First Minister consider, given that seven out of the eight offenders who were convicted as a result of operation algebra were not registered sex offenders? How can we do all that we can to ensure that all aspects of society do what is possible to protect children from offenders who are not known to authorities, but who are too often known and trusted by children and their families?

The cabinet secretary mentioned the Barnett formula. Would the decision on community courts have been any different had Scotland received the Barnett consequentials of the money that was released from the reserve to support investment in English prisons?

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this debate, as I truly believe that the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill will be part of this Government's—and, indeed, the Parliament's—lasting legacy. Like many members, I have received a sizeable number of representations in support of the bill. Eco-congregations, eco-schools, fair trade groups and the many community councils in my constituency are actively engaged in combating climate change by changing behaviour at every level of society. I have lost count of the number of times that I have visited a primary school, only to be blown away by finding that very young children know exactly what we need to do to save our planet. That is very uplifting and it gives me great hope for the future. However, the responsibility of parliamentarians is to bequeath to our children the right building blocks. As John Swinney said in the debate yesterday, the challenge is to create "enduring" legislation. With that in mind, we must bore down into the detail of this substantial bill. I have no hesitation in proffering my support for this world-leading and ambitious bill, and although I take exception to small parts of some of the detail, I do not want that to detract from my overall support for it. That said, I seriously question the inclusion of section 59, which enables the current or any future Government to introduce, if it so wishes, charges for supplying carrier bags. I am grateful to my constituent Mr Bill MacDonald for bringing to my attention the problems in principle with that proposal. The merits of charging for carrier bags were fully debated and tested by the Environment and Rural Development Committee in the previous parliamentary session during consideration of Mike Pringle's Environmental Levy on Plastic Bags (Scotland) Bill. The committee did not recommend Mr Pringle's bill to Parliament and it was withdrawn—for good reasons. More recently, when scrutinising the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee  clearly pointed the Government back to the work of the Environment and Rural Development Committee and the issues that it highlighted. On pages 67 and 68 of its stage 1 report, the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee states: "In relation to the specific issue of charging for the supply of carrier bags, the RAE Committee noted that it had received numerous written submissions opposing the policy behind this section of the Bill. This opposition was based on evidence which suggested that proceeding with this policy is unlikely to deliver the intended environmental benefits and instead lead to increased emissions."

I accept that the voluntary agreement is resulting in reduced use of plastic carrier bags, but I am concerned that that may be counterproductive and that we will merely replace the lightweight carrier bags with which we are all familiar with heavier plastic, paper, cotton or jute bags, which are often coated in plastic. Such products have a carbon footprint, are often bulkier and can lead to increased transportation costs. Evidence was presented to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee that waste could increase by 13,700 tonnes per annum. The Irish experience has demonstrated clearly the unintended consequences of replacing plastic bags with so-called environmentally friendly bags for life, which has resulted in an increase in food packaging for loose items for health and hygiene reasons. That is an example of a counterproductive policy. It is regrettable that the focus has been on lightweight plastic carrier bags, because—as I know—they are reusable as nappy bags, sandwich bags, freezer bags, pedal-bin liners and dog-poop bags; they can also be recycled. Surely the issue should be to improve plastics recycling. With that in mind, I welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement earlier this year that £5 million from the zero waste fund will be used to develop a home market for reprocessing plastics. I am well aware that the Government's stated intention is not to introduce charging at this point but to retain the option to do so. Matthew Farrow of the Confederation of British Industry hit the nail on the head when he said in evidence to the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee: "The carrier bag issue is endlessly rehearsed and is a symbolic issue, and to be honest I would say that the proposal for carrier bag charges is probably not the best way to increase diversion from landfill. The effort that would be put into that policy could be better expended  elsewhere."—[ Official Report , Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee , 3 March 2009; c 1620.] If we are to create what Mr Swinney calls "enduring" legislation, we should not make symbolic proposals; instead, our proposals should be robust, rigorous and evidence based. In my view, section 59 is ill conceived. The merits of the case have already been rejected twice. Plastic bags account for 0.2 per cent of our waste, so our energy should be focused elsewhere. I urge ministers to put the issue to bed once and for all and delete section 59 from this otherwise ambitious and world-leading bill.

I congratulate Mary Scanlon and commend her for marking international midwives day with tonight's members' business debate; there is much to celebrate in the good work undertaken by midwives at home and abroad. I have absolutely no doubt that we need to enhance the role of midwives and how they are perceived and valued as well as to increase the number of midwives here in Scotland and in the developing world. The value of a good midwife is never more evident that when the birth of a child is not progressing as planned: I recall my birth plan going well and truly out the window. I would like to pay tribute to two midwives—Sandra Smith and Michelle Davidson—who work at St. John's hospital in Livingston. They recently won a top award from the Royal College of Midwives for promoting normal and natural childbirth. The judges selected that project  because it was innovative and reinvigorated a Cinderella service—antenatal care. We have to remember that pregnancy and childbirth are normal and natural experiences but, as Mary Scanlon highlighted, for some women—depending on where they live, their access to health services and their own health—they can be perilous. Worldwide, a woman dies in pregnancy and childbirth every minute. Over half a million women die due to complications and 10 million women suffer debilitating illness and lifelong disabilities. Those are truly shocking statistics. There is a huge disparity in maternal health between rich and poor countries and within rich and poor countries depending on whether one is in a rural or an urban area and whether one has had access to education. A woman's lifetime risk of dying in childbirth in the developing world is one in 76 and in countries such as Niger it is as high as one in seven, but in the industrialised world it is one in 7,000. As we heard, mothers play a vital role in the economic health of their families and motherless children are trapped in a cycle of poverty. Worldwide, 2 million children are orphans due to their mothers dying in childbirth. Despite the progress, the number of deaths of children under five remains unacceptably high although it has dipped below 10 million—an annual death rate that is truly appalling, particularly when it is from preventable diseases such as pneumonia, diarrhoea, malaria and measles. The situation in Scotland is very different. Nonetheless we are not without our challenges. While neonatal and postnatal deaths have decreased over the past 30 years, the rate of stillbirth remains static. Like Mary Scanlon, I was shocked that the number of women per 100,000 births who die in Scotland is 13 and how poorly that compares with rates in other European countries. Low birth weight is a crucial issue that affects 6 per cent of births in Scotland but is related to 60 per cent of perinatal deaths. Smoking and the age and weight of the mother are factors in low birth weight. I cannot help but note that the latest figures, from 2005-06, show that 133 low birth-weight babies were born in West Lothian. It is obvious that maternal health relates greatly to Scotland's record as the sick man of Europe, and I look forward to hearing about how the Government will progress the agenda.

I add my thanks to Dr Richard Simpson for lodging the motion and securing the debate this evening. While I knew of telehealth, and of its existence within my constituency, I am afraid to say that finding out more about it was on my list of many things to do. Prompted by Dr Simpson's motion, I found out more about telehealth developments in West Lothian and beyond, and I was pleasantly surprised. However, I agree whole-heartedly with Liam McArthur that telehealth is about the quality of care, and enhancing the patient's experience and access to medical care. It is certainly not a Trojan horse for the centralisation of health services. During my investigation I found out that NHS Lothian, with West Lothian community health and care partnership, has been developing telehealth capacity by working with GPs and identifying health clinicians who would be willing to contribute. I am told that that £700,000 project is one of the biggest telehealth projects in Europe. It focuses on the use of telemetry in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, high blood pressure, diabetes and stroke; smaller projects are examining childhood obesity and congestive cardiac failure. An innovation of particular interest is the exploration by West Lothian CHCP and NHS Lothian of the use of technology in mental health and palliative care. I will certainly look at that work closely as it develops. Thirty patients in West Lothian have telehealth equipment in their homes. The pilot work throughout the Lothians has shown that the technology is extremely popular with patients, in terms of improving their self-confidence, reassuring carers and improving access to care. One patient who was involved in the pilot said: "I've never felt so well looked after in my life. I think it is like a godsend". The spouse of a 75-year-old patient said: "I don't worry about him the same as I used to. It's all taken care of before it can get to an uncontrollable level. This machine tells Alec he's ill even before he knows it himself." Another patient said: "Sometimes you phone up for an appointment and you can't get one, so I feel that if I've got the telehealth device, I therefore have a chance of seeing a doctor anyway."  That remark was reiterated by another patient, who said: "My doctor phoned me up to say that he had been monitoring my health system and wanted to visit me as they thought I had become unwell. It was great, as I was just about to phone him and ask for an appointment anyway—the system works." Health managers tell me that it is too early to say whether the technology has had beneficial effects on hospital admissions, although the international work suggests that that is a possibility. I know that the Lothians project will examine closely the impact of telehealth on the length of hospital admissions and the number of unplanned admissions. The aim is to reduce hospital days by 3,000. I was delighted to note that in February this year an investment of £1.6 million was announced for e-health, and that more than £0.5 million of that money had come from private partners—including a company called Atos Origin, which is in my constituency and to which I pay tribute. Before Christmas, I spent a Saturday night with the Scottish Ambulance Service in Livingstone, to see at first hand some of the technology—which Dr Simpson mentioned—that is used in responding to the needs of patients with chest pain and suspected heart attacks. That work is to be commended; I will be watching it closely, and I hope that the Scottish Government will pursue it with all its heart.

We would all do well to remember that, ultimately, a house is a home and that our homes are the cornerstones of our lives. I firmly believe that the record investment in affordable housing by the SNP Government of £1.5 billion over three years will ensure that more houses are built the length and breadth of Scotland. Combined with the ending of the right to buy, that will put the plug back in the bath, ensuring that the new water—the new resources—are not allowed to drain away or be wasted. I listened with interest to Mary Mulligan's comments. Like me, Mrs Mulligan represents a West Lothian constituency. She described herself as a positive person, but I am sure that she will forgive me if I beg to differ on that. Given the new house-building programme in West Lothian, I would have thought that there would be more cheer in Mrs Mulligan's speech. Because of the actions of the SNP Government, West Lothian Council will build 700 council houses over the next four years—other local authorities will be able to do likewise. That work started last winter and the first homes are now complete. Out of those 700 houses, 458 will be in Mrs Mulligan's constituency whereas only 242 will be in my constituency. So Mrs Mulligan has 458 reasons to be cheerful in comparison with my 242. The record of the SNP Administration and local SNP administrations compares very well with what went before. Over a 12-year period from 1995 to 2007, West Lothian Council, under Labour, built 280 houses through a housing partnership; we aspire to build 700. In a third of the time, the combined efforts of SNP members, both local and national, will result in more than double the number of new houses becoming available. I listened with great interest to the remarks that were made on the subsidy that has been made available to Midlothian Council and how it, unlike other councils, will receive only £10,000 per unit. I say to Mrs Mulligan that there is nothing underhand about that. Like Midlothian Council, West Lothian Council will receive a subsidy per unit of £10,000, and it is apparent that the larger house-building projects will receive a smaller unit-price subsidy. I also remind her that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities had a pivotal role in the distribution of those funds. I am sure that members will welcome both the announcement during the recess by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing that she will double the money that is available to local authorities to build new homes from £25 million to £50 million, and the £100 million that the Scottish Government has made available to registered social landlords with a view to securing additional  investment in houses. In my constituency and Mrs Mulligan's constituency, registered social landlords have purchased a number of completed units. During the 10 years that I was an elected member of West Lothian Council, housing was one area in which there was a degree of political consensus between SNP and Labour councillors. I feel it is highly important for me to remind Labour parliamentarians about the genuine shared angst and anger at the ever-growing waiting lists and rising homeless presentations. With the shrinking housing stock, people were forced to go down the homeless route as opposed to biding their time on a waiting list, and the consequences for housing services, children and community cohesiveness were stark. The second area that had cross-party unanimity was ending the right to buy. The shrinking stock eventually resulted in council houses becoming the houses of last resort because to get a council house someone had to have huge social needs to gather enough points to meet the demand. That is a very sad reality for our communities, which rely on a much more balanced and cohesive social mix. The third issue that we always agreed on locally in West Lothian was the need for Westminster to write off the housing debt. I am pleased to say to Labour locally and nationally that we, the SNP, have stepped up to the plate on ending the right to buy, which will, as the minister highlighted, save between 10,000 and 18,000 homes. Will Labour members get Westminster Government to step up to the plate and write off the housing debt? Less of an issue for an authority such as West Lothian Council but certainly in the Scottish national interest is that the social and economic arguments for bailing out banks in the current economic climate have the same resonance for housing. What is good for the goose is good for the gander.

As a constituency member, the debate is timely for me because, last night, I had the good fortune of attending a public meeting in Ladywell in Livingston. Recently, the community there was once again touched and hurt by a serious offence against a young man. Although I do not want to confuse criminal behaviour with antisocial behaviour, the backdrop to the difficulties was a lot of gang-related antisocial behaviour. The community faced the type of difficulties that can either make or break a community. However, people contacted their councillor Peter Johnston and said, "Enough is enough. We want to reclaim our community." That chimes with much of what is in the antisocial behaviour framework. The community demanded and successfully negotiated a package of measures, including an increased police presence and a commitment to provide a facility for older children to hang out in, for want of a better expression. Leisure activities are provided free to young people on Friday afternoons, when they leave school after lunch time and there are facilities such as a drop-in cafe on a Friday afternoon at which young people are fed and can socialise before they, dare I say it, go out binge drinking at the weekend. Although that might sound like happy-clappy social work psychobabble, it is what communities want and, at the end of the day, it works. The community has successfully negotiated services and a package of measures for all their children and young people.  I have lost count of the number of times over the years that I have heard parents and concerned members of the community lament the fact that all our energy is often targeted only at those who misbehave or offend and that resources and services are often provided only for those who are in difficulty. The cry has been, "What about the children who don't misbehave? What about the children and young people who are not causing difficulties?" The complaint is that those children are overlooked. The antisocial behaviour framework is absolutely right in not just punishing bad behaviour but rewarding good behaviour. As well as providing disincentives to transgressors, we must provide incentives and encouragement for good behaviour. As the minister said, we must take a more balanced approach. We need the carrot as well as the stick, and we must get serious about prevention. The research on public opinion that has underlined the strategy is interesting, although I suspect that it confirms what we already knew. Yes, people want those who blight their lives to be dealt with and punished proportionately—quite right, too, because the legislative framework remains. Of course, the SNP supported the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. As an MSP, most weeks I am involved in making representations by phone or letter or by attending case conferences to encourage the local authority or housing associations to use the powers that they have under the act. I see the antisocial behaviour framework as a logical extension of—and logical progress on—the legislative framework that has already been put in place. The other point to make about the research on public opinion is that it demonstrates clearly that communities want the underlying causes of antisocial behaviour to be addressed; they want long-term solutions. Our message to our communities is that we are in this for the long haul. We do our constituents a disservice when we resort to political, knee-jerk soundbites. People understand that, often, there are no quick fixes. Communities understand and know all too well what the underlying causes of antisocial behaviour are. The issue that we, on behalf of our communities, cannot duck is the impact of alcohol abuse. Later this year, we as a Parliament will debate the proposed health bill. I know from speaking to individuals and community groups in my constituency that when it comes to addressing the nation's alcohol problem, they do not want us to duck the issue. They do not want more of the same; they are looking for bold measures. They are looking for us not to shy away from making difficult decisions. I fear that the comments about  soft-touch Scotland might come back to haunt those who made them if they duck the issue of alcohol abuse. Finally, I will say a brief word about parenting. Like Paul Martin, I accept that parenting is the hardest and most important job and that we do not have the God-given right to be a parent. I cannot help but observe the issue of unsupervised children in the village where I live and the community that I represent. However, that is a complex issue and I suggest that to address it we need more than an antisocial behaviour framework. It is also a child protection issue, which we must take seriously.

The last remaining branch of Lord Roberts Workshops, which is in my constituency, faces closure this June. The workshop provides sheltered employment for disabled ex-servicemen and women, many of whom suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder. Given the First Minister's stated support for veterans and ex-servicemen and women, will he ensure that the Scottish Government actively explores all the options to save that service? Will he consider accepting an invitation to visit the workshop in Livingston?

I would like to remind Rhona Brankin of three facts about class sizes. The proportion of classes with more than 25 pupils is now down from 38 per cent to 23 per cent. Will she congratulate the SNP-led West Lothian Council, which has more than doubled the number of children in primaries 1 to 3 who are in classes of 13 children or less from 10 per cent to just under 25 per cent? Will she—

Does the member accept that Labour did not keep any of its class size commitments?

As we have heard this morning, the importance of the financial services sector to the Scottish economy is unquestionable. Between quarter 1 of 2001 and quarter 1 of 2007, the financial services sector in Scotland grew by 60 per cent, whereas over the same period the overall Scottish economy grew by 14 per cent and the United Kingdom financial services industry grew by 47 per cent. So it is clear that the Scottish financial services industry punches well above its weight and is well worth fighting for. The concern is that the economic downturn will impact greatly on the Scottish economy, but it is feared that the financial services sector will bear the brunt, so I welcome the motion, because it is essentially about jobs and the need to protect major Scottish industries during the current banking crisis and the worst recession in 60 years. As has already been intimated, one in 10 Scottish jobs are in the financial services sector—up to 100,000 people are directly employed by it. However, as Derek Brownlee indicated, the approximately 100,000 people who are employed in support services are also important. Edinburgh is, of course, Scotland's financial services centre, but financial services make a crucial contribution to local economies. That is indeed the case in my constituency, which has regrettably seen jobs contract in HSBC and Intelligent Finance—that is even before we consider the consequences of the Lloyds TSB takeover of HBOS, with predicted job losses of 3,000 to 4,000 across Scotland. Financial sector jobs are important for two reasons. First, they mean a livelihood and survival for people. Secondly, the work is generally well paid. Across a range of roles, finance sector jobs  pay up to 25 per cent more than the comparable roles in all sectors of the Scottish economy. That is particularly important for my constituency, which has seen the demise of other well-paid jobs in silicon glen. Those jobs have been replaced by jobs in McArthurGlen. Although retail growth in Livingston centre is most welcome and has transformed the town centre, I am concerned about overreliance on the retail sector, particularly at a time of recession. It is obvious that well-paid jobs do more to support the retail industry. I hope that the task force will work well with local authorities and local economic development departments. Notwithstanding the concentration of financial services in the capital, it must be reiterated that they play a pivotal role in many local economies. Scotland is renowned for its expertise in finance, and our financial services industry is a truly international success story. It is one of our oldest industries and still one of our most vibrant and innovative. It is vital that we protect it and support it through any changes and evolving practices. While the establishment of the task force is most welcome, we must not forget to celebrate the industry's success, because it is truly a Scottish success story.

How many houses in Scotland need insulation? Very few council houses in West Lothian have no insulation at all.

Heaven loves nothing more than a repentant sinner, which is perhaps why so many MSPs were present for time for reflection today. Parents are always encouraged to praise their children for the good things that they do, to focus less on the naughty things that they do and, of course, never to cast up past mistakes. For that reason, I will not speak at length about how last week's events ran the serious risk of disrupting local authorities, including my local authority of West Lothian Council, which could have had a £19 million shortfall and a 40 per cent increase in council tax. However, I would heed the words of Jim Spowart, who said at the weekend that now is not the time for point scoring. It is often the leading lights in civic Scotland and in the business community who speak good old-fashioned common sense. I believe that the political parties,  Parliament and Scotland have moved forward and for the better this week. As Keith Brown did, I welcome the growing consensus that Scotland should have a budget that makes decisions about raising income as well as about spending it, instead of what happens just now, which is a bun-fight about how we will cut the cake. Many of us will recall the unedifying comments by Tony Blair when he drew comparisons between the Scottish Parliament and English parish councils. Ironically, parish councils can borrow £5 for each person in their area. Furthermore, local authorities can utilise prudential borrowing and the Northern Ireland Assembly can borrow up to £2.5 billion. Instead of having such powers, we have a fixed budget that is given to us by the mother of all Parliaments—apparently, mother knows best. However, I hope that one day our adolescent Parliament will come of age. I suppose my hope is that, when next we approach budget negotiations, we will have learned the lessons of past budget negotiations and give ourselves a reality check, in order to remember two things. First, the budget is a balancing act for all parties, but all must remember that whatever they propose must find support across the political spectrum. Secondly, a significant proportion of the £30 billion-plus budget is already committed, with fixed and non-negotiable costs as well as statutory obligations. Before negotiations in smoke-filled rooms, or even before the first handbag is drawn, we must remember that a third of the budget—in excess of £10 billion—has already been eaten up by local government, and pensions liabilities for teachers and NHS staff take up the best part of £3 billion. I bet that by the time we include European Union regulations for agriculture support, for roads, and for police, fire and prison services, at least half the cake has already gone. Maybe Mr Swinney will clarify how much of the budget is available for discretionary spending. The devolution settlement ensures that no one can be bought and sold for Swinney's gold, I am—of course—sad to say. However, even a limited amount of money can go a long way if it is spent wisely. I have never believed that one political party has a monopoly on good ideas. Spending £230 million on accelerated capital spending, £70 million on affordable housing, and £60 million on town centre regeneration supports 5,000 jobs as well as apprenticeships, and are the right things to do. Without full economic powers, however, we will never truly tackle poverty or inequality. We are living through the worst recession in 60 years. As Joe FitzPatrick does, I welcome the comments of Liz Cameron, who was absolutely right to say that  "every day the budget is delayed, that's delaying contracts that could be going out to the private sector." She urged "all political parties to get around the table" and to concentrate on "the bigger prize" that could "be won ... for the Scottish economy." The loss of jobs in my constituency has focused the mind. At this time, our resolve and aspirations should be focused on the bigger picture and on, as Liz Cameron put it, the "bigger prize". In a Parliament of minorities, we all have an opportunity to grasp that prize. Ensuring the safe passage of our budget is the responsibility of all 129 members of the Scottish Parliament. Despite the political commentary describing last week's events as "a crisis", I prefer to think of it as a rite of passage, the growing pains of a young Parliament or perhaps the birth pangs of a better nation. The past week has been a defining moment for the Scottish Government and Parliament. Across the political divide, there has been a shift in thinking and in how we do business. Minority government does work, and Scotland has changed forever and for the better. The challenge to all 129 MSPs is to move with the times and not be left behind.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in today's debate, and I extend a warm welcome to residents of Burnside village, near Broxburn, in my constituency, who join us in the public gallery. My constituents' lives were turned upside down by severe flooding last August. I am grateful to the Minister for Environment, Mike Russell, for visiting Broxburn and seeing at first hand the destruction and devastation. I wish to read an extract from a letter that I received from an elderly couple who lost their home and 95 per cent of its contents, as I believe that their experience and recommendations are highly relevant to this debate. Mrs Ross wrote: "It has taken me 3 months to be able to put some thoughts on this experience on paper. I do so with the hope that those who read it and are involved in considering the funding or provision of flood prevention measures will be made more aware of what a traumatic and life changing event such an experience can be." She went on to say: "flooding of the severity experienced in August ... demands a co-ordinated response". I whole-heartedly welcome the bill's aim to improve interagency co-ordination and co-operation in flood risk management plans. After the flooding in Broxburn, I certainly had to knock some agency heads together. I particularly welcome the requirement for risk management measures to consider the social as well as the economic impact of flooding. The stage 1 report interested me in that it touched on the point that there is no precise, absolute defining line between what is deemed risk management and what is deemed flood rescue. I note that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee recommended that amendments should be forthcoming to deal in particular with fire and rescue services taking the  lead on flood rescue and with enabling the police to be more proactive at an earlier stage. I will quote Mrs Ross again: "I had no idea if and when the water would stop rising. I had no idea how we were going to get out of the house. I had no idea what priority the emergency service had given my call. I felt we were completely isolated and alone left to cope the best way we could." I appreciate and understand that the bill has specific purposes in mind but, when we debate and discuss, and legislate on and regulate the assessment and management of flood risk, I urge us to take a whole-process approach that includes flood rescue and aftercare. I appreciate that local authorities already have duties and responsibilities, but I feel strongly that we need national leadership on what constitutes best practice. My constituents have often compared their experiences to that of a bereavement, given their inability to function in the immediate aftermath due to shock. I am talking about able people not being able to deal with the practicalities. They have described mood changes and depression, as well as repeated nightmares of being trapped in a home with rising water levels. I take this opportunity to stress the importance of practical assistance, good advice—about contamination, for example—follow-up procedures and good aftercare. I will quote Mrs Ross once more: "It would have been like a gift from heaven if someone from the council or social services had phoned to ask if we were ok or to offer some help." If the bill is passed, I will be pleased that local authorities will be empowered to proceed with flood management initiatives, where agreement exists between all those involved, without having to go through a lengthy statutory process. I appreciate the Scottish Government's approval of a £5 million flood defence scheme in Broxburn. West Lothian Council is actively looking at how to extend the scheme and truncate the implementation period. In that regard, I make a plea to the minister: can anything be done about European Union procurement rules, which slow processes down to a standstill at times? Like other councils, West Lothian Council is also considering early warning systems. On a personal note, I add my thanks to Graham Hedger, the flood prevention officer at West Lothian Council, and to Lothian and Borders Fire and Rescue Service, particularly the retained fire crews, and other emergency services for the professionalism and care that they showed to my constituents.

I put on record my thanks to Unison for its briefing, which cut succinctly through the verbiage of objections from health boards, called a spade a spade and got to the heart of the matter when it said: "Opposition to the Bill in the main comes from the health establishment". Like Ian McKee and Michael Matheson, I object to the suggestion that health is too complex for mere mortals to comprehend. Implicit in many of the consultation responses that the Health and Sport Committee received is the idea that elected members would be too stupid. Indeed, I think that it was stated explicitly that elected members would be of variable quality. However, people of different abilities communicate with different people. The rather douce councillor or elected member might well be able to communicate a message more effectively to some parts of the community than would a polite professional accountant. The complexity of health issues and the size of budgets—£8 billion in Scotland and the best part of £1 billion in NHS Lothian—mean that there is all the more reason to address the democratic deficit. We are, after all, talking about vast amounts of public money. As I drove into Parliament this morning I listened to Radio Scotland, on which doctors' leaders were reported as saying that direct elections would lead to cliques and manipulators. I argue that a lack of democracy leads to cliques and manipulators. That level of debate exemplifies the establishment's desperately hanging on to the  status quo and its disproportionate power and influence at the expense of public accountability and engagement. Local authorities and elected members are not without criticism, but they make difficult and, from time to time, unpopular decisions and they prioritise resources to intervene and improve quality of life and indeed, to save lives in cases of child protection and the protection of vulnerable adults, which are complex areas. They have to make decisions about universal service provision and targeting services based on need. There are, of course, more considered objections based on the experience of direct elections to health boards in other countries, such as low turnout, decreasing numbers of candidates and a lack of diversity among those who are elected. As Unison says, democracy is not a panacea, particularly not when it comes to improving diversity and representation of the underrepresented. We have only to look around the chamber to see the lack of women and ethnic minorities, but that is not an argument against democracy; it is a reason to find the right democratic process. It is also a good reason to have pilots. The current system of appointments has failed to improve diversity in health boards. Indeed, the local health concern campaign expressed concerns that although the appointment system gave the impression of public involvement, people were not enabled to put forward their views through fear of deselection. I have a constituency case involving a woman from an ethnic minority who was a non-executive lay member of NHS Lothian. She is a woman of exceptional ability, non-political and non-partisan, who I believe was forced to resign in a non-transparent and underhand manner. That is an example of why the culture has to change. Health boards have expressed some concerns about single-issue candidates. Again, they represent a misunderstanding and misrepresentation of the democratic process. The debate about the pros and cons of a single-issue candidate should be had in an election. I also suggest that it is the actions of NHS boards that have breathed life into single-issue campaigns, possibly because boards' decisions were wrong, they had not persuaded the community of their decision, they had not meaningfully consulted the community or their decisions were not transparent in the first place. We have experienced all those failings in West Lothian. I was disappointed by NHS Lothian's evidence to the Health and Sport Committee, and I noted with interest Michael Matheson's comment that NHS Lothian said that it had consulted when, in reality, it had not. I was disappointed by the  comments about an elected councillor from West Lothian who was elected on issues relating to St John's hospital. The evidence led by NHS Lothian singled him out and stated that his contribution was of limited value. NHS Lothian's evidence also said that directly elected members posed a risk of destabilising boards and contributing to a lack of unity.

No, not today, thank you. The tenor of some of NHS Lothian's evidence would do more to damage unity of purpose and demonstrated an intolerance of difference and community concerns. Perhaps I should not be too hard on health boards, because their views and experience are hampered by their lack of exposure to democracy—in essence, they just do not get it. I speak as a nationalist who has long been accused of being in a single-issue party. The reality is that elected members roll up their sleeves and, where there is common purpose, get on and work with their opponents for the greater good of the community. As Ian McKee said, the pilot elections to NHS boards offer an ideal opportunity for boards to embrace change and elected members. Direct elections are desired and discussed in my constituency because they are seen as part and parcel of keeping health care local. Addressing the democratic deficit is part and parcel of celebrating value and protecting local services.

I would never expect political opponents to support sycophantically any of the Government's  endeavours. Indeed, I am no sycophant myself. However, notwithstanding the more recent speeches from Bill Butler, Robert Brown and Richard Simpson, large chunks of which I may disagree with, but which contributed consideration and detail to the debate, I lament the lack of mature, calm and reasoned debate. There has been a lot of political posturing in the press. Of course, being politicians, we tend to fight fire with fire, but I will resist as much as I can the temptation to respond to the political posturing that we heard earlier in the debate and that we have had in the media in the previous weeks and months. There have, of course, been sensationalist, scaremongering media reports, so I will emphasise some of the misconceptions that we have read in some of the red tops. It is important to stress that the Government is not emptying prisons. We are changing what happens at the point of sentencing; we are not opening the doors of prisons and having floods of offenders in our communities. As Bill Butler acknowledged, the presumption is against sentences of less than six months, but they are not being abolished or prohibited. There are good reasons for that presumption: such sentences do not work. That is not to say that, when there are issues of public safety, a very short sentence is not appropriate, but we must change how we do business and how we think.

I thank Richard Simpson for raising that point because I, too, have been assaulted in the line of duty. It was done with a knitting needle, actually, and I had some bruising and so on. However, my personal view is that how our judiciary views crimes of violence and crimes against people needs challenging. I often came across offenders who were serving lengthy sentences for crimes against property. I am not condoning such crimes, but I would sometimes come across sex offenders and violent offenders who were serving significantly lower sentences. I think that we, as legislators, should challenge the judiciary's mindset in that regard. I know that judicial independence and all the rest of it must be protected within our legal system, but I am still concerned that we sometimes place more value on property than on people. To give an example from my constituency, a paramedic who works for the Scottish Ambulance Service in  Livingston had her nose broken by—as we could all have guessed—an alcohol-fuelled offender. He was dealt with very leniently, despite all the emergency worker legislation. The issue, I suggest, is how we view crimes against people. We have a responsibility to raise such issues and to push that agenda forward. As a former criminal justice social worker, I would be the first to admit that robust community sentencing cannot be done on the cheap. Henry McLeish is 100 per cent correct to make that point repeatedly—including on the radio this morning—but we also need to consider some of the positive aspects. We have a fair local government settlement, despite a tight spending round. Some £95 million is being invested in criminal justice social work services, which represents a 185 per cent increase over a decade. As the cabinet secretary said, additional resources of £2 million over this year and next are being targeted at additional recruitment in recognition of the fact that workloads will increase. Of particular interest to me is the Government's support for Edinburgh's criminal justice social work development centre, which brings practitioners together to learn from research and to share effective practice. Some 1,000 practitioners from throughout Scotland will have had the opportunity to participate in such events. In addition, 300 people will have been trained as trainers so that they can pass on their skills on how to work with young people who display sexually harmful behaviour. Of particular importance is the recommendation that case information should travel with the offender. The amount of time that I used to spend chasing up information on a particular client could be hours, weeks or sometimes months. There are many positives, but there is much to be done. I can see by the clock that I am running out of time. I had hoped to concentrate more on what should happen to children and 16 and 17-year-old offenders. McLeish recommended that they should go to secure units rather than to prison. The Government's response states that, where such offenders are imprisoned, we should ensure that they are kept separate from adults. There is a real debate to be had on that issue, but I warmly welcome the fact that the days of 14 and 15-year-olds being imprisoned under unruly certificates will soon be gone. Finally, I want to flag up the fact that we need to debate the age of criminal responsibility. Bill Aitken said that he had hoped that we would have more debate from the cabinet secretary. The political posturing to date has prevented much of that detailed debate, which we need to have.

Medical advances and modern life have given us much to celebrate. We now have many more opportunities to give and save life. As Christine Grahame and Ross Finnie have already rather eloquently stated, organ donation should be the gift of life.  I have a very brave constituent who is waiting for a liver transplant, and I have been involved in making representations on her behalf about the care that she has received. There are currently 22 Scots waiting for a liver transplant, and my constituent is one of four who have been waiting for that transplant for more than a year. As a result, I am aware of the work of the Scottish liver transplant unit of the Edinburgh royal infirmary. It is a busy service with a 96 per cent occupancy rate for its 18 beds. It is a small unit. The work that is done by the living donation liver programme is particularly exciting. The liver is an amazing organ that can practically regrow itself. I have always been instinctively sympathetic to the BMA's position in favour of a soft system of presumed consent, notwithstanding the unhelpfulness of that language. The BMA's position is pragmatic and sensitive to the views and needs of grieving relatives. It is based on the reality of the current system, in which only 25 per cent of organ donors in 2006-07 have registered their positive choice, with 70 per cent of organ donations being decided by the families on behalf of the deceased. However, having listened to the debate, I am interested in the suggestion that Christine Grahame made on behalf of Dr Ian Grant, who is a consultant at the Western general hospital. That suggestion was that we need people to register for or against organ donation, although I believe that Christine Grahame said that Dr Grant thinks that such registration should be compulsory. That is an attractive suggestion, especially as we all go for regular health checks. Women go to well woman clinics, many of us go for flu jabs, and we make regular visits to our GPs with our children. We also go to lawyers to discuss the making of our wills and what we want to happen when we are no longer here. Nanette Milne is correct to say that, culturally, we have an aversion to talking about death, and the services with which we all have daily contact could do something to change that. I do not want to sound morbid, but talking about what we want to happen once we are no longer here must become a cultural norm. Last night I was showing the Kirknewton gala day committee around the Parliament and debating chamber. The group was made up of a cross-section of women from different backgrounds and of different ages. While we were in the chamber, we were talking about the debates that are coming up. I get the sense that people want to discuss life-and-death issues. Although an individual might not be personally affected by an issue, they do not have to make a great leap to imagine what could happen to them or to one of their loved ones. It is important that we keep the debate going and that we do not stand still. I  welcome what the cabinet secretary said; if we need an earlier review of the situation, that will happen. Organ donation needs to become the norm and the natural decision. It needs to become part of our culture to say that we will freely give what is, after all, the gift of life.

I receive many complaints about the quality and reliability of bus services in my constituency. Although local authorities can work with the Vehicle and Operator Services Agency to monitor commercial services, follow-up action is possible only after the traffic commissioner for Scotland has deliberated. Does the minister agree that the system is ineffective in coercing improvements?

I congratulate Des McNulty on securing this evening's debate and on his success in attracting the support of nearly 50 MSPs for his motion recognising and celebrating the eco-congregation Scotland programme.  Particularly at this time of year, it is refreshing to debate some good news. As it is Christmas, it is all the more worthy that we take cognisance of what our faith organisations have achieved and what they aspire to do for our communities and, not least, for the developing world. The manner in which the eco-congregation programme has been embraced exemplifies how our faith organisations practise what they preach when it comes to personal and collective responsibility for reducing carbon emissions. As I have already indicated, the eco-congregation programme is the largest network of community environment projects in Scotland. The programme is leading the way in educating individuals and communities on the impact of climate change and, more important, leading the way in enabling individuals and communities to make changes and make a difference. That is an important message in the more global and uncertain world in which we now live. We must not fear the environmental challenges that face us. Small actions add up. Actions also speak louder than words, which we politicians should always try to remember. One of my colleagues remarked in passing that I always talk about my constituency in the chamber so, in order not to disappoint that colleague, I will make a special mention of Knightsridge church in Livingston. Like the eco-congregation project, many of the churches in the new town of Livingston are ecumenical and seek to work in partnership with other organisations. The ecumenical parish is very much at the heart of its community. In 2005, Knightsridge achieved an eco award for its butterfly garden. Several young people and Sunday school teachers embarked on that environmental project over the school holidays in 2005 and turned an ugly, litter-filled area into life-giving space. They did not stop there. They built on the butterfly garden's success until Knightsridge became the eighth church to achieve a second eco-congregation award. Its major breathing spaces project has created beautiful gardens from waste ground that is fenced off around the community centre in which it meets. There are three areas in the garden and each has a different theme: love, joy and peace. That is very apt for this time of year, but it is also symbolic of our aspirations for our local and wider communities all year round. There is a growing number of faith-based environmental groups and organisations, one of which is aptly entitled operation Noah, reminding us that a little action taken often counts, but there is nonetheless a sense of urgency in making our planet a safer and greener place for our children's children to grow and thrive in.

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government will support the 16 days of global activism to tackle violence against women. (S3F-1253)

I am sure that the First Minister will want to extend a warm welcome to Scottish Women's Aid and Amnesty International, whose representatives are outside the Parliament today. Women with insecure immigration status who are fleeing violence are unable to access public funds, which pay for refuge accommodation and support, so will the First Minister state whether the Scottish Government is able, within its powers, to offer financial support? Will he make representations to the Home Office to exempt women who are fleeing violence from the no-recourse-to-public-funds rule?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will promote the urgent need for banks to give additional flexible support to small and medium-sized businesses. (S3O-4930)

Does the minister share my concerns that good local businesses, such as Vantana, which makes blinds in my constituency, are being additionally penalised in these difficult times by the withdrawal of credit facilities, a reduction in overdrafts and increasing interest rates on loan repayments, which is all the more harsh, given that local businesses are requesting only flexibility, not a free lunch?

In our deliberations about Scotland's looked-after children this morning and our expressed desire to improve, promote and protect children's welfare, it is paramount that we reflect on the suffering of Baby P, which is a haunting example of what can happen when we get it so very wrong, by acts of either commission or omission. Baby P was visited 60 times by health and social work professionals—the equivalent of twice a week. He was seen by 19 health professionals and had been in hospital three times. He had more than 50 injuries. Three days before he died, he was seen by a paediatrician who failed to diagnose his broken back and ribs, injuries that would have left him paralysed. Instead, he was described as cranky and miserable. As a former social worker, I am incredulous about the single and collective failings of each agency towards Baby P and, as a mother, I can barely bear to think about it. However, as a parliamentarian and a citizen, I must and we must. Closer to home are the death of baby Caleb Ness and the HMIE reports about Aberdeen and  Midlothian, which are chilling reminders of the tragedies that could have been. Following Victoria Climbie's death, the Laming report, among other things, focused on corporate parenting. Corporate parenting is defined as: "formal and local partnerships needed between all local authority departments and services, and associated agencies, who are responsible for working together to meet the needs of looked after children". Forgive me, but that is rather staid, managerial, civil service, policy-maker language. The important thing is to consider who corporate parents are. Local councillors need to take on leadership and ownership and they need to be at the vanguard of their local child protection system and services. What then is the role for parliamentarians? We should be the corporate interfering granny, looking over the parents' shoulders to ensure that they are doing it right. We should be the nosy neighbour, always watching and asking searching and probing questions about outcomes for Scotland's children. We have reams of well-meaning legislation and policy statements. As we know, professionals have a duty of care and the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 rams home the point that children's welfare is paramount and that their needs and rights take precedence over those of everybody else. To its credit, the previous Scottish Executive produced "It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright." The Scottish Government has produced, "These Are Our Bairns: a guide for community planning partnerships on being a good corporate parent." Government has to be blunt and concrete in saying that it is entirely unacceptable for any professional—not just social workers, but nurses, doctors, health visitors, housing officers or anybody who is paid from the public purse or who works in a service that is funded by the public purse—not to share information or not to work in children's best interests. That must be the case irrespective of whether people work in a service that works directly with children or one that provides only indirect support to children, or, indeed, whether their client is an adult as opposed to a child. Often, in the wake of the death of a child, we hear commentators, particularly in the press, say that in the years following all the horrific revelations of institutional abuse of children in our child care system, the pendulum has swung the wrong way and we have gone to the opposite extreme. Apparently, social workers are now too reluctant and reticent to take children into care and the current presumption is that a bad family is better than no family. However, the clear message from Government and Parliament is that there must be no room for fashion or fads when it comes to protecting Scotland's children. Protecting  children is a straight-down-the-line decision, which should be evidence based and made with vigour and rigour about what is best for each child. That decision should be made without fear or favour. The quid pro quo from parliamentarians and Government to workers and other professionals is that when they make those decisions without fear or favour, we will stand by them. According to some studies, 60 to 80 per cent of a social worker's time is spent staring at a computer screen, wrapped up in bureaucracy or doing paperwork. Of course, as Hugh Henry said, resources are always central to any discussion about protecting children's services. I am glad that we have expressed our support for the difficult job that our social workers do and that we recognise the successes that often go unreported. We also recognise that work with children and families is complex and takes time, and that there needs to be dialogue and sharing of information. I am proud of Scotland's children's hearings system. However, there is never any room for complacency. Approximately 50 children throughout the UK die every year at the hands of their parents or carers. As we know and as we have heard today, there are many forms of abuse. We have to stand by our children. The challenge for policy makers and politicians is to feel for the children who do not have parents or people to put their interests first. As Sandra White said, we must want for those children what we would want for our own children. Like most parents, I would rather lose a limb than see any harm come to my son. As parliamentarians and legislators, that is the desire and ethos that we need for all Scotland's children.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it accepts evidence that a 90 per cent reduction in plastic  carrier bags will result in 13,700 tonnes of additional waste per annum. (S3O-4816)

Given that 75 per cent of consumers reuse plastic carrier bags at least once, does the cabinet secretary not agree that a 50 per cent reduction in carrier bags will reduce waste by a negligible 4,000 tonnes? Would it not be a far more effective policy to increase existing opportunities to recycle plastics as opposed to any counterproductive and narrow focus on plastic carrier bags?

Does the cabinet secretary share my concerns that talk of opening HMP Addiewell early, which has continued for some weeks, is both irresponsible and anxiety-provoking for my constituents, many of whom initially opposed the prison? The Scottish Prison Service has worked long and hard with the community to reassure people that the opening of a prison is a well-planned and well-tested process. The phrase that comes to mind is, "Marry in haste; repent at leisure."

Is the First Minister aware that Cable & Wireless has made a share acquisition of Thus, a leading telecommunications company that provides more than 200 highly skilled jobs in my constituency? There will be redundancies of Thus employees only, which greatly disadvantages the Livingston constituency. What representations will the First Minister make to protect jobs in my constituency in the current economic climate?

I feel that I have drawn the short straw in following Lord George Foulkes. I wonder whether I am one of the less knowledgeable and enthusiastic individuals to whom he referred. I will, of course, resist the temptation to respond to many points that he made; I say only that we all have our fair share of greedy bankers. I am delighted that the recent summit meeting of the British-Irish Council took place at Hopetoun house in South Queensferry. The setting was fitting and beautiful—indeed, Hopetoun house is Scotland's grandest stately home. Unfortunately, it is not in my constituency, but it sits on the edge of West Lothian, which beats at the heart of Scotland—it certainly does so for me, anyway. The British-Irish Council is built on partnership, mutual respect and co-operation. Having listened carefully to Mr Swinney's opening remarks and  studied the motion, I am somewhat disappointed, although not too surprised, by some of the more negative and paranoid comments about mischievous Scottish ministers—as if Scottish ministers would ever be mischievous. Leading the way on some energy work is not exactly the stuff of revolutions. Scotland has a lot of expertise in the oil and gas industry, and it is fitting that we should lead the way on matters such as carbon capture and storage. The United Kingdom Government is, of course, a partner in the British-Irish Council, and I assume that it would have agreed to Scotland leading the way on such work, as I understand that business is—rightly—done on the basis of consensus.

I am not sure that I understand the point of the Labour Party's amendment, as the Government's motion is fairly uncontentious. It has already been mentioned, and it is fitting to remember, that the British-Irish Council sprang up under the terms of the Good Friday agreement, which is probably the most positive aspect of Tony Blair's legacy. Forgive me, but I cannot help commenting on the irony that the man who worked so hard for peace in Northern Ireland was the same man who took us into an illegal war in Iraq. Of course, as we know and have heard this afternoon, politics and politicians are full of contradictions. As other members have done, I commend the detail of the good work that the British-Irish Council undertakes. I have a particular interest in the on-going work on migration. I come to the debate as a Scot of Italian extraction. The experience of Italian Scots is similar to but different from that of our fellow Irish Scots. My great-grandfather, at the age of 12, was put on a boat to leave Italy and told that he was going to America. Luckily for me, he ended up in Blackburn in West Lothian. On a more serious point, it is important that migration is discussed and addressed positively and pragmatically, because we need migrants to fill the skills gaps in certain areas of our economy. The participating nations in the British-Irish Council have different needs when it comes to migration. The debate must be framed positively, not pejoratively with talk about British jobs for British people, which Gordon Brown said at his party's conference last year and which a recently appointed minister reiterated. The work on digital inclusion is welcome. Parts of West Lothian, including the village in which I reside, do not have access to broadband. It is  interesting that only 50 per cent of Scottish households have broadband and that 73 per cent of disabled adults do not have access to broadband at all. In the digital age, internet access and broadband are pivotal to improving the quality of life and economic and social participation. I look forward to hearing more about that work in due course and about the work on healthy independent ageing, which sounds good to me. The concept of the British-Irish Council has always interested me, as a nationalist. It underlines the importance of, and the relationship between, the independence of a state and the interdependence between states. As the participating nations grow, develop and change in accordance with the political will of each country, the British-Irish Council will, I hope, also grow and change, irrespective of what it is called. It is worth noting that the relationship between the United Kingdom Government and the British-Irish Council is the best that it has ever been, notwithstanding recent comments about the Irish economy. I firmly believe that it is about two independent countries freely associating and co-operating as equal partners. There are many examples from Europe and throughout the world of independent nations working together on the basis of shared interest and geography and mutual benefit. For example, there is the Benelux economic union, which was set up after the second world war, and the Nordic Council, which has been on the go since the 1970s and which has achieved many great things. Unsurprisingly, I look forward to Scotland participating as a fully grown-up and independent nation and discussing, debating and co-operating on a full range of issues. We want independence, not just because of what we can do for ourselves, but because of what we can do for others.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made to protect residents whose title deeds bind them to a specific land maintenance company. (S3O-4435)

Recently, I had an informative meeting with the Lands Tribunal for Scotland, the details of which I will write to Mr Ewing about. As a result of that meeting, it is clear to me that the current legislation—the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003—does not offer practicable protection or solutions to residents who are in the unique position of being bound to a land maintenance company. In the case of my constituents, the company involved is Greenbelt Ltd. Will the minister give an undertaking to pursue a course of action that will give residents who wish to exercise their rights as citizens to change their land maintenance company an accessible and affordable route to do so?

To ask the Scottish Executive what the current waiting times are between referral by a general practitioner and consultation with a specialist at the spinal injury unit at the Edinburgh Royal infirmary. (S3O-4352)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is wholly unacceptable for my 15-year-old constituent who has suspected scoliosis, visible curvature of the spine and a twisted ribcage and who is in severe pain to wait 21 weeks for an initial hospital appointment, given the detrimental consequences of untreated scoliosis in adolescence?

To ask the First Minister what progress the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency has made in tackling the supply of drugs. (S3F-1043)

I congratulate the SCDEA on its success with drugs seizures, but does the First Minister agree that we will not begin to win the battle against drugs until we successfully disrupt the organised criminal gangs, including the Mr Bigs of the criminal underworld, who are responsible for spreading so much misery in communities throughout Scotland?

The role and purpose of the Scottish Government is to represent and advance the Scottish national interest, not least in times of adversity and uncertainty. As a constituency member, I have a duty to represent my community in the context of the challenges that are presented by the recent demise of HBOS and its subsequent possible merger with Lloyds TSB. Political endeavours to date have rightly focused on the high-level and strategic discussions about retaining jobs in Scotland and ensuring that we get the best deal for Scotland. They have promoted the necessity for key head office decision-making functions to remain in Scotland. However, our focus will have to turn at some point to communities across Scotland such as mine because—make no mistake—banks, like post offices, provide a community service as well as a commercial one. They are part of our social fabric and they add to both the social and the economic viability of our smaller towns and villages. We must not lose sight of that. For that reason, I welcome the First Minister's comment that we must consider the needs of the whole of Scotland and not just those of the capital city, however important Edinburgh is. In the wake of the takeover of HBOS by Lloyds TSB, I believe that West Lothian is particularly vulnerable to branch closures because of the distribution of branches of HBOS and Lloyds TSB—for every Lloyds TSB branch, there is an HBOS just down the road. Local concerns escalate when we consider what might happen to Intelligent Finance—a division of Bank of Scotland plc and part of HBOS—whose customer services operations are located in Livingston and Rosyth. Between them, those sites accommodate 1,200 workers. In scrapping Intelligent Finance accounts and credit cards, HBOS has already affected 400 jobs. The closure  of HBOS's mortgage processing centres will affect jobs in Livingston as well as in Chester and Cardiff. Recent events come hot on the tail of announcements of other job losses in my constituency over the past 12 months—by HSBC, Glenmorangie and Bausch and Lomb. Although unemployment in West Lothian stands at only 2.3 per cent, which is lower than the Scottish average and the same as the UK average, we in West Lothian are hypersensitive to the possibility of job losses because of vivid memories of the early 1980s, when one in four of the male working-age population was unemployed. My father was one of those men. Every West Lothian family has been touched by unemployment at some point in the recent past. Although West Lothian is to be commended for turning round its local economy, we can ill afford to lose more jobs. Therefore, I ask the cabinet secretary to consider in his summing-up speech how best we can take forward the specific needs of communities and, in particular, whether local authorities might have a role, given their economic development functions. Sadly, job losses may indeed be inevitable. In The Scotsman last week, Peter Jones predicted that Scotland would lose 3,000 to 4,000 jobs within a year, based on the 15 per cent loss of jobs that occurred following the merger of the Royal Bank of Scotland and NatWest. Arguably, that could be a conservative estimate, given that the e-mail that was sent to staff by the HBOS chief executive, Andy Hornby, insisted only that "the majority" of HBOS employees would keep their jobs. Obviously, that leaves concerns about what will happen to the minority—potentially, 49 per cent. Like most people in the real world outside the Parliament, I do not claim to be proficient in the intricacies of the stock market or the financial services sector, nor have I ever met a spiv or speculator. However, like most people, I must ask how this was allowed to happen. We live in a country that is highly regulated. Some would argue that we have a tendency to overregulate. We gold-plate basic regulations. My local council cannot put in flood prevention schemes without having to advertise work in Europe, while my constituents lie awake worrying every time that it rains. It is ludicrous and ironic. To quote Professor Ronald MacDonald: "We need much better regulation of the financial sector as it has been very lax and we are reaping what we've sown in the sense that it is a poorly regulated financial sector." Of course, Alistair Darling has been talking about tightening the regulation of the financial industry since the Northern Rock collapse, but nothing has happened. In October 2007, Alistair Darling said that the Labour Government would  lead an international effort to learn lessons from the run on Northern Rock and develop a new regime that would restore stability to the financial markets. A year later, he was still making the same promises in his speech to the Labour Party conference. Too little, too late. There is deep anger and a deep sense of loss over what has happened to HBOS. As we turn our eyes to the future, I hope that we can unite and do what we can at a practical level to save jobs.

First, it would be prudent for me to declare an interest. In a former life I was a prison social worker for five years, and for the five years before I became an MSP I worked at the state hospital at Carstairs as a mental health officer. I strenuously take issue with Mr Aitken's point because I know from my work experience that having people in the wrong system increases the risk to the public. I know—and I am sure that Richard Simpson knows—that it is deeply unwise to have offenders in the mental health system and to have mentally ill people in prison. The legal basis for detention and the aftercare procedures are entirely different in cases where someone is ill  and offends because of their illness and cases where the person is an offender. The Scottish Prisons Commission report is aptly entitled "Scotland's Choice". We have known for many years what works and what does not work, so there is absolutely no need to reinvent the wheel. Irrespective of fluctuations in the crime rate—whether it has remained stable or has increased or decreased—prison numbers have continued to soar. Notwithstanding the need to incarcerate dangerous and serious offenders, we have always had a misplaced faith in prison. Professor Coyle states: "How many prisoners do we want to have in ... Scotland? Because ultimately the answer to that question does not depend on levels of crime or on levels of re-offending. It is a matter of public choice." That is the real issue that needs to be addressed. Soaring prison numbers are counterproductive and unsustainable and will, I fear, end in tears. Meltdown is not in the interests of the public, prisoners or prison staff. We are currently 1,000 prisoners over capacity. To address that, we need to address what happens to offenders at the point of sentencing. We want to do something different with them and something that works; we do not—as some have quite scandalously suggested—want to open the gates and let people walk free. My colleague Willie Coffey was right to point out the damaging effects of short sentences. As he mentioned, in 2006-07, about 6,000 fine defaulters were imprisoned. He was perfectly correct to highlight that 88 per cent of those 6,000 spent less than two weeks in prison. One needs to look at the annual turnover of prisoners rather than at snapshot figures. No doubt the prison population on a particular day might have included only 13 fine defaulters, but the annual turnover shows that 88 per cent of those 6,000 fine defaulters spent less than two weeks in prison. That is not a good use of public resources. If we are serious about challenging offending behaviour and addressing in depth the issues of drink, drugs and mental health as well as the education and employability of offenders, we need to target the good skills of prison staff.

We could debate the statistics all afternoon, but I hope that we are agreed on the principle that fine defaulters are  clogging up the system. At the end of the day, sending someone to Barlinnie for a fortnight is like giving them a two-week apprenticeship in new ways to offend. We know what works. We know that tough community sentences work. Forgive me for giving a personal example, but one young man whom I supervised many years ago for a community service or probation order complained profusely that he would rather have spent six months in Saughton than see me every week. Of course, in part that might be a reflection on my personality. We know that reconviction rates for those on community sentences are more favourable than for those who leave prison. I know that West Lothian has achieved an excellent reduction in reconviction rates because of the good community service work that is being done. The Scottish Prisons Commission report rightly highlights Falkirk as a good example where offenders are seen on the day that they are sentenced so that they can be signed up there and then when they are given their community service order. That means that they are got out to work immediately. Overall, the debate has given us many examples of how the system can be beefed up and made bolder. We need to use bail more wisely and target the people who are kept on remand. There are great examples of how community service sentences can be beefed up by using conditional sentences with a wider range of conditions. The progress courts will be a great way of ensuring that offenders are held to account and cannot turn their face against the law and against their community service orders without serious consequences. Finally, I am committed to the idea that punishment should be visible, swift and fair, and it is for MSPs across the political divide to show some leadership in what works.

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that the introduction of a sentencing council gives greater scope for consistency and the understanding of risk of harm among judges, which will ensure that those who need to be in jail—the wife beaters, the sex offenders and the drug dealers—are sent there. I know that we do  not always put the right people in prison, but that is because of inconsistency in sentencing.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

It is a privilege to be in the position of welcoming the SNP's legislative programme, which will continue to move Scotland forward. We have heard a few times in the debate that the Scottish economy is robust, but not immune from global pressures. Every man and woman in the street continues to feel the pinch with, as we have heard, soaring energy prices and the scandal of 500,000 Scots being in fuel poverty. That is particularly scandalous in an energy-rich country like Scotland. The cost of living is up, with the retail price index at 5 per cent. The cost of living is, of course, even greater for the over-65s. The price of petrol has increased, which results in the cost of everything increasing. Despite not having full economic powers and facing the frustration of having one hand tied behind its back and being able only to campaign for a fuel duty regulator as opposed to implementing one, the Scottish Government has succeeded in putting money back into the pockets of hard-pressed Scots. The council tax has already been frozen and we have heard today our political commitment to the abolition of such a regressive and hated property tax—although the will of Parliament will determine whether we achieve our aspiration of introducing a local income tax. Prescription charges are also going. Of particular delight to me and my Livingston constituents is the fact that car parking charges at St John's hospital will go at hogmanay—a happy hogmanay that will be. The resilience of the Scottish economy is exemplified by growth that continues to match or surpass that of the UK, as it has done over the past three quarters. Our population is increasing—Fergus Ewing and I have made our own small contributions to that, as have Richard Lochhead and Shirley-Anne Somerville, and Karen Gillon will make her contribution in the months to come. Our population is at its highest level in 25 years. Retail sales are up and house prices in Scotland continue to edge up—notwithstanding today's reports that house prices in Edinburgh have fallen quite dramatically. I want to focus on the Government's much-welcomed proposals to advance the affordable housing agenda, but I prefix my comments with a personal view. While recognising the value of the house-building industry to the Scottish economy—not least because it provides employment—I have never been convinced that rising house prices are a good thing per se. In my constituency, soaring house prices have had a disproportionate effect on  first-time buyers. Median incomes in Livingston constituency are between £17,000 and £18,000 a year; average house prices are about £160,000 in Scotland and a little bit higher than that in West Lothian. In Edinburgh, average house prices are around the £200,000 mark. People might well make a hefty profit on their house sale, but that will only be diminished when they need to pay more to buy their new house. It concerns me greatly that young families are mortgaged to the hilt. We have gone from one extreme to the other, from a situation in which people were offered 100 per cent-plus mortgages to one in which first-time buyers now struggle to get a mortgage at all. In my view, it is the job of Government to support first-time buyers and those who struggle to pay their mortgages in these economically challenging times, but it is not the job of Government inadvertently to bolster house prices. With that in mind, I believe that the measures introduced by the Scottish Government strike the right balance, in particular in their support for first-time buyers. The investment of £250 million in low-cost initiatives for first-time buyers is very welcome indeed, as is the £25 million for home owners who struggle to pay their mortgages. Of course we have a responsibility to prevent repossessions, given the impact that those would have on our already difficult problem with homelessness. Affordable housing is very much at the heart of the Government's agenda. I believe strongly that abolishing the right to buy was a bold and decisive move that has kick-started a new generation of social housing. I welcome the fact that, for the first time in decades, new council houses will be built in West Lothian. Of course, much remains to be done. Some 200,000 people are on council house waiting lists across Scotland—11,000 in West Lothian alone—so there is a lot of work to be done. I endorse the Government's legislative programme. It is very much about lifting the hearts and minds and aspirations of Scottish families and communities. Together, we will certainly take forward Scotland as a nation.

I congratulate Karen Whitefield on securing the debate, which highlights the fact that far too many young people continue to leave care at 16 and the detrimental consequences of that on their life chances. Care leavers are disadvantaged on almost every front, with an increased risk of alcohol or drug misuse, mental health problems, contact with the criminal justice system, homelessness, unemployment and difficulties in sustaining education. I thank Robert Brown for the two pertinent recent motions that he lodged. The first reinforces the point that care should normally continue until at least 18 years of age and the second calls for an increase in supported accommodation and semi-independent living units. One young person in the "Sweet 16?" report that Scotland's Commissioner for Children and Young People prepared states: "It would be better if there was more preparation for leaving care, especially a semi-independent flat where staff could come in to check how you're getting on. The practical things were the most difficult to cope with." I remember well the telephone calls that I used to make to my mother when I first left home, with seemingly stupid questions about how to defrost a chicken and change a plug. It is only with the passing of years that I realise how lucky I was. I commend the children's commissioner and her team for the "Sweet 16?" report. Kathleen Marshall has reminded us that, although it is fundamental to have enabling legislation and policy, it is what happens in practice that counts. Her report is a somewhat painful reminder of the harsh reality for  many of Scotland's children. At the last count, slightly more than 14,000 children and young people were looked after, whether at home, in residential care or residential school, or by foster or kinship carers. Interestingly, that is an increase of 26 per cent since 1999. As we know, 75 per cent of those youngsters leave school with no qualification and less than 1 per cent go to university. I am pleased that in West Lothian 78 per cent of looked after and accommodated children obtain a minimum level 3 in English and/or mathematics, which is essential to progress towards a college placement. However, as a children's rights officer who is quite rightly quoted in the "Sweet 16?" report states, "For young care leavers it is very much a postcode lottery." That is not acceptable in today's Scotland. The learning to care/care to learn agenda is still pivotal. Education is the passport from poverty—in its broadest sense, it gives our children the ambition and ability to achieve. Nor is it acceptable that 25 per cent of young people aged 15 to 21 who are eligible for through-care and after-care services are not in touch with those services. Douglas Bulloch, in the report that he produced for the previous Scottish Executive entitled "For Scotland's children: Better integrated children's services" identified that the children who are most in need of services are often the most likely to have difficulty accessing them. Karen Whitefield's motion acknowledges that examples of good practice exist. West Lothian Council has the having your say advocacy projects, the youth inclusion project and one-stop shops for vulnerable 16 to 21-year-olds. The crux of good services is the local authority's attitude to corporate parenting, and West Lothian Council should be commended on its attitude to that. A corporate parent must aspire to do all that a good and reasonable parent would do, by holding together the many strands of a child's life and caring about their safety, health, education, friendships and future, and by talking and listening to them. The corporate parent should also—dare I say it?—fight with and argue with their children. As one young person in the "Sweet 16?" report says: "Staff don't fight you if you want to leave at 16." Children and young people need boundaries to push against; they need to know that they are wanted and they need to know that someone cares. The children's commissioner makes many recommendations in her report. I, for one, support her in those recommendations. I look forward to the minister's response.

In a former life, in a former career, I had a client who was serving a life sentence for the violent murder of his wife; an offence that occurred some decades ago now. I will always remember reading the note of circumstance, which described how that young woman attended the social work department with marks on her neck only 10 days before her death, stating that her husband had tried to throttle her. The system and society—the collective "we"—turned its back on that young woman, and she paid with her life. I extend a warm welcome to the representatives from Scottish Women's Aid, West Lothian Women's Aid and Amnesty International who are in the public gallery today. Due to their vocation and dedication, and the work that is undertaken by government at all levels, both past and present, in regard to domestic violence, I am somewhat confident that in today's Scotland, more women are safer. However, we are turning our backs on a group of women whom I would describe as new Scots or new Scotswomen. Unless we can navigate or cut our way through the demarcation of devolved and  reserved matters, we will continue to fail—perilously—to protect new Scotswomen who are fleeing violence. Amnesty International and the Southall Black Sisters have produced deeply disturbing evidence that women with insecure immigration status have no recourse to public funds and are, therefore, unable to claim the benefits that they need to flee violence. They have no right to be accommodated under housing legislation and no housing benefit or supporting people money to pay for refuge and support. They have no right to benefits; yet some of the women have no right to work. Women who flee violence often leave with nothing, and women with no recourse to public funds face the stark and cruel choice of either remaining trapped in a violent relationship or entering destitution. Who are the women with insecure or uncertain immigration status? They are women with valid visas who are here legally as spouses, students, visitors, workers and those who are classified as overstayers, in addition to those who are the victims of human trafficking. Scottish Women's Aid does its level best, but how can it absorb a cost for which it is not funded—a cost in excess of £6,000 per woman per year—with no recourse to public funds? It is simply not acceptable or sustainable for women to have to rely on charitable donations or sheer good will for the accommodation and support that ensures their safety. Scottish Women's Aid has highlighted the fact that 106 women throughout Scotland have been refused refuge in the past year. In today's Scotland, any woman should be able to access refuge irrespective of her race, ethnicity or origins. To deny that is, in my view, an abrogation of human rights as well as of human dignity. Many of the women have children and Scottish Women's Aid informs us that an increasing number of local authorities are suggesting that they can accommodate the child but not the mother. That may represent the reality of the legal position, but it is, nonetheless, absolutely outrageous and contrary to the well being of children and the spirit of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995. There are many challenges for women who are trying to navigate their way through the immigration process. It is costing one West Lothian woman in excess of £700 to apply to the Home Office, and an application can take between three months and two years. Then, there is the need to obtain evidence from a doctor who has documented injuries that are attributable to domestic violence; yet, as we know, some offenders are very careful and will leave only mental scars. Scottish Women's Aid and Amnesty International are campaigning for the Scottish Government to put in place emergency funds  while a permanent solution from the UK Government is sought—that is, the exemption of women who are fleeing domestic violence from the rule that currently denies them recourse to public funds. Other countries, such as Canada, the United States of America and Austria, have similar rules that deny recourse to public funds, but those rules specify exemptions. The crux of the issue is reserved to Westminster. As a nationalist, I regret that fact. I hope that the Scottish Government will lead the way in finding a solution and co-operate constructively with—and, when appropriate, cajole—Westminster, just as it is my duty as an MSP both to co-operate with and, at times, to cajole the Scottish Government in the interests of my constituents, whether they be indigenous or new Scots. Scottish Women's Aid first raised the issue five years ago and, with more new Scots coming to Scotland—indeed, to my constituency—we need action now. Surely, the safety of women and children is paramount.

I, too, welcome the debate, as it gives me an ideal opportunity to put on record my thanks to, and appreciation for, the front-line ambulance staff who are based at the station in Livingston. I visited the station recently and I have accepted the staff's very kind invitation to join them on a night shift one weekend. I look forward to doing that. Having listened to front-line staff in Livingston, I certainly hope that the Health and Sport Committee will undertake a review of the Scottish Ambulance Service. Personally, I feel that such a review would be timely, as it would follow on from last year's Audit Scotland report on out-of-hours services. In that report, Audit Scotland correctly highlighted the need to improve the links between the out-of-hours service, NHS 24 and the Ambulance Service. The report emphasised the need to strengthen communication and, crucially, it urged a review of the impact of the out-of-hours service on the Ambulance Service. I note and welcome the eight-minute target for category A call-outs, which is all very laudable, but I believe that additional, more sophisticated performance indicators are needed. Surely if an  ambulance crew does not arrive within eight minutes but succeeds in saving a life, that is a good result in anybody's book. Responding to emergencies day in, day out requires physical, emotional and mental strength. It is unacceptable that staff struggle to get meal and refreshment breaks, especially when they are working a 12-hour night shift. When describing the challenges of their work, Ambulance Service staff repeatedly iterated to me that they felt that calling out an ambulance seemed to be the default position. NHS 24 appears to be the regular culprit behind inappropriate call-outs. Telephone assessment based on buzz words can be a rather blunt instrument and compares poorly with face-to-face clinical assessments. In addition, as we all know, A and E targets for vacating hospital beds also have an impact on the Ambulance Service. My constituency is semi-rural in parts but, with the growth of Livingston new town and the core development areas, the constituency has one of the fastest-growing populations in the United Kingdom, never mind Scotland. St John's hospital at the heart of my constituency has the highest rate of hospital-to-hospital transfers in Scotland, as evidenced in a recent national audit. All of that, combined with the removal of some acute services from St John's hospital to the Edinburgh royal infirmary in 2004, has had huge resource implications for the Ambulance Service in my constituency. Increased journey times are a real issue. The increased number of journeys between West Lothian and Edinburgh has implications for equity of access for my constituents, as ambulances are increasingly caught up in out-of-area call-outs. That is a cruel reminder of the consequences of not keeping health care local. With the 60 th anniversary of the national health service approaching, we need to keep health care local if we are to be true to the NHS's founding principles. The SNP Government can be proud of its policy of keeping health care local. I urge the cabinet secretary to continue to pursue that policy with all her vigour.

Notwithstanding the health inequalities that continue to blight our nation, it is to be celebrated that more of us are living longer and, in general, enjoying better quality of life than our forebears. I am reliably informed by Christine Grahame that 60 is now the new 40 and 70 is now the new 50. The increasing number and proportion of over-65s and over-90s will, indeed, provide challenges for government at all levels, but we must remember that some good news is at the crux of the challenge and we must desist from framing discussions about older people and the challenges for public policy and the public purse in pejorative terms. That is why I welcome Lord Sutherland's independent review. In dealing with the here and now, he looks to the future and provides a framework to work towards improving the lives of those we refer to as older people. However, the hard facts of life are that old age will come to us all and the vision that we now have for older people is, in fact, a vision for ourselves. For me and many of my constituents it is, as Lord Sutherland says, "the right service at the right time and in the right place" with the aspiration of staying in our own homes for as long as possible. If that is not possible I—like Irene Oldfather—want to stay somewhere that provides appropriate care and replicates home. Free personal and nursing care is frequently described as a flagship policy of the Scottish Parliament. It has been noted on many occasions that the policy is admired and at times envied in other parts of the United Kingdom and the world. The work that was undertaken by Lord Sutherland is on a par with the work that was undertaken in the late 1960s by the Kilbrandon commission, which established the children's hearings system. That system has, by and large, stood the test of time and is still with us today. Lord Sutherland has indicated that free personal and nursing care is affordable, so we can be confident that that policy, too, will stand the test of time. Like the children's hearings system, it is an example of how we can do things differently in Scotland to reflect the core values that we have as a nation, which cut across the political divide. As we know, the raisons d'être of free personal and nursing care were equity and the principle of free care based on need. Frankly, it is therefore  outrageous and despicable that Westminster continues to deny the people of Scotland £30 million per annum in attendance allowance payments. The cabinet secretary is being more than reasonable—some of us might urge her to look for payments in arrears. Since the introduction of free personal care, this country has lost about £150 million.

I will give way to Lord Foulkes as long as he does not ask about the Barnett formula.

I thank Lord George Foulkes for reminding my colleagues that I have a lot to answer for. With the SNP Government, we have seen a breath of fresh air. The Government has accepted a good report in its entirety. In the short-term recommendations in the independent review, recommendation 7 states: "The UK Government should not have withdrawn the Attendance Allowance funding". It is appropriate that the cabinet secretary wants to deal with the shorter-term issues now and then move on to look to the future. The SNP Government has put its money where its mouth is: it is meeting the £40 million annual shortfall. For the first time, it has increased free personal and nursing care payments to older people in care homes and it is looking to the future to end the postcode lottery on food preparation. I am pleased that David McLetchie accepts that West Lothian Council is on the roll of honour. The free personal and nursing care policy was and is a national expression of how we want to care for and support older people. It is despicable that the Westminster Government continues to try to thwart our collective aspirations by denying £30 million a year in attendance allowance. The debate is an opportunity for Parliament to unite and to put our case with one voice and with fervour for what at the end of the day is ours by right. To put it simply and crudely it is, after all, our own money that we are talking about.

To ask the Scottish Executive what consideration is given to the funding of the Scottish Ambulance Service in areas of population growth. (S3O-3283)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary is well aware that my constituency has one of the fastest-growing populations in Scotland. Is she aware of a recent audit that highlighted that St John's hospital has the highest number of hospital-to-hospital transfers in Scotland? Is she aware of the impact on the availability of ambulances in my constituency of ambulances taking patients who used to be treated at St John's hospital to Edinburgh royal infirmary?

With respect, I say to Kenneth Macintosh that my only natural bedfellow is my husband. On a more serious note, the motion gives the Parliament an opportunity to follow the lead of the cabinet secretary, stand up constructively for Scotland and defend, as and when appropriate, the interests of the people of Scotland. As other members have said, the abolition of the 10p tax band will leave half a million households in Scotland worse off. Anyone who earns less than £19,500 and is ineligible for tax credits will be worse off. Those who earn £17,000 or less will face a higher effective income tax rate in the current financial year as a direct result of the 2007 budget. Any taxation should, of course, be progressive and based on the ability to pay. That is a fundamental principle that the SNP holds dear. The regressive move by the former chancellor and current Prime Minister has resonated sourly in my constituency of Livingston. For example, a receptionist who earns £14,000  will be a net loser while MSPs and MPs will be net gainers. Although Livingston and West Lothian are fortunate enough to have a relatively good array of employers compared with the rest of Scotland, companies associated with silicon glen have been lost and replaced by McArthurGlen and a reliance on the retail industry. Consequently, incomes are relatively low. The 2007 "Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings" demonstrates that, as the median income in my constituency is just over £17,500. Another factor is that, according to the last Scottish house conditions survey, 8,000 homes throughout West Lothian are fuel poor. Social tariffs are all very well, but they are not mandatory. Winter fuel payments are welcome, but they now cover less than 20 per cent of a pensioner's fuel costs. Four years ago, the winter fuel payment covered approximately a third of a pensioner's fuel costs. The term "compensation package" says it all. Surely, if people require to be compensated for a Government decision, the original decision must have been wrong. No Government likes to lose face by doing a U-turn, but sometimes that may be the best option and the right thing to do. Instead, a bungling Mr Brown and Alistair Darling are trying and failing to compensate for bad decisions. The Social Market Foundation rightly points out that the compensation package will compensate only one in five of those adversely affected. To add insult to injury, the chancellor, with his talk of average losses being offset over the year, has failed to give explicit reassurances and guarantees to vulnerable Scots.

I will speak about my experience in West Lothian. We have delivered, on the back of the historic local government concordat, record levels of investment for disabled children. That is before we even get on to reducing class sizes, on which we are making significant progress in West Lothian and in doing so are prioritising areas of deprivation. I hold up West Lothian Council as a positive example to other councils in other areas, which I could not possibly comment on. Surely good government has to be about improving the lot of the less well-off and helping people to move forward rather than guddling about with the intricacies of an income tax and tax credit system that are surely complex enough. The sheer lunacy is that in his last budget Gordon Brown unpicked a measure that he introduced. The  implementation of the 10p tax band was widely welcomed. In 2000, when Wendy Alexander was the Minister for Communities, she described it, among other measures, as putting money in the purses of mothers. I do not often find myself quoting the former Labour minister Brian Wilson, but on this occasion I will. He stated: "The most problematic conundrum is why a Labour government should be penalising some of the lowest-paid wage earners in our society by abolishing the 10p tax band. As with the poll tax in days of yore, this succeeds in offending not only the victims, but also a large body of opinion that does not wish to benefit at their expense." So much for London Labour; it has lost its way and its focus. As Christina McKelvie correctly highlighted, it is now left to the SNP to put money in the purses of ordinary Scots through the council tax freeze, the reduction in prescription charges—they are soon to be abolished—and increases in free personal care and nursing home payments. I realised a long time ago that if you want social democracy you have to be able to pay for it. The SNP Government is rightly focused on growing our economy to meet our social democratic aspirations. Therefore, it is highly disappointing that the London Government's budget undermines our efforts to support small businesses. If we want compassion, we certainly need enterprise; they are two sides of the same coin. Of course, it is hard for me as a nationalist to be dispassionate about Scotland and our desire for full self-determination but, as we are all agreed, we cannot turn the clock back and there is only one direction of travel. I look forward to full fiscal autonomy at very least.

Has any work been undertaken to evaluate the working practices of NHS 24 and the impact of the inappropriate call-out of ambulances? If not, is such work going to be undertaken? I recently met front-line ambulance crews in Livingston, and I believe that that may be an issue.

I thank Mrs Mulligan for securing today's debate. The motion rightly celebrates the achievements and aspirations of the Bathgate business community in establishing, with overwhelming support, the first business improvement district in Scotland. The motion urges other Scottish towns to follow in Bathgate's footsteps. I make my contribution to tonight's debate with that point in mind. For those who do not know, Bathgate is in the West Lothian constituency, which neighbours mine. Consequently, it has much in common with West Calder and Broxburn, which are in my constituency. Those smaller West Lothian towns have a shared history and heritage and share the challenges of co-existing as near neighbours to the ever-growing and ever-successful Livingston new town—in an ever-changing local and global economy. We must therefore enable the business communities in those small towns to flourish and thrive. In that respect, the business-led BID concept, which is supported locally and nationally by the SNP, is a shining example of how the needs of local businesses and the wider community can be met. When the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, Mr Swinney, visited Bathgate, he was bowled over by people's commitment to making the BID concept work. Moreover, last night, at an economic debate in Livingston, Mr Mather, the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, emphasised the importance of economic partnerships and the need to get everyone in the same room and talking to each other. If we can—to use his words—crossfertilise and pollinate, we can all move up together, and the BID concept is an excellent example of economic partnership. The BID team's business plan, which is based on the business community's views and needs with regard to improving its trading conditions and environment, clearly demonstrates that the benefits are more than economic; I have no doubt that it will also deliver environmental, social and cultural dividends. Although the concept is about creating a recognisable brand, its pragmatic focus takes in accessing additional funds and services that will make a difference and will, crucially, enable communities to devise town centre strategies that will keep the heart of our smaller communities pumping. I am pleased that West Lothian Council's current administration will continue to match-fund the Bathgate BID levy over the next five years. Indeed, the very concept complements the SNP Government's support for small businesses, including the reduction in and scrapping of business rates. [ Interruption. ] With the recent announcement in West Lothian of job losses at  Bausch and Lomb, HSBC and Mahle Engine Systems, the success of the Bathgate BID is a timely reminder of what we can and should be doing to ensure our communities' economic viability. I, too, thank, commend and send best wishes to Sam Crawford, who chaired the BID steering group; implementation officers Amanda Finlayson, who is one of my constituents, and Pat Kerr; and David Stein as well as the wider Bathgate business community. I, for one, believe that their determination to succeed will make Bathgate and wider West Lothian a better place to work, live in and visit.

I welcome the focus on policing in this session of Parliament. The Justice Committee is correct to focus its report on the role, purpose and effectiveness of policing in modern-day Scotland and, not least, on resources and police numbers. Throughout the chamber, we all want to strive for a safer Scotland. On 25 April, 150 additional officers will pass out from the Scottish Police College at Tulliallan. This Government has an absolute commitment to put 1,000 additional officers on our streets and to examine how to improve capacity within Scotland's police force. Some £94 million is to be used to recruit directly 1,000 police officers. Although we all listen with interest to the political argy-bargy, the voters in my constituency will remember what we have delivered at the end of this parliamentary session. I have absolute confidence in the cabinet secretary that, three years hence, we will have delivered 1,000 extra police officers the length and breadth of Scotland.  The actions of this Government have already paid dividends in my area. As a result of the local government settlement, West Lothian Council, along with its colleagues in Lothian and Borders Police, has been able to fund 21 additional officers and extend the safer neighbourhood team into each multi-member ward. That is positive news indeed. If Mr Lamont is concerned about "soft-touch Scotland", I invite him to visit the criminal justice social work team in Livingston, because that will show him exactly how managing offenders in the community can and should be done. If my memory serves me correctly, the West Lothian criminal justice social work team has the best record and results on probation and community service officers. The Government's emphasis is on visible policing, which will result not only in everyone feeling safer but in communities actually being safer. There is no doubt that a tough challenge lies ahead for us in ensuring that the police force is fit and resourced for the 21 st century. The Government has risen to the challenge, and the Justice Committee, to its credit, in its report bores down into the pivotal and essential issues. The key issue, personally speaking, is community policing. I have been in representative politics for the best part of 11 years, and I cannot speak highly enough of the community police officers with whom I have had the privilege of working over the years—that is, when and where they have existed, because in the year prior to the 2007 election West Lothian, which should have had 25 community police officers, quite often operated at half that capacity due to various stresses and demands on the police force. I draw members' attention to page 9 of the Justice Committee's report. With respect to the Scottish Police Federation evidence, the ASPS "defined community policing as 'softer-edged policing that includes diversionary work in youth clubs and liaison with various community groups.' Chief Superintendent Murray argued that the public wanted 'the harder-edged, enforcing arm of the police'". I reject any suggestion that community policing is the softer policing option. Community policing, at its best and properly resourced, is well placed to deal with the harder-edged issues, whether those are drugs in our communities, youth disorder, disorder by older offenders or antisocial behaviour. From my own experience, I am well aware that community police officers often come up with imaginative solutions to deal with local hotspots. Community police officers have often laid down arguments to their senior officers about the need for additional resources. Other examples of partnership working have been crucial.  Community police work deserves status and has to be at the heart of what policing in Scotland is about. I look forward to hearing about the continuing work of the Justice Committee in that area. I firmly believe that the Government has risen to meet the commitment to deliver safer communities throughout Scotland. The people of Scotland will judge us on that.

Will the member give way?

I congratulate Mrs Godman on securing the debate. My postbag, like those of other members, has been burgeoning with complaints about the land-maintenance company the Greenbelt Group. There are 11 private housing estates in Livingston, and 47 throughout the United Kingdom, whose residents are, in accordance with their title deeds, legally obliged to pay several hundred pounds per annum to Greenbelt for the upkeep of communal ground. My constituents' title deeds lock them into a monopoly, and no account is taken of consumer choice and customer satisfaction—or dissatisfaction, in the case of Greenbelt customers. Like it or lump it, Greenbelt owns and maintains—for a fee—communal land in perpetuity. The problem will not go away—quite the reverse. West Lothian has the second fastest growing population in the UK, and the proportion of home owners in Scotland is more than 60 per cent and rising. The issue is surprisingly complex and involves legal, planning, environmental, trading standards, advertising, house building and consumer issues. It cuts across all levels of Government, although it is primarily a devolved issue. As with an onion, the more layers we peel away, the more we find—and the stronger the stink, according to some of my constituents. My constituents, people the length and breadth of Scotland and the Minister for Community Safety are well aware of the nature and degree of the problem. We need to find the best way forward and we need a solution. In short, we need action. The minister is actively considering an accreditation scheme for property managers, and it is anticipated that Scottish planning policy 2, which will be published later this year, will strengthen the message that proper, detailed consideration must be given to the management and maintenance of communal land and property. Mrs Godman's motion suggests that the common-hold system, which operates in England and Wales, is a potential solution. I make additional suggestions. In some factoring arrangements, residents' title deeds contain a clause that allows them to form a residents association and, by majority, appoint or change the factor whom they pay to maintain common ground. My constituents and others have no such choice; they are subject to an enforced monopoly. Not one resident disputes their responsibility to pay for the upkeep of land; they are in dispute simply about the level of service that they receive and to whom they must pay their money. Legal opinion has been sought and it may be that, under the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003, a monopoly in such circumstances is illegal.  Across Scotland, residents are calling for regulation. I support the introduction of regulation that is on a par with that which is proposed in Ireland. I know that the minister is considering a national accreditation scheme for property managers, which I will support if land-maintenance providers are included and grave consideration is given to the necessity of having a compulsory scheme.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will examine the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 and other legislation as appropriate to ensure that home owners have protection and recourse from land management companies that have sole rights to manage land. (S3O-397)

I thank the minister for his answer but, with respect, I press him to state today or undertake to consider further what he can do to assist the 1,000 residents throughout West Lothian whose title deeds bind them indefinitely to the land management company Greenbelt which, according to my constituents, is woefully failing to deliver a service for which they are forced to pay. Neither the law nor their title deeds appear to offer any easily identifiable, accessible or affordable solution. Perhaps the minister will agree to meet me to discuss the issue further, given that it is complicated.

Given my rapidly expanding waistline, I might not appear to be much of a maiden, but appearances can be deceptive. I am reliably informed that, for the purposes of today's debate, I am indeed a maiden.  It is an enormous privilege and honour for me to represent Livingston, which is the constituency in which I grew up. To the best of my abilities, I will endeavour to give back in kind what I have received from the community that has shaped me. It is highly significant for me, at political, professional and personal level, to contribute to a debate on the health and well-being of our nation. None of us will go through life untouched by the NHS. Advancements in medical science and clinicians' expertise have given me and my loved ones much to be thankful for. I welcome the cabinet secretary's speech and her explicit remarks about her dedication to tackling health inequalities in Scotland. I was surprised that a recent Federation of Small Businesses Scotland study ranked West Lothian in a poor position relative to other areas. West Lothian is a thriving and growing community, but the study gave significant weighting to the health problems that are endemic in parts of the community that I represent. If we are serious about tackling health inequalities, we must continue to advocate that today's NHS is for everyone, irrespective of whether a person is a smoker, an alcoholic, a drug user, a teenage mother or someone who has mental health problems and, consequently, challenging behaviour. Even offenders require treatment. I am a former mental health officer, so I am painfully aware that mental health care is the Cinderella service—I am talking about mainstream mental health services, let alone the forensic settings in which I worked. There is little focus on targets or on reducing waiting times for people who use mental health services. If we are to address health inequalities, we must start by addressing the democratic deficit in health. For that reason, I would welcome the introduction of a local health care bill in the Parliament. I will never talk down the NHS—as I said, I have much to be grateful for—but it has been all too easy for health boards, fuelled by the centralisation agenda and their dependency on private finance initiatives, to take action without taking adequate account of the views of the community. Such an approach has been to the detriment of St John's hospital in Livingston, which is at the heart of the community that I represent. The hospital has lost vital services, which has threatened its viability as an acute hospital. Equity of access is at the heart of efforts to tackle health inequalities. It is not acceptable for a few managers and clinicians who have vested interests to dictate where and how the rest of us receive health services. I endorse the Government's presumption in favour of local  services. The Government has drawn a line in the sand. I welcome the cabinet secretary's commitment to meeting me and local campaigners and stakeholders to discuss what we can do to secure and enhance the future of St John's hospital as an acute hospital. The cabinet secretary is aware that I have corresponded with her on car parking charges at St John's hospital. I call for a moratorium on the proposed increases in charges at St John's, pending a full review. I am alarmed and concerned that NHS Lothian is in breach of Government guidance, given its recent admission that the proposed increases of up to 100 per cent are designed in part to offset the costs of transport, which is required only because vital services have been removed. It is ironic that there is free parking at the McArthurGlen shopping centre, council buildings and the Livingston Football Club, but not at the local hospital. The car parking charges are nothing short of a tax on the sick and those who visit them or spend their lives treating them. I look forward to the cabinet secretary's response.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will respond to proposals by the Electoral Commission to reduce the number of members of the European Parliament who represent Scotland from seven to six at the 2009 European elections. (S3O-284)

I thank the minister for her comments and support on this matter. Given that the proposal would downgrade Scotland's representation in Europe to half of that enjoyed by other similarly sized European nations, what will she do to generate the general public's support on this issue?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will support the work undertaken by credit unions to address financial exclusion. (S3O-259)

As the good work that credit unions do spans the work of more than one Government department, will the minister please commit to working together with his ministerial colleagues and others to support vital anti-poverty projects such as debt redemption schemes? Will he ensure that service of general economic interest funds that have been allocated to organisations such as Livingston Credit Union for the financial year 2008-09 but which have not previously been guaranteed will be made available? That would enable an organisation such as Livingston Credit Union to continue for the third year running a debt redemption scheme and to deliver a huge increase of 100 per cent in the number of loans that are made available under the scheme.

While I have no doubt that there is a role for the voluntary sector and more informal forms of support for all offenders, including sex offenders, there are serious concerns about untrained individuals becoming over-involved with a group of offenders who, as we know, are devious. I am concerned that too much reliance on informal measures of support could provide offenders with countless opportunities to manipulate matters and cause more danger to society.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that St John's hospital in Livingston should be a fully functioning acute district general hospital? If so, does she agree to examine any decision or issue that threatens its viability as an acute hospital?

Does the First Minister share my concern about the lorry drivers at the Tesco distribution centre in my constituency of Livingston, who are disputing the downgrading of their terms and conditions of employment? With the announcement that 70 of the drivers will be sacked, widespread industrial action is now likely. Will the First Minister advise what may be done to encourage a negotiated settlement to avert further hardship to the Tesco lorry drivers and their families, and to avoid further industrial disruption?