Scottish Canals has identified a number of locations along the Forth and Clyde canal where investment can create economic opportunities for the wider canal network. Creating destinations in Bowling to the west and Port Dundas in the city centre will help to stimulate a critical mass of activity whose benefits are expected to be felt along the entire length of the canal, from Anniesland and Maryhill to Clydebank and beyond.

Scottish Canals regularly works with the Scottish Waterways Trust, which is a charitable organisation that is related to Scottish Canals. A great deal of work is undertaken in light of the trust’s views. As I have said previously, the work that has created all the regeneration activity, including, most recently, the Glasgow paddle sports centre, has been done with partners such as Glasgow City Council and Diageo. That is leading to a situation in which fresh life is being breathed into this underexploited asset—our canals—and into the communities that are adjacent to them.

I would not disagree with that. That is why, when we have had recent consequential money, or any opportunity at all to fund shovel-ready projects, Scottish canals have been at the forefront of our consideration. That has been the case in Glasgow—I mentioned the paddle sports centre at Pinkston—and on the canal itself. We have encouraged people to live on the canal, which has not happened for many years. Work has been done on canals across Scotland, including in the Forth valley and the north of Scotland. We are talking about real opportunities. We will continue to support the opportunities that arise in Glasgow, working with Diageo, as Patricia Ferguson mentioned, and we will also consider how we can help the wider regeneration of the area.

The “Edinburgh Glasgow Improvement Programme: Final Business Case” includes provision for compensation paid under the rail regulatory regime for planned disrupted access to the rail network.

In the past, I have provided information about how Network Rail and others intend to manage the disruption, which is inevitable with a capital improvement project of this type. Buses will be used, as I have mentioned previously. Work is continuing to minimise the length of time for which that disruption will occur. All the partners involved are doing a great deal of work to minimise the disruption, but disruption is inevitable if we are to make the substantial improvements that are required, many of which should, in my view, have been made decades ago.

I am sure that all the experts who have been involved in the process, such as Network Rail, the engineers and Transport Scotland, will take note of the member’s reference to a “crazy decision” but, of course, the alternative that Neil Findlay proposes would be to spend upwards of £60 million on a chord that would be superseded by EGIP—in other words, much of it would be abortive expenditure. We are not in the game of wasting that level of public resource—his party might have been previously, but we are not. As I have said, I see the period of 44 days to which Neil Findlay refers as a ceiling rather than as the minimum period of disruption. We are working very hard to bring it down from that, and we will put in place appropriate measures to ensure that we minimise disruption by providing alternative forms of transport.

The EGIP final business case was completed in October 2013—that was consistent with the recommendation by Audit Scotland that Transport Scotland should review and update the business case process by December 2013—and was published at the earliest opportunity. That followed a review of the commercially sensitive elements of the business case, to allow the production of the version that was approved by Scottish ministers for publication on 27 January 2014.

No, I do not accept that. The history of the case shows that an extensive consultation process took place after 2011. We have had a drop of around 26 per cent in our capital budget and 11 per cent in our revenue budget. We must look at such projects in the context of the resources that are available. That is what we do—we manage them extremely carefully, which was not the case with some previous transport schemes that I could mention. With the support of Atkins, we came up with the new version of the scheme, which was to contain at least 80 per cent—perhaps more—of the original scheme, but at a reduced cost of £650 million. We were urged by the Labour side to spend more money—for what purpose was not always clear—to get back up to the level of £1 billion. We have announced that the cost of the electrification—the core part of the scheme—has been reduced by £50 million, which has, because of some opportunities that have arisen, allowed us to put more money into an iconic development of Queen Street station in Glasgow. We have also put more money into the optimism bias as a contingency. I am convinced that EGIP is an extremely good scheme. Unlike Sarah Boyack, I am convinced that it is supported by many people throughout Scotland, especially in Edinburgh and Glasgow, but, more important, also in other parts of the rail network that will benefit from a more efficient service; a 42-minute journey time; electrification of the route through Falkirk High; the Edinburgh gateway station, which will provide links to the airport; and, of course, the fantastic redevelopment of Haymarket station, which members may have seen. EGIP is going ahead—much of it has been completed and more will be done. The Commonwealth games will be the long stop for ensuring that the Cumbernauld section of the project is carried out. I am pleased with the progress that has been made and with the parts of the project that are still to come.

Mr Crawford is right about the money that we have already spent. We are spending up to £742 million on capital works, which will bring employment and increase the productivity of the country by improving our transport network. That is a very good thing, which I would have thought would be welcomed by members throughout the chamber. It is important to note, though, that much of that has been done because it was not done previously. I have said a number of times in the chamber that there have been decades of underinvestment in the transport network in Scotland. I have had some sceptical looks for saying that but, yesterday, the United Kingdom Secretary of State for Transport, Patrick McLoughlin, came to Scotland and said exactly the same thing, even though he was a transport minister from 1989 to 1992. We are happy that we are cracking on with projects that should have been done many years ago.

That would depend on the nature of the upgrade that is proposed. Network Rail considered three options as part of its “Route Utilisation Strategy Generation Two”, which was published in June 2011, to remove the single-line constraint at Montrose, which affects journey times on the Aberdeen to central belt route. The high-level cost estimates to undertake that infrastructure work are between £50 million and £200 million at 2010 prices.

The member rightly raises the issue of the tension between having more stations and more access for people, and having shorter journey times. Both issues are very important. We try to find the right balance, and we have seen new stations open on that route. Rather than saying which route I would continue to go down, or which route I would choose, it is best that I wait until we have the feasibility study, which is on-going, to see how we can best achieve a reconciliation between having shorter journey times, which are very important, and having as much access as possible. Laurencekirk station is one example where we are seeing huge interest, a huge uptake and increased patronage across the network. Those are two live issues. However, the member raises an interesting point. Some months ago, before he asked his question, I asked officials about what would be possible on that route. I undertake to keep him updated on that.

Cost increases in the final business case incorporate more ambitious plans around the redevelopment of Queen Street than originally planned. Although no further upgrades are planned during the first phase, which I announced in July 2012, remaining elements of the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme will be delivered in future phases.

I have laid out exactly when we will do that, with the publication of the final business case. I made the point in my original answer and will make it again that this is the first phase of the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme and there is more to come. We have also said that, after we have electrified the Edinburgh to Glasgow line, we will start to electrify around 100km of the remaining track in Scotland every year. That is a substantial commitment. Although it is important to emphasise the extent to which Glasgow and Edinburgh will benefit from the project—there are already four lines there, and there is the possibility of high-speed rail between Edinburgh and Glasgow—it is also important to concentrate on the benefits for other parts of the network. We will continue to do that, and further phases of EGIP will take place. Given the constraints that we have on the budget, this is an excellent project that ensures that we spend our resources properly. We have a good track record on delivering major initiatives, such as the Airdrie to Bathgate project and the M74 project. However, we do so in the context of the resources that we have.

Of course, the initial benefit will be to reduce the journey time to 42 minutes. In the original case, the target was not just over 30 minutes, which Annabel Goldie suggested it was, but 37 minutes. The major reduction to 42 minutes represents a reduction of around 20 per cent in the time that it takes to travel between Edinburgh and Glasgow. That is in the first phase. Further phases will come after that. Of course, that decision is one to be taken as time and resources allow. To me, that is a substantial improvement in terms of capacity, the efficiency of the railway and the environmental impact of the railway, as it is electric rather than diesel. Those huge benefits will happen in the early stage. I think that many people travelling regularly between Glasgow and Edinburgh will be grateful for that initial journey-time reduction, and for the additional capacity on the line.

For planned maintenance schemes, our operating companies carry out prior consultation with the emergency services, elected members, community councils, local roads authorities, haulage and freight companies and other affected stakeholders. Planned closures are also advertised in the local press and letters are issued to residents and businesses in the area.

Given what the member says, I am happy to go back to Transport Scotland and ask it to examine the processes by which it consults local communities. In my original answer, I mentioned a fairly long list of people whom it consults for planned closures. Of course, the works on the A82 at Pulpit Rock are extremely difficult. Transport Scotland is building out and over the water against the backdrop of a very steep slope on one side. Trees have fallen, as has a very large rock. Transport Scotland is dealing with difficult circumstances at Pulpit Rock, but I agree with the member that it is very important that local communities are kept as fully aware as possible and get maximum notice for the reasons that he mentioned. I undertake to speak to Transport Scotland about that.

Building on the extensive engagement prior to the publication of the draft invitation to tender—ITT—on 19 November 2013, officials from Transport Scotland were in discussions with the trade unions on 10 January this year, concluding discussions with the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen regarding apprenticeships, and on 20 and 21 January with the Scottish Trades Union Congress clarifying issues on staff uniforms.

I think that the member is perhaps misinformed. The issue concerned the branding of the new franchise holder and ensuring that the ScotRail brand was maintained and made clear to future passengers. As soon as the issue was raised with the STUC talking to officials, we clarified the point. We support trade union membership in the rail industry. I have met the trade unions involved in the industry more than any previous transport minister. We have had effective engagement on the ITT. I think that the unions would tell the member that it is probably the best deal that they have in a franchise throughout the UK and compared with previous Administrations. The one, fairly minor issue that the member raises was dealt with quickly to the satisfaction of the STUC. That is proper and constructive engagement.

The Scottish Government’s commitment to supporting bus services in Scotland is clearly demonstrated by the £250 million or so that is expended every year in bus service operators grant and concessionary travel reimbursement as well as the Scottish green bus fund, the bus investment fund and, more recently, the community transport vehicle fund.

I hope that the member has taken up the issue about the particular route that she mentioned with the relevant authority, which I think is the Strathclyde partnership for transport. Regional transport partnerships and local authorities have the power to intervene to protect particular bus routes. We provide the financial support that I have mentioned, but it is they who have the ability to safeguard routes. I hope that the member has taken that option, given that that is the way in which to address the issue. We have still to see the proposals for Iain Gray’s bill. We look forward to seeing them and have said that we will look at them with an open mind. However, we have had various other demands in relation to transport—whether to spend an extra £350 million on the Edinburgh to Glasgow rail improvement programme, or to give more money to local authorities or community transport providers—and I hope that, during the budget process, there will be a proposal from Labour of how much it intends to put towards those proposals and how it would fund them. In that way, we would know that the proposals are serious; otherwise, it would seem to me to be playing politics. Even if we were able to spend all that extra money on funding all those other things—we cannot do that, as we are limited in what we can spend—we would end up in the same position as the last Labour Chief Secretary to the Treasury, who, when he was hounded out of office, had to say that there was no money left.

We are on course to have the first 4.6 mile section of dualling between Kincraig and Dalraddy under construction by December 2016.

Of course, we do not intend to dual the entire 67 plus 41 miles that were mentioned by Mary Scanlon; instead, we propose to dual the stretch from Inverness to Perth by 2025. I have to say, however, that two of the projects that we have already completed—the Ballinluig grade-separated junction and the Helmsdale single carriageway—at costs of £9.7 million and £15 million respectively, stand in stark contrast to the underinvestment by previous Governments. Moreover, we are the first Government to commit to a £3 billion upgrading and dualling of the A9, which is the biggest transport project by cost in Scotland’s history. That, too, stands in stark contrast to previous Governments’ lack of commitment. Of course, the Conservatives’ main commitment was to spend £3 billion on a tram system for Edinburgh.

Presiding Officer, I note your comments about the release of information. We tried hard to ensure that it did not happen, but it has happened. As you have suggested, we will reflect on how we can avoid its happening in the future. Once the information had appeared in the public sphere, I sent out a briefing note to Opposition members to ensure that they were aware of as much of the information as possible. Nevertheless, I regret the release of the information. As Scotland prepares to remember those who made the ultimate sacrifice during the great war, we should pause also to remember those who returned from that war injured and, in many cases, broken in other ways. They believed that they would return home to a land fit for heroes. Instead they came back, by and large, to poor housing, the prospect of unemployment and very little in the way of welfare support. Ours is a different society, and although we always strive to do more, those who leave the armed forces today have access to a wide range of support and services. In one vital respect, however, it can be argued that that earlier generation had one factor in their favour: the many people from this country who served in that conflict had a common experience and its horrors were shared on a much larger scale than is the case for those who serve today and return to join civic society. Experience of active service is shared by far fewer people today, which reflects our success in avoiding wars on the scale of those that we had in the early part of the previous century. That also provides a strong reason why we must continue to provide particular support to veterans, many of whom have experienced conflict of one sort or another and have served with honour and pride, and have given up many of the individual freedoms that we take for granted. Not just for that reason, but for others, too, we owe them a debt of gratitude. By and large, our veterans are innovative, hard-working, entrepreneurial and civic-minded people, and they generally play a full part in making Scotland successful. Veterans Scotland estimates that there are about 400,000 veterans in Scotland, which is almost 8 per cent of the population, and about 2,000 service leavers return to civilian life annually. Many make the transition relatively seamlessly, but a small number face particular difficulties and require our support. In some cases, we must ensure that they get special treatment in recognition of the special circumstances that they have had to endure, and I make no apology for taking that action. In 2012, the excellent armed services advice project—ASAP—reported that although veterans often have similar support needs to the wider population, the experience of serving can also result in multiple and complex needs. Those needs can relate to welfare, access to benefits, getting back into employment, health issues or financial and debt issues, and their causes can often be traced back to the veteran’s initial transition to civilian life. The ASAP report notes that in spite of the support and advice that is available, too many veterans in Scotland slip through the net. Some continue for many years after leaving to experience problems resulting from that unsuccessful transition. That is why it is so important that we get it right at the point of transition, but it is clear that the current transition process is failing some of our veterans. That is particularly the case for early service leavers, who are not eligible for the full Ministry of Defence resettlement package, which is offered to veterans who have more than four years’ service. In my previous role, I served in an education capacity; I remember the issues and discussions that we had then about the transition from primary school to secondary school. I am not saying that that transition is completely analogous to the transition that people make from military life to civilian life, but a fairly substantial change takes place and some of the issues are similar. It is really important that we get the transition right. Early service leavers account for half of all those who make the transition to civilian life in any given year, and some find themselves ill equipped to cope. The transition mapping study that was produced by the Forces in Mind Trust last August projected that the cost of poor transition across the United Kingdom would rise to £122 million in 2013. Much of the responsibility for meeting the needs of service leavers in Scotland falls to the Scottish Government and to devolved public services. It is a responsibility that we take seriously, and we are committed to ensuring that they receive the full range of support. Had we the full range of powers, we would design an holistic framework of support running seamlessly from enlistment to transition. However, transition is currently the responsibility of the UK Government. I saw how the process could be managed when I talked to people in Canada who are involved in the transition process. They, too, take a holistic approach to people serving and moving into civilian life. I have told many UK ministers over a number of years that, on the very day when somebody joins the services, we should start a plan for their return to employment and for their housing provision when they eventually leave the service. I look forward to seeing the outcome of the UK Government’s veterans transition review, which we expect to report in February. I have made known to Lord Ashcroft my views on the failings of the current system of transition, and we have shared some suggestions for concrete improvements. Working within our devolved powers, our priority remains the removal of any disadvantage that our veterans face in accessing public services in a way that suits their unique circumstances. Lord Ashcroft’s team said that the support that is provided in Scotland to services personnel who enter civilian life is a model to be recommended. In September 2012, we published “Our Commitments: Scottish Government Support for the Armed Forces Community in Scotland”, which details the support that we provide to members of the armed forces and veterans. That support covers health, education, housing, justice and sport. The paper was widely welcomed by veterans organisations, as well as by the Ministry of Defence and the armed forces. They told us that it lays the foundations of an on-going productive relationship with them. It reaffirmed our clear and unequivocal message that the armed forces, their families and veterans remain at the centre of our policy thinking, as well as of our development and delivery of policies. We have made considerable progress, which has been underpinned by significant funding commitments. We have committed more than £3.5 million to projects across Scotland that provide housing and support services for veterans and disabled ex-service personnel. We have implemented the recommendations of both Murrison reports by providing £2 million for a new national state-of-the-art prosthetics service, and more than £1.2 million of funding per year for specialist mental health services. We have also improved access to national health service services, which has included provision of access to priority treatment through new general practitioner forms, the roll-out of community health index numbers to serving personnel, and provision of a veterans’ health zone on the www.nhsinform.co.uk website. Those successes have been made possible through working with our strategic partners, the NHS, local authorities and wider public bodies. I pay particular tribute to the ex-services sector: Veterans Scotland and others play a vital role as champions and advocates, as disseminators of good practice and in representing the interests of veterans across Scotland. That is why in November I announced that the Scottish Government would provide Veterans Scotland with capacity-building funding of £220,000 over the next two financial years. Along with a significant increase to the Scottish veterans fund, that is further evidence of our whole-hearted support for those who have served. However, we must seek to do more and, in particular, to help veterans who slip through the net. I believe that the time is right for us to step up our commitment and to shape a response that addresses the distinct needs of veterans, and which supports public services to meet expectations for them. Having reflected on the models that I have seen in Canada and elsewhere, I am pleased to announce the creation of a new commissioner dedicated to veterans. The Scottish veterans commissioner will have a broad remit, which will involve taking an overview of support services across Scotland. Through thematic inquiries, the commissioner will identify the need for, and will help to drive, changes that will enable those services to support veterans better. We must ask why some veterans are still struggling to access the help that they deserve, where the gaps are and what more we can do to meet our obligations to those who have served. As I have said, we must ensure that at the first point at which a veteran tries to access public services—whether it is the council, the Government or the health service—they get the right response at the right time, because if they do not, many will not come back to seek that support, as we have found in the past. Working with partners, the commissioner will bring renewed focus and momentum to our ambition to develop leading-edge support for veterans across our devolved responsibilities. The commissioner’s recommendations will help to build leadership and direction on veterans policy in partnership—crucially, that will be done with the strong ex-services sector. The unique role of veterans organisations in Scotland will be pivotal, and the expertise and evidence of the Royal British Legion Scotland, Poppyscotland and others will be drawn on to capture the experience of veterans. The veteran’s perspective will be fundamental to the work of the commissioner and will inform investigations and recommendations for improvement. However, the commissioner will not be a complaints arbitration service; we will ensure that the commissioner’s remit does not duplicate the functions of the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman and others. We will take the time to listen to and take on board the views of key partners—especially Veterans Scotland—in order to help to shape the commissioner’s remit and work programme before the post is advertised. I have set out what we have done to support our veterans to date and how we now propose to do more, through the development of a Scottish veterans commissioner. We will continue to work with veterans charities and public sector providers to ensure that we meet the aspirations and expectations of Scotland’s veterans. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the debt of gratitude that Scotland owes to those who have served in defence of freedom; notes that, since the publication of Our Commitments: Scottish Government Support for the Armed Forces Community in Scotland in September 2012, the Scottish Government has continued to provide support to the armed forces and veterans’ communities in Scotland that has been widely welcomed by the military and the ex-service community; commends the partnership working with stakeholders, which has led to improved support, including capacity-building funding for Veterans Scotland, and further notes the Scottish Government’s intention to ensure that the response to the UK Government’s Veterans’ Transition Review addresses the distinct needs of Scottish veterans and supports public services to meet their expectations; recognises the excellent work of veterans’ organisations in supporting veterans; welcomes the number of Veterans’ Champions across Scotland, and endorses the aim of ensuring that local services are better integrated to support Scotland’s veterans.

I am grateful to all members who have spoken. We heard some good speeches, which contained knowledge, insight, suggestions and indeed criticisms. I will try to address members’ points, particularly their constructive criticisms. It is unfortunate that there is contention, but any Government proposal must be open to comment and criticism. However, on the two substantive criticisms, which I think were made by Alex Johnstone and Liam McArthur and were to do with remit and resources, I said in my opening speech that we are not only applying new resources to the post, which have been found from the Scottish Government, although not from the veterans budget, but putting additional money—about £100,000, I think—into capacity building. Liam McArthur suggested that money should be used in that way. I therefore thought that we had covered the issue and allowed for unanimous support for the post. On remit, I said that we intend to consult further, not least with Veterans Scotland. If members have suggestions, I will be more than willing to listen to them. On Alex Fergusson’s point, it is certainly not my view that the commissioner should have oversight of the charities that comprise Veterans Scotland. I have made that point to Veterans Scotland, and I am sure that it will not be suggested that such oversight form part of the commissioner’s remit. I think that the proposal is positive and is of a piece with the Government’s approach, which has been pretty innovative. The first minister to have responsibility for veterans—Stewart Maxwell, who is in the chamber—was appointed back in 2007. He established the Scottish veterans fund, which was the first such fund in Scotland. The paper, “Our Commitments: Scottish Government Support for the Armed Forces Community in Scotland”, represented a new departure and set out expectations on how Government and others should meet veterans’ needs. As Alex Fergusson said, there is also the cross-party group on armed forces veterans. I was involved in the establishment of the group, which is a great addition to the Parliament. Whether we are talking about the Government or the Parliament, we have upped our game on veterans over the past few years. It is not the case that whenever there is a debate on veterans we should all naturally fall into consensus mode. I have never thought that. However, it would be useful to have a consensus about the role that we expect the commissioner to undertake. Given the assurance that resources will not come from other veterans-related activities—in fact, additional money is going into such activities—and the assurance about consultation on the commissioner’s remit, I hope that we will be able to reach unanimity. Mark Griffin mentioned support for Britain’s reservists and employers. I am involved with SaBRE, although I have to say that I have attended my local organisation fairly infrequently. The organisation is important and looks after the interests of reservists and other parts of the armed forces. Many organisations have been mentioned and it is perhaps invidious of me to mention only two or three, but given that a number of members mentioned Scottish Veterans Residences, I take the opportunity to thank very much Lieutenant Colonel Ian Ballantyne, who recently retired from the post of chief executive of the organisation. He happens to have been my company commander when I served in the Falklands and has had a fantastic career since then. He is succeeded in his post by Phil Cox, who I am sure will continue the good work that the organisation does. As we set out in “Scotland’s Future: Your Guide to an Independent Scotland”, irrespective of the outcome of the referendum—I go back to a point that Alex Fergusson made—there has been a fairly substantial consensus on and a very progressive approach to veterans affairs by the Parliament and the parties in it. I hope that that will continue, regardless of either constitutional or political change in the future, and I believe that it will, not least because of the point that Ken Macintosh, I think, made. Over the past few years, there seems to have been an increasing appreciation of the role of the armed services, and people seem to be able to divorce that appreciation from any views that they may have on the conflict in which the armed services are serving. That is a very welcome development, and we hope that it will continue. I will not go into all the stuff about constitutional change, but Nigel Don made one or two points, one of which in particular bears repeating. It related to the idea of no compulsory redundancies. It could be said that that is really a matter for the Government to take on if the result of the independence vote is yes, but it is important in this context because compulsory redundancies make people veterans by force and make their becoming veterans much more traumatic, not least if they have been serving on the front line and are suddenly presented with a P45 and told that they are no longer required. That is why it was important to mention that issue. We are committed to delivering better outcomes for those who have, in many cases, sacrificed a great deal to defend our freedoms, and to ensuring that that better deal is felt across all our devolved responsibilities. The creation of the post of veterans commissioner is an attempt to take that forward. As I have said, we are still willing to listen to what others have to say, but my view is that the very good things that are currently being done can be pulled up to a higher level. Mark Griffin made a point about what has been done in respect of housing in North Lanarkshire. I hope that the commissioner will be able to see, in looking at that, that it is an excellent development and that they will ask why it cannot happen elsewhere, why there is not uniformity, if that is required, and whether it would be easier for veterans who may have joined up in one location and have perhaps become a veteran in a different location to have a better and more uniform approach to the services that they require. Such uniformity may not be needed, but the commissioner could usefully take up such issues. As I mentioned at the start of the debate, thematic inquiries could be undertaken into some of the current provision. The commissioner is therefore of a piece with a fairly progressive approach that the Government has taken. It is the first such post in the UK. We and the UK Government have looked at the issue of an ombudsman. I refute the idea that things were done in a hurry; the idea has been developed over many months and there have been a number of discussions, not least to find out what has been done in Canada. We have not followed the same model. The comments that were made about the plethora of ombudsman-type positions are true. However, as I said in my opening speech, we are not saying that the person should be responsible for taking up individual cases, although they can listen to individual veterans. To respond to another point, the post will not be paid for by the Parliament; it will be paid for by the Scottish Government as part of the veterans activities that we undertake. Members have a real opportunity to agree on the commissioner’s role and to see whether the commissioner can start to make the difference that the ombudsman’s role in Canada has made, although the roles will not be the same. The role in Canada has made a great difference to veterans there. From what I have heard from around the world, I believe that it very much depends on the individual who is selected to do the work. The important thing is not the statutory underpinning of the post. The appointment will not be a statutory appointment in the way that Alex Johnstone described; it will be made by the Scottish Government. What is really important is the person’s standing in the veterans community and whether they are credible and understand the issues that are at stake. I would like the commissioner not only to address the needs of veterans who are particularly disadvantaged, but to develop a wider focus on unlocking the potential of veterans so that their skills and experience can be brought to bear for the benefit of all Scotland. Most members present must have heard a veteran who was looking for a job on leaving the service say to them, “Well, I’m not really qualified to do anything.” They are completely unaware of the skills that they have developed over a number of years in the services. It is incumbent on all of us, and it will be incumbent on the commissioner, to ensure that people realise their potential when they rejoin civilian life. Members have commented on the first world war and the commemoration of it. I was asked to do a foreword for a study on the war memorial in Dunblane, which went through every individual on the memorial. The first people to lay a wreath at that war memorial—in 1921, I think—were a mother and father who had lost three of their four sons in the conflict. To go back to a point that was made earlier, it was really interesting to go through the individual stories of each of the people involved, as they are often forgotten. We see the names, but it is very important to remember that that those people were part of a family and a community and to find out what their role was. On other kinds of service, Ken Macintosh mentioned football. I once played against a services outfit. He said that I was “useful”, but I think that I was just too slow to get out of the way and nearly severely injured one of the very fast service personnel who was playing against us. I was also happy to play against a Hearts legends team—it is never a hard task to play against a Hearts team, admittedly—although they beat us, I think, 13-2. Hearts have a proud tradition of working with Erskine and all that goes with the history of Hearts. I am not sure that I will be present when the fixture comes up next time, but I will certainly be there in spirit. I close by again recording my thanks to the vast and diverse array of veterans charities. Some people have suggested that there could be a role for the commissioner in bringing them together or putting them in order, but it is not about that—it is about something else entirely. We are just trying to ensure that the services are right. The charities do a considerable amount of work on behalf of veterans, providing advice, assistance and support as well as signposting to services elsewhere. They also represent veterans at local and national levels and inform our policy thinking and development, which is an invaluable role. I congratulate them on all their fantastic work. They support the estimated 400,000 veterans in Scotland, for which they have our gratitude.

The Scottish Government is committed to refurbishing the Cromarty bridge over a number of years, and the feasibility of that is being assessed by Transport Scotland. A trial repair contract for the first five spans was completed in October 2011 and the repairs are being monitored to ascertain the scope of works for future repairs on the remaining 63 spans of the bridge.

The Cromarty bridge is technically very different from the Kessock bridge, as the member knows. The Cromarty bridge is a low-level, concrete, multispan bridge that has severe concrete deterioration, and the refurbishment that is proposed is to arrest that to improve the bridge’s durability and ensure its future use by the travelling public. There is another lesson that we can learn. Even as the billions were starting to come into the United Kingdom Treasury’s coffers from North Sea oil, the bridge was a cheap and cheerful option that we are now having to remedy. That is another aspect of the lack of investment in our transport infrastructure over decades, which a yes vote in September can help to remedy.

Scotland’s road safety framework to 2020 sets out the Government’s commitment to pedestrian road safety, including the needs of children, the elderly and the disabled. We support the aims of the give us time to cross campaign, although the legislation is reserved and implementation is for local authorities.

Alison Johnstone mentioned the 20mph pilots that have been announced for the trunk road network, which are a radical departure from previous practice. The pilots could have significant benefits for pedestrians, cyclists and other vulnerable road users, at the same time as calming traffic in some small towns that are bisected by the trunk road network. In addition, we are providing guidance to local authorities. Puffin crossings, which Alison Johnstone will be aware of, have technology that can take into account the length of time someone takes to cross the road: the lights will stay at red while they are still crossing it. We and the United Kingdom Government have said that from now on, all crossings that supersede the previous pedestrian crossings will have that new technology, which will help people in the circumstances that Alison Johnstone mentioned. Ms Johnstone also mentioned the national walking strategy, which will be published in spring next year. We will work from that basis to ensure that we have further measures to improve safety for pedestrians.

Dennis Robertson raises an issue that is very similar to the issue that Living Streets identified of elderly people being given enough time to cross pedestrian crossings. The issue is reserved. The Department for Transport could change its guidelines and the national standards that apply. However, it is in within the gift of local authorities to change timings on pedestrian crossings to suit circumstances or users. To answer Dennis Robertson’s question, for our part, the Scottish Government has provided further guidance, which is detailed in the good practice guide. Authorities therefore have the power and the guidance to take the measures that he suggests.

That is possible, to the extent that local authorities have such a power. It is a surprise to some people that pedestrian crossings are a reserved matter—who knows what the reasons for that are? However, local authorities have some discretion. As Alex Johnstone says, changing the time is within a local authority’s power, and when it has the technology to do that, changes can be made to help in the situations that Alison Johnstone and Dennis Robertson described. People should take up those opportunities.

We welcome the findings of the independent Campaign for Better Transport report, as they show further evidence that, despite the Westminster budget cuts that we must work under, we are driving forward Scotland’s economic growth and competitiveness. Our commitment to invest in our railway infrastructure and services has delivered benefits, and Scotland’s performance is outstripping that of many other parts of the United Kingdom.

It is worth pointing out that, as I said in my initial response, despite the Westminster cuts that we have suffered from, the Scottish Government is committed to a record programme of investment in rail to support new and better services, stations and trains and to allow us to do everything possible to keep fares down. The impact of that programme is clear, as passenger numbers have increased to record levels—there were more than 83 million journeys last year alone—and passenger satisfaction levels are higher. That shows what can be achieved through devolution, when decisions are taken locally for the benefit of passengers in Scotland. However, current railways legislation constrains our ambitions, and we could do much more. An independent Scotland would have greater flexibility over the decisions and budgets to structure and support the efficient delivery of rail services in Scotland. Yesterday, the Office for National Statistics announced that Network Rail is to be reclassified. I assure the member that we have proposed no change to our current levels of investment, which should not be circumscribed by any changes that the ONS makes. We intend to maintain or improve investment levels in the future.

The Scottish Government is in regular contact with Scottish ports on a range of issues. I will engage with the ports, shipping industries and others to examine the impacts of the new controls on sulphur in marine fuel at a conference, which I have convened, to be held here in Edinburgh on 15 January. We expect ports to align any actions that they take with the national marine plan and, when appropriate, the national planning framework.

I reassure the member that we will continue to work with the ports and shipping industries to maximise the opportunities for any funding that becomes available to address any requirements that relate to marine fuels or other issues. As he is aware, the criteria for the network were set at the European Union level, although we have worked hard to ensure that a case was made for increasing the number of Scottish ports that are included in the wider comprehensive network. The most recent call for TEN-T funding was announced on 11 December, and Transport Scotland officials are already encouraging ports to make proposals for funding when they meet the criteria for the core or comprehensive network.

A reduction in air passenger duty will allow Scotland’s airports to be more competitive in attracting new direct air routes and will improve our international connectivity. A study by York Aviation in October 2012 found that, by 2016, £210 million less per annum will be spent in Scotland by inbound visitors than if APD had not risen as it has since 2007. As set out in “Scotland’s Future: Your Guide to an Independent Scotland”, this Government would prioritise a 50 per cent reduction in APD within the first term of an independent Scottish Parliament with a view to eventual abolition of the tax when public finances allowed.

Figures specific to the north-east and the Scottish economies are not available. A report by PricewaterhouseCoopers earlier this year projected that the abolition of APD would lead to the United Kingdom economy rising by about £16 billion between 2013 and 2015. It would be larger than it otherwise would have been under the current APD regime. In addition, such a rise in output could lead to the creation of around 60,000 jobs between now and 2020.

The Deputy First Minister has already given a commitment to ensure that the Parliament is updated as we move forward with the Prestwick purchase. I thought that James Kelly was going to apologise for the fact that, four years ago, the Calman commission committed to reducing APD and nothing has been done since then. We have had nothing from the unionist parties, who all subscribe—

The question is about APD, so that is what I am trying to answer.

Apologies, Presiding Officer. I would have thought that the unionist parties would have explained why, although they all supported APD being devolved to Scotland in the Calman commission, they have had little to say about it ever since.

The A937 is a local road, so responsibility for it rests with Angus Council and Aberdeenshire Council. For our part, the Government has provided £100,000 for the access to Laurencekirk study, which is being commissioned by Nestrans in partnership with Aberdeenshire Council and Transport Scotland. The work aims to identify a preferred option at Laurencekirk on the A90.

Alex Johnstone should be more careful about how he describes the road. The road that was described as being “the most dangerous ... in Scotland” Is actually the local road, not the trunk road. The trunk road is a low and medium-risk road. The high-risk road is the local road. Obviously, we want to work with local authorities and others to improve road safety wherever we can. In relation to the trunk road—which is not the road that is mentioned in Alex Johnstone’s original question—we have introduced measures in 2007 and 2008. Since that time, accident stats have reduced and we have conducted a cost-refinement exercise on the junction. As I mentioned, we are taking forward a design proposal with the north-east of Scotland transport partnership to see what the best possible solution for the A90 and access to Laurencekirk could be. Although that suggests to me that the Government is being very proactive on the matter, we certainly acknowledge local concerns. I have met the campaigners—I talked to one just last week—and we will continue to listen to them and to improve the road where we can.

It is worth my while saying that the Scottish Government has, as a roads authority, no authority to suggest or make improvements to a road for which another roads authority is responsible. However, Nigel Don is quite right to say that we work closely with local authorities, not least on roads maintenance. If the local authorities or the regional transport partnership make such a request we will be more than happy to work with them on the issue.

The Scottish Government has had regular recent discussions with Aberdeen City Council over a number of transport issues, which include public transport, road and rail infrastructure, hydrogen infrastructure, and learning technologies and electric vehicle infrastructure.

The member will be aware, of course, that the Government did not support the Edinburgh trams project at the outset. Following a vote of the Parliament, however, it supported the project to the tune of £0.5 billion. I am aware that Aberdeen City Council has instructed its officers to open discussions with Transport Scotland officials on proposals for cross-city transport connections in the council’s strategic infrastructure plan. We will of course consider any representations that the council makes. However, at this stage my view is that this is a purely Aberdeen City Council initiative. The Scottish Government’s transport priorities are clearly set out in our strategic transport projects review and our infrastructure investment plan.

As I said in my response to Maureen Watt, I think that this is purely an Aberdeen City Council initiative but I have gone so far as to say that Transport Scotland officials will discuss the council proposals with the city council officials. That is as far as I would want to go in relation to that. Lessons can be learned from the experience of a tram project in a busy city such as Edinburgh—lessons that to some extent are relevant for Aberdeen City Council. It would be an Aberdeen City Council initiative should the council choose to go forward with it, but obviously Transport Scotland officials will discuss the proposals with council officials if the council wants to bring them forward.

In the context of that last point about the decline in shipbuilding jobs, does Johann Lamont believe the promises to make the peace dividend pay for jobs in Scotland through the ending of the cold war, that Trident is useful Government expenditure and that both are missed opportunities in terms of safeguarding shipbuilding jobs?

It is perhaps worth remembering that this debate takes place against the background of the anxiety and insecurity of 835 people who are set to lose their jobs and livelihoods at Govan, Scotstoun, Rosyth and Filton, and of the 1,110 workers, including 170 agency workers, who do not feature in Johann Lamont’s motion, whose jobs are to be lost at Portsmouth.

No, I will not. Our thoughts are with all those workers; it is worth taking time to think about that. Many of those workers and, indeed, their trade unions have asked—some have even pleaded—that their plight not be used as a political football. However, only a fortnight later we have this motion from Johann Lamont. It is also worth saying that her deputy leader said: “Let’s not make this a constitutional issue.” Worse still, on the very day that the announcement was made, Johann Lamont rushed on to the radio to blurt out: “It’s self-evident this decision is part of the union dividend.” She thinks that the 1,110 jobs and the 835 jobs that are being lost are part of the union dividend. It is Johann Lamont’s obsession with Westminster control over these affairs and her proposition that everything is better under Westminster that I seek to challenge today. Johann Lamont saw the job loss news as her latest opportunity to bang the drum for Westminster control over such decisions, but we should contrast that with the approach that has been taken by the Scottish Government. The focus of John Swinney, Nicola Sturgeon and the First Minister has been on working with the trade unions, the workforce and the management to safeguard as many jobs as possible, to help place those who need them into new jobs and to support the workforce. So, is Johann Lamont right that the UK is good for defence jobs?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. So, is Johann Lamont right that the UK is good for defence jobs? To test that proposition, I will look at three particular projects. First, on the two aircraft carriers that Johann Lamont mentioned, only one will be operational and that will be nearly a decade after the UK last had aircraft carriers; the other will be held on what is called extended readiness but most of us would call being mothballed. The taxpayer was told by the Labour Party that the budget for both aircraft carriers was £3.6 billion. In the technical language that is common to Philip Hammond, that figure has been rebaselined; to the rest of us that means that the budget has been blown out the water, because it is now £6.2 billion for the two aircraft carriers.

No, I will not. I think that I have been delayed enough already. UK defence procurement is a shambles. Let us look at the Nimrod MRA4 project, costing up to £3.6 billion. The money paid was taken over by a £0.5 million commission. Therefore, there was £3.6 billion for the cost of the Nimrods and £0.5 million for a commission to scrap the Nimrods, and for that we got scrap value of £1 million. So there was a cost of £3.6 billion, but we have no Nimrod aircraft to show for it. We also had 100 civilian job losses in relation to that project. UK defence procurement is a mess and is losing us jobs. In relation to that second project, Johann Lamont quoted a number of trade union leaders. I would quote Bernie Hamilton, a national trade union leader, who said of the Nimrod project: “The lunatics have taken over the asylum ... The decision ... is a betrayal of the workers”. UK defence procurement is not good for workers in Scotland. Let us take the Labour Party’s £150 million award of a contract for two ships at Swan Hunter in 2000. They finally cost more than twice as much as they were intended to cost—£342 million—were years late and had to be moved from Swan Hunter to the Clyde. One of the ships, the RFA Largs Bay, was then sold to Australia for £65 million after only four years in service. UK defence procurement is a shambles and it is costing jobs.

Inventing things that I have said is probably not the best way for the member to advance her argument. I have never said that it was a bad thing in relation to the job losses on the Clyde. Our vision for the defence industry and, within that, the shipbuilding industry in Scotland, stands in stark contrast to the UK’s record of massive cost overruns, projects delivered years late—and sometimes not delivered at all—and the badly managed decline of jobs. To come back to Johann Lamont’s point, in less than 20 years the UK has seen Scotland’s shipbuilding workforce decline by 35 per cent. That is some union dividend, supported by the Labour Party. For our part, we would take the missed opportunities to diversify. Johann Lamont says that she does not understand the point about diversification. She may remember the commitments that her own party gave at the end of the cold war to diversify defence jobs. That never happened. The cost of Trident, at £100 billion, could much more properly be spent on traditional defence procurement to the benefit of jobs in Scotland. An independent Scotland will not require £6.2 billion aircraft carriers. However, we will need to address the fact that not a single major Royal Navy surface vessel is in Scotland at this time. We have a coastline longer than India’s, and the UK has left Scotland very poorly protected. BAE has recognised the unique skills of the workforce on the Clyde and at Scotstoun, and we will work with the company to safeguard and build upon that expertise. Babcock is already diversifying into renewables. Thales, another company in Johann Lamont’s constituency, is already working with the Scottish Government on transport projects. We can do better than the UK Government has done. The Scottish Government is working hard to support the industry in identifying new markets and capitalising on our real strengths in highly advanced, complex warship design and fabrication. We are currently determining our defence procurement needs. Decisions on those, alongside support for international trade, will support the long-term future of the yards. I know that hundreds of BAE staff are working with Babcock at Rosyth to complete the assembly programme for the aircraft carriers. Those companies are hugely important to the Scottish economy.

I have lost a lot of time already. As well as diversification, we need to see a change in defence technologies, driven by new forms of combat that have led to changes in product design and manufacture across the defence industry. I have mentioned Thales; I could also mention Selex ES. We in the Government have faith in the ingenuity and expertise of defence workers in Scotland. Johann Lamont says that the big threat to that is the referendum. On that point, we perhaps agree: the referendum to take the UK out of the European Union is a far greater threat to defence jobs in Scotland than any referendum on Scotland’s independence. The uncertainty of the EU referendum is surely a concern, especially for companies such as Thales and Selex ES, which are headquartered in Europe. We have had no mention of that from the Labour Party. In relation to the type 26 contract, the approach of the no campaign seems to be totally different from the approach of the Scottish Government.

The no campaign wants to put the brakes on the type 26 contract coming to the Clyde in the event of a yes vote, but they are not ABS—anti-lock braking system—brakes, although it does want to put an ABS twist on this: for it, ABS means anywhere but Scotland, and it is happy for the UK to consider working collaboratively with Australia, India, Canada Turkey and the United States. Willie Rennie rose—

Johann Lamont now supports the most sensitive and dangerous piece of defence equipment—Clyde nuclear weapons—being procured from, leased from and owned by a foreign power. She will not trust the same workers who are working on these contracts now to work on them after Scotland votes for independence. Scottish workers are currently building these UK warships. They have shown their ability over many years. Despite what Johann Lamont says, according to Philip Dunne, the UK defence minister, the decision was taken on business grounds and had nothing to do with the referendum. That is why the business came to Scotland in the first place. What we have now seen, of course, is Johann Lamont’s local MP, Ian Davidson, dreaming up and advocating a break clause to deny the yards in his own constituency the type 26 contracts should Scotland decide to vote for independence in what Jamie Webster calls a “democratic vote”.

No, I cannot. Willie Rennie is trying to speak, but these are the words of Alistair Carmichael: “If Scotland were to vote Yes ... you would think Portsmouth would be well placed in that circumstance.” Therefore, the Secretary of State for Scotland is promoting Portsmouth as the place that should get the type 26 contracts. I know that Alistair Carmichael got his job in a hurry, but surely he should have checked his job description first. His job is to promote Scotland in the Cabinet, not promote the Cabinet in Scotland. He should defend those Scottish jobs, and it is a disgrace that he has not done so.

I have already answered that point, and I do not intend to go back to it. [Interruption.]

At one stage, Johann Lamont said that we should get round the table and work together. I wrote to her on 25 June to ask her to work with me to provide the reassurances that are required to ensure that the type 26 contract came to Govan, but she never even bothered to respond. That shows her commitment to those jobs. I will conclude with a quote about the type 26 contract from the union convener of the Govan yard, Jamie Webster. He said that what will happen will be the result of a “democratic vote” and that, in that context, everybody in Scotland, “every ... politician of every section” should work “to hell and back” to safeguard the jobs at Govan and on the Clyde. I am one politician who will, after a yes vote, work to ensure that those jobs stay on the Clyde, and I think that every other politician in the Scottish Parliament should do the same. I move amendment S4M-08348.3, to leave out from “but notes” to end and insert: “; notes that independence will bring new opportunities for this industry, as for others, with naval procurement a key part of the future of Scotland’s shipyards, and further notes that freeing Scotland’s share of the estimated £100 billion lifetime cost of the Trident replacement programme would widen the choices that could be made to support increased diversification and take action to boost exports.”

I refer Willie Rennie to the comments from the Liberal Democrat leader of Portsmouth City Council, who said in March 2012 that if a decision was not taken within the next year the skills would have gone. The jobs cannot go to Portsmouth—your own Lib Dem leader is saying that. Do you not have faith in the Scottish workers on the Clyde to take on the job, or do you think that we should pay an expensive premium to go elsewhere?

That is what he said.

I am happy to lay out in my closing speech the work that we have done to help apprenticeships and training on the Clyde through Scottish Enterprise grants. However, does Duncan McNeil not think that the UK Government, which is in charge of defence, should have taken the lead on diversification? When has he criticised it for not doing so?

As Alex Johnstone said, this has been a fairly ill-tempered debate, which has, perhaps not unexpectedly, been dominated by the constitution. It is important to remember that we are talking about at least 800 people in Scotland losing their jobs; around 1,200 people elsewhere in the UK face the same prospect. At the root of the issue, we must remember that the support that the Scottish Government provides through PACE and other means is vital to ensure that those individuals have the prospect of further employment, if that is what they so wish. That is an important point—I take that point in Johann Lamont’s motion. Nevertheless, it is regrettable that the constitution has intruded in the way that it has. Despite what Alex Johnstone says, the Labour Party’s motion makes this a constitutional issue. That is in stark contrast to the request by Johann Lamont’s deputy leader that we should not make this a constitutional debate, and to the position of Jamie Webster, who said that the issue should not become a political football. Instead, the motion quite clearly tries to identify the decision that was taken as a constitutional consequence. Incredibly, Johann Lamont has said—she will get the chance to clarify these remarks if I am wrong—that the decision was an example of the union dividend. The decision to cut 800-plus jobs in Scotland and many more in the rest of the UK was an example of the union dividend.

That is a natural consequence. If people, especially at that skill level, knew that there was not the future that they would want at that yard, they would start to look for other opportunities. That is natural enough. It would, of course, have been useful had Willie Rennie acknowledged his political ally in Portsmouth, who mentioned that those jobs will be long gone by the time the contract has been awarded. Johann Lamont made the point that the SNP should consider its arguments because of the consequences. That is not a bad discipline. Perhaps we would not do that in the course of this debate, but we should all from time to time check the arguments that we are deploying and the effects that they would have. Perhaps it is time for Johann Lamont to undergo a little bit of self-examination as well, because she is now ignoring her deputy leader’s calls not to make the issue a political one and supporting her Conservative friends—I think that that was the phrase that Alex Johnstone used. Members should bear in mind, of course, that many Labour Party people outwith the chamber say that they do not have the stomach to work with the Tories but, obviously, all the Labour Party people here like working with them. Not a word of criticism has come from the Labour Party today about the Tory Government’s various failures on defence; the criticism has all been directed at the SNP, of course. Worst of all are the explicit—they were previously implicit—threats to the workforce on the Clyde. The Labour Party is telling people on the Clyde, “If you do the democratic thing and don’t vote the way we want, your jobs are gone.” It is a disgrace that it should do that. It is, of course, possible to say—as I think Alex Johnstone tried to say and we will say—that, whatever the outcome of the referendum, we will help people to try to retain those jobs. I want to go back to a point that I made earlier, which I hope Johann Lamont will respond to in summing up. I wrote to her on 25 June to ask whether she could clarify whether Scottish Labour would commit to work with the Scottish Government to give our shipyards the best possible chance of winning this contract as soon as possible, thus safeguarding hundreds of jobs and the local communities that depend on them. I still have not had a response from her. Perhaps that colours my view of her call for cross-party working. I welcome the commitment from Alex Johnstone to cross-party working. The point is to provide reassurances from the UK Government, should they be required, that the type 26 contracts can, of course, be delivered in an independent Scotland. There is no question about that. Duncan McNeil was looking back to what has not happened up till now on diversification as he saw it. I have pointed out to him the number of times—six this year, for example—that Scottish Government ministers have worked with BAE alone on improving productivity, modernisation, job opportunities and apprenticeships. Duncan McNeil has not said one word about the fact that, as I have pointed out, the UK Government is responsible for diversification, as it is responsible for defence. It has some responsibility, as well. As soon as I raised that issue, his response was, “Oh, don’t look back.” His first point was, “What have we done up till now?” All that I am saying is that we should be even-handed. The lion’s share of the responsibility has to be with the UK Government. At the end of the cold war in the 1990s, the Labour Party said, “Let’s make sure that we make the premium from this the fact that we can diversify arms jobs.” That has not happened.

That is exactly the kind of work that has been going on. I will point to a couple of examples. On the North Sea and renewables, members will, of course, know that Babcock has diversified at Rosyth. It has already taken that position, and it is starting to do that. I think that we all know that BAE is much more explicitly a defence supply industry contractor—that is what it does—but where diversification can take place, we have tried to support that. I note that Willie Rennie opposed the extension to the Rosyth base that Babcock applied for. He opposed the future opportunities in terms of the ferry terminal, so I take his support for diversification with a pinch of salt.

No, I will not. There was not enough mention in the debate of the impact of the extended overruns in UK defence procurement. They have been wished away and not mentioned by either side: the cost of aircraft carriers going from £3.6 billion to £6.2 billion, and £3.6 billion being spent on aircraft that never flew a mile—I would have thought that people would make a connection between those things and the jobs that are lost in Scotland. We get only 5 per cent of the defence procurement jobs in the UK. I am sure that we could get an awful lot more if it was not for the huge overruns and wastage that we see within UK defence procurement. Of course I am more than happy to discuss those things with the UK, but we cannot hide the facts, and we should not hide them. We should point them out. Can members imagine what would happen here? James Kelly has regularly debated the Glasgow airport rail link with me and he has mentioned £30 million that was spent but not then recouped. Today we are talking about the spending of £2.6 billion—that is £2,600 million—on the aircraft carriers and £3.6 billion on aircraft that never flew but were scrapped at a cost of £500,000 and had a scrap value of £1 million, yet there is not a word of criticism about that. I would have thought that James Kelly would make the connection in relation to that. Much has been said about the people who work on the Clyde and everyone has a person that they can refer to. I will not repeat Jamie Webster’s comments, but they are key. We seem to be getting something of a consensus around the fact that we should all commit to help out the workforce whether the Scottish people vote yes or no. We should all do that. However, I should also mention somebody else—he is a former shipyard worker and TGWU official—who said: “The industry has for years been far too reliant on Admiralty contracts for warships. What we need to do is diversify and build a range of craft like cruise liners, ferries and offshore patrol boats.” [Interruption.] I do not know why Duncan McNeil finds this objectionable.

He continued: “What we must not do is allow all that skill, expertise and technology to disappear and I fear that is happening under Westminster. We need to be in control so that we make decisions here in Scotland that suit Scotland.” Those are the words of the former Labour Lord Provost of Glasgow, Alex Mosson, and I support them.

Will the member give way?

The funding strategy for high-speed rail will be determined following the output of the joint study between Transport Scotland, the Department for Transport and HS2 Ltd announced on 1 November 2013. That study should identify options for high-speed rail to Scotland, and associated high-level costs.

It is essential for the study to happen first, because it will give us an idea of the potential routes and therefore the potential costs. We have accepted from the very start that Scotland has a contribution to make towards the funding of this vital infrastructure project. Some estimates—not ours—have put the cost at around £8 billion or £9 billion. We accept the fact that we have to make that contribution. It seems to me that it is perfectly possible for other countries in Europe to have high-speed rail links between different countries and to overcome such issues. I should say that perhaps a bigger obstacle is the statement from the UK Government that Scotland is not top of its “to-do list”. I know that the baroness is spending more time in Westminster, so perhaps she could say to Alistair Carmichael that it really should be top of his to-do list. The UK Government now has to come out explicitly in support of high-speed rail going all the way from London to Scotland. That would take the whole process further forward.

Elements of the Tay estuary rail study have already been delivered as part of the December 2011 and December 2012 timetables. Further service enhancements developed in partnership with Tayside and central Scotland transport partnership, the rail industry and Transport Scotland will be introduced from 8 December 2013.

I agree with Jenny Marra that it is an important development—not only because of the waterfront developments that are taking place. However, I am not sure which of the services she is referring to when she asks about completion. We have already introduced five new services between Glasgow and Aberdeen, along with additional calls at Broughty Ferry and Perth. We have also announced the works that will be undertaken at Gleneagles station in time for the Ryder cup—we will have more to say on that this week—and the member herself has mentioned the work to which we have contributed on Dundee railway station, which is a fantastic development. If Jenny Marra is specific about which service she is referring to, I will be more than happy to come back with a detailed response on it.

I am happy to welcome Dundee City Council’s investment to rebuild Dundee station as part of the waterfront development and, of course, the investment by the Scottish Government, which is quite substantial. Many of us who are familiar with Dundee station—as I am from my time in Dundee as a student—know that it was time for it to be upgraded and updated. We are all well aware of the other work that is going on round about the station. It really is transforming Dundee. I should also mention that it will be possible to use the future Scottish stations fund, which will come in with the new franchise, to fund further improvements to station buildings and facilities in future years.

As the Glasgow to Edinburgh line via Airdrie forms part of a longer route originating west of Glasgow in Helensburgh, passenger counts on the route include those stations as well. Therefore, to give an accurate answer to John Mason’s question on passenger numbers between Glasgow and Edinburgh specifically, we would need to disaggregate the passenger journeys from stations on the Helensburgh and Balloch services to Edinburgh. I would be happy to write to him with that information once that exercise has been completed. However, I can add that the Helensburgh and Balloch to Edinburgh route has had passenger growth of just under 22 per cent since the Airdrie to Bathgate line opened.

John Mason’s question was well worth waiting for and he makes a good point. It has been said a number of times that actual patronage tends to exceed what is forecast before improvements are undertaken, although the reverse has been true. Patronage has been substantially lower in some instances, on which I am happy to provide the member with information. However, in my constituency, the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line was forecast to carry 80,000 passengers, whereas the actual figure is more than 400,000. Transport Scotland undertook research with the Department for Transport to examine forecast versus actual demand at newly opened stations and its report found no evidence of systematic forecast bias in either direction. The patronage forecasts in the business case for the Airdrie to Bathgate line were based on the best information that was available at the time.

If the member puts his request in writing, I will be happy to get the information that he seeks. The point that I made in response to John Mason is that the Airdrie to Bathgate line is not isolated from others; it originates in another place, so we have to disaggregate the figures. If Mark Griffin wants to follow up his request, I will be happy for it to be included in the work that is being done.

Transport Scotland officials recently met the Community Transport Association’s director for Scotland to discuss the committee’s report. The committee undertook an excellent investigation and made a number of recommendations, not least to the Government. In light of those discussions and the committee’s recommendations, Transport Scotland has increased its funding to the Community Transport Association from 1 November and will commission research into the wider benefits of community transport. In addition, £1 million will be made available in 2013-14 from Transport Scotland and Scottish Government third sector budgets to help community transport providers to purchase new vehicles. Officials are also considering, with stakeholders, options for addressing other concerns raised by the committee, including training costs for minibus drivers.

The people who are best placed to allocate that money are people involved in the sector. The community transport vehicle fund will be jointly administered by CTA Scotland and the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and will be allocated by a board agreed by those bodies and the Scottish Government. It will be open to community transport groups in Scotland that are looking for funding for vehicles. It is a one-off fund for now, but I expect it to provide valuable insights into the sector’s needs, which we can use to develop future support as finances permit. Details of the scheme are being finalised and we envisage it being open for applications by the end of the month.

This Government’s investment since 2007 in modernising our transport infrastructure is transforming our strategic transport networks. I have said before, and I say again, that there was underinvestment in Scotland’s transport infrastructure for decades. We have to try to make up for the lack of investment in previous decades, at a time of unparalleled budgetary constraint. In just six years, 23 major improvements have been made to our motorways and trunk roads across the length and breadth of the country. Some 26.5 route miles of new railway have been built and six new stations have opened, the most recent being Conon Bridge, in February. In addition, our investment in the strategic networks will ultimately support the low-carbon agenda, by providing efficient links for public transport and the new generation of low-carbon vehicles, which will help to remove traffic from local roads, improving conditions for active travel and encouraging modal shift. On active travel, we have added 215 miles to the network since 2007. The network contributes £71 million to the Scottish economy in health savings and reduces greenhouse gas emissions by 115,000 tonnes a year.

I will come back to that point. I was talking about the general area when I said that our action on the transport network helps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 115,000 tonnes. In addition, for example, we have worked with Glasgow City Council on low-carbon hybrid buses and on the potential for retrofitting buses to reduce harmful emissions. Glasgow and Edinburgh both have issues with air quality. In this financial year, 2013-14, we are giving Sustrans £10 million for community links and national cycle network routes. Over the next two years, we will increase that by £20 million, adding to the £58 million that has been spent in this spending review period. The elements that I talked about represent a total investment in completed schemes of more than £2 billion. However, that is not the limit of our ambition. As I speak, one of the biggest investment programmes in recent times is well under way, with more than £4 billion of work under construction or in procurement. That includes the Queensferry crossing, which is the largest transport infrastructure project in more than a generation. The work is creating thousands of jobs for the hard-pressed construction industry and is building the platform that Scotland needs if it is to compete in the 21st century and secure long-term sustainable growth. Our transport networks are vital to our economy and to bringing together all communities across the country. We are the first Government to have committed to linking all our cities by dual carriageway—a standard that is pretty much taken for granted in many modern developed countries but was apparently not accepted in this country in previous decades. Our plans to dual the A9 between Perth and Inverness and the A96 between Inverness and Aberdeen represent an investment programme to 2030 of some £6 billion. On our rail networks, we have a £5 billion investment programme to 2019. That huge sum includes more than £3 billion capital investment in the rail infrastructure. We are undertaking investment to support the operation and maintenance of the existing tracks and to support substantial enhancements between Edinburgh and Glasgow, between Aberdeen and Inverness, and on the Highland main line. Together, those investments in road and rail will better connect our cities and help to create growth and jobs across the country.

The budget for the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme is currently about £650 million, although we want to do some additional work on the programme that might take it over that figure. Other work will also be on-going between Edinburgh and Glasgow. Tavish Scott’s question hints at the amendment that he proposed in relation to further work between Edinburgh and Glasgow on, for example, the high-speed line. However, we are of the view that the improvements that we are making to lines north of Edinburgh and Glasgow will benefit from EGIP freeing up capacity for points north and that high-speed rail will benefit the whole of Scotland if it comes to Scotland from London, as we think it should. The completed projects are expected to generate billions of pounds in benefits over the next 30 years through better journey times and reliability, improved safety, reductions in emissions and better choice, all of which will improve the quality of life of people who live and work in Scotland. Businesses will reap the benefits, too, through reduced operating costs and improved access to key housing and employment sites. We can see the benefits now. The Airdrie to Bathgate rail link and the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line are giving people more choice in using the train rather than the car, and patronage is running well above the levels that were initially predicted. The Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line, which was projected to carry around 80,000 passengers a year, carried more than 400,000 passengers in its first year. Roads are also a fundamental part of transport infrastructure—they help public transport and active travel, too—and the new M74 through Glasgow is cutting journey times by more than 15 minutes. Claudia Beamish asked about air quality. Previously, in the mornings and afternoons, people could be stopped for long periods at the Kingston bridge, but they now have far better journey times and a far smoother journey. Air quality is improved by our having made that investment, so it has been important for the environment as well, and the project provided a much-needed catalyst for the regeneration of the east end of Glasgow. The Government’s infrastructure investment plan sets out our investment priorities for the future. In the short term, it is stimulating the economy and boosting the construction sector. Construction Scotland says that, for every £1 that is spent on construction output, a further £2.94 is generated in the economy. The largest of the current projects is the Queensferry crossing, which has been under construction—under the water, in many places—for more than two years and is under budget and on programme. That project not only is providing a vital future crossing across the Forth, but currently employs around 850 people on site, with 365 Scottish businesses having benefited from the project. Between them those businesses have been awarded orders worth about £143 million to date—money that is going straight back into the Scottish economy. Moreover, the latest projections put the cost of the project at around two thirds of its original budget, which was between £1.75 billion and £2.3 billion. The current estimated cost is around £1.4 billion. We shared the frustrations of people in the Aberdeen area that were caused by the legal challenges to the Aberdeen western peripheral route, but both that project and the Balmedie to Tipperty project are now out to tender, with construction on programme to start in the autumn next year. When it is completed, that project will bring significant benefits to the north-east, including around £6 billion of additional income and more than 14,000 jobs over the 30 years after it opens.

Rather than give the member a good reason, I suggest that he read the report that was produced by the engineers. That report said that the project would be best done after we have completed the AWPR, not just for engineering reasons but because of the enormous disruption that would be caused by undertaking the work on the Haudagain roundabout just now. My opinion has not changed and I have ensured that the local council is aware of that.

Many of the projects that I have mentioned were insufficiently progressed under previous Administrations. However, I am keen to encourage people to move from road to rail as we move on from the AWPR to the Borders rail project. Passenger journeys on our railways are up 30 per cent to around 83.3 million since the start of the franchise in 2004, and that is driving the need for investment in capacity and opportunities to improve the frequency of services. The Borders railway is the longest new domestic railway to be constructed in Britain for more than 100 years. That project will strengthen local communities across the Scottish Borders by reintroducing a fast and efficient rail link with seven new stations. I mentioned EGIP. It will also transform our railway network. Passengers will benefit from improvements in service choice and faster journey times on modern, attractive, more energy-efficient trains as well as fully refurbished stations at Glasgow Queen Street and Haymarket, where the £27 million upgrade will open to passengers next month. The first phase of EGIP electrification—the £80 million electrification of the Glasgow to Cumbernauld lines—will be delivered in time for the 2014 Commonwealth games, helping people to get to the venues.

If James Kelly had been listening earlier, he would have heard that I mentioned buses at the start of my speech. Buses also run on roads, and investment in roads is related to that in buses. That is one of the reasons why we are investing in that infrastructure. We do not have complete motorway between our two major cities, but that will now change with the M8 Baillieston to Newhouse upgrade. That project will further improve connections and, along with the recent M74 and M80 upgrades, complete some of the longstanding gaps in central Scotland’s motorway network. In terms of jobs, the M8 project will be of a similar scale to the M74 completion, which directly supported 900 construction jobs at its peak, with the large majority of the workers coming from the local area, including a number of modern apprentices. I met many of those apprentices during the construction of the project. That investment serves a critical purpose during these difficult financial times, but continued investment is still needed. Therefore, it is right that we are planning further transport projects now, laying foundations so that we can build on them tomorrow. We all know that rail lines and roads are not built overnight. We need to do in-depth planning to ensure that we deliver the right scheme at the right price and keep impacts on communities, businesses and the environment to an absolute minimum. I will say a word on keeping costs down. I once met a previous transport minister from the Parliament in Waverley station. He commended the Government on having brought some of those projects in on price and on time and said, “You must have to meet with these people every week.” That is exactly what we do. I was appalled to hear in the debate on high-speed rail in the House of Commons that the United Kingdom Government anticipated a six-monthly report—in fact, it ruled out a six-monthly report, preferring annual reports. It really is necessary to keep on top of such projects. We make no apologies for taking the necessary time early on. We need to get it right—it would be a false economy to do anything else. Too often, other public infrastructure projects have been rushed and not properly planned, which has resulted in delays and cost overruns when they get to construction. Our track record speaks for itself: the £690 million M74 was completed ahead of time and under budget and the £320 million M80 upgrade was on time and on budget. We intend to continue to apply that robust approach to future projects, such as the A9. We have set a demanding programme to have the 80 miles of dualling on the A9 completed by 2025 and we are on track. Last month, draft orders were published for the first stretch between Kincraig and Dalraddy, and orders for the Luncarty to Birnam section will come forward early next year. We are the first Government to commit to full dualling of the A9 between Perth and Inverness. Estimated at around £3 billion, it represents the biggest transport infrastructure project, by cost, in Scotland’s history. To go back to the point that Tavish Scott raised, the cost of the project is in excess of the combined cost of the Forth replacement crossing, the M74 and the Borders rail project. Earlier this year, I announced our outline strategy for the A96 dualling programme between Inverness and Aberdeen by 2030. That identified design and development work to be progressed over the next few years. I was in Nairn on Monday at the public information exhibitions. In my closing speech, I will speak about high-speed rail as well, but I underline the ambition that we have for the future. We have an unparalleled record of successfully delivering critical and complex projects. I commend the motion, and I move, That the Parliament welcomes the record levels of investment being made by the Scottish Government on major transport projects, with over £4 billion of work under construction or in procurement, including the Queensferry Crossing, Borders Railway and the Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route, and future plans for the dualling of the A9 and A96 and developing the National Cycle Network, and agrees that these projects are vital to transform Scotland’s strategic transport networks and stimulate the economy now, securing long-term sustainable growth and providing a modern and efficient transport system fit for the 21st century, giving people a choice and helping secure a low-carbon economy.

Given what Mark Griffin says, does he propose increased expenditure on buses? If so, will he propose that during the budget process?

That is not my position. I made the point that there had been a lack of investment for many decades, but there were undoubtedly initiatives. When I was at Clackmannanshire Council, we proposed the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine rail link, which I acknowledge was supported by the Scottish Executive of the time.

We are taking exactly the same approach as the UK Government took, which is to do the work first, then look at the funding once we know what the routes and the project comprise. That seems the sensible way to proceed.

Does that mean that at budget time the member will come forward with a proposal to spend £1 billion on bus reregulation or to put additional money into EGIP—or is it just talk?

I thank all those who have participated in what has generally been quite an interesting—and sometimes even consensual—debate. The major transport projects that I mentioned at the start will play a crucial part in connecting people and businesses throughout Scotland, and they therefore deserve the attention and recognition of Parliament. Jim Eadie mentioned that transport infrastructure can appear to be boring to some people. I think some members tend to see a transport debate coming and find a way to transport themselves somewhere else; perhaps that is the object of the intergalactic travel and teleporting that Chic Brodie mentioned. Transport is important to Scotland’s economy and for connecting people in different communities across the country. We are transforming our strategic transport networks to realise the vision of a modern and efficient transport system that is fit for the 21st century. Our transport system connects our cities by fast and safe road and rail networks, and delivers high-quality and complex projects on time and on budget. Since 2007, there have been 23 major improvements to our motorways and trunk roads network. With regard to buses, it is true to say that we have held substantially to previous investment levels, and certainly to those of previous Administrations. It strikes me that, given the 26 per cent cut to our capital budget—despite what Alex Johnstone’s amendment says—and the 11 per cent cut in our resource budget, the fact that we have, by and large, maintained the same level of expenditure on buses through BSOG and the concessionary travel scheme shows a good record of support for buses. That is even before I mention the green bus and the bus investment initiatives; the Glasgow fastlink; and the £300 million project to upgrade the subway in Glasgow, which does not involve buses but is about providing local transport. Unlike Tavish Scott, I do not have to worry about my popularity with the Labour group, so I will say one or two things that will not win many friends among its members. First, we have heard tonight four or five demands from the Labour group, none of which is costed, and none of which Labour will ever propose in a budget, because in order to do so it would have to find money from somewhere else. I think that it was Nye Bevan who said that the language of politics is the language of priorities, and setting priorities is what we have to do. If you want to spend money on something else, you have to say what you will take out and where the money will come from. I will give members an idea of the scale of the commitments that the Labour Party wants to see. First, it wants the reinstatement of the GARL and EARL projects, and—I think, from what has been said—an additional £350 million for EGIP. It wants lower bus fares, more buses and bus investment, lower ferry fares and more road equivalent tariffs—which, of course, Labour never wanted when it was in government, although the current Government is progressing that. Money has been demanded for additional rail services, more ferries and more routes, and for the air discount scheme. We should not forget the demand for bus reregulation; the best estimate that we can make on the bare bones of what is there already is that it would cost approximately £1 billion to reregulate bus services in this country. Everyone knows that there is not the slightest prospect of the Labour Party lodging a single amendment that proposes to do any of those things. That is the extent to which Labour is duping people by saying that it supports those things when it has no intention of putting its money—or taxpayers’ money—where its mouth is.

I have said from the start that I cannot help it if the Labour Party chooses not to listen: we will do the full EGIP project. Labour did not do it when it was in control, but we will certainly carry out that massive investment in Scotland’s central belt. Of course, we have some idea of where the Labour Party’s priorities lie. Its latest proposal is to have trams in Aberdeen, and we have heard that again today; I think that it was described as light rail. That is the Labour Party’s priority, which we do not share—

No, I want to make some progress first. In addition, despite what has been said today, we hear constant doom and gloom from Labour members. Ken Macintosh said that the Government is talking about its projects and praising itself. We are not—we are logging what we have done and what we intend to do. We have heard nothing but negativity in the responses from Ken Macintosh and—to a certain extent—Mary Fee. All that I am saying is—

Not just now. Given that we are managing to deliver the Forth road crossing, which is the biggest transport project ever undertaken in Scotland, with a saving of about £700 million, one might think that that would merit a passing acknowledgement from the Labour Party, but no. Labour’s history of transport projects in previous years was one of constant overruns, failure to complete—in the case of the M74—and delays to completion. I will give way now.

I do not know whether Ken Macintosh has visited the Borders recently, but if he does so he will see construction across the length of that route, which is something that the Labour Party never achieved during all its time in office. Lewis Macdonald made some fair points about the need to mitigate the effects of HS2. The best and most effective mitigation for HS2 is HS3, whereby high-speed rail would come to Scotland. I think that Maureen Watt was right to say that the study that was done was pretty flawed in not taking into account oil and gas. With HS3, there would not be a disbenefit to Aberdeen, Dundee or anywhere else in Scotland.

Both for high-speed rail coming to Scotland and for our Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme, we have said that the benefits will come from the capacity that will be released for other routes to the north and south of Scotland. That is a fair point to make. On Rob Gibson’s question about average-speed cameras on the A9, when I visited Thurso and Portgower earlier this week, I saw the work that is being undertaken there and on the Berriedale Braes—there is no other way to get to Thurso. One misconception that appears to exist is that the average-speed cameras will involve a reduction in speed limits, but that will not be the case until we get to the construction part of the project, when limits must be reduced to ensure the safety of those working on the road. The average-speed cameras will come in in the next year, and the final procurement and timescale for that will be published shortly. Coming back to high-speed rail, I think that Alex Johnstone asked why, post-independence, the UK Government would contribute to the cost of investing in high-speed rail in Scotland. Incredibly, he said at one point that the benefit of high-speed rail coming to Scotland would accrue only to Scotland. That is fundamentally to misunderstand the basis of high-speed rail. Even the UK Government acknowledges that, as well as for London, Manchester and Birmingham, there will be profound business and economic benefits for the whole of the current UK if we have a high-speed rail link. Recently, we found out that the UK Government minister’s position is that high-speed rail coming to Scotland is “not top of my to-do list”. That may be the UK Government’s position, but surely the Secretary of State for Scotland’s role is to put Scotland’s case, so it should be at the top of his to-do list. Rather than threatening people with losing shipyard jobs or failing to pass on money for agricultural purposes, his job is to fight for the Scottish interest, so that issue should be at the top of his list. Bringing HS2 to Scotland is the most profound thing that we can do to connect the railways between Scotland and the rest of the UK. Let us not forget, of course, the extent to which the north-east of England feels let down by the lack of recognition given to the benefits that high-speed rail could bring to that area. Great things could be achieved by high-speed rail. We cannot say exactly what the costs would be, as I said to Annabel Goldie earlier, but we are doing the same as the UK Government did in undertaking a study to show us the routes and the costs involved. We will produce that information. We asked the UK Government to do that two years ago, but it took until last month for it to do that, whereas it should have been produced much earlier. In conclusion, even if we do not quite have the intergalactic ambitions that Chic Brodie mentioned, we certainly have ambitions. I mentioned the 26.5 miles of new railway that we have built and the six new stations that we have opened. The total investment in completed schemes—to pick up a point that was raised previously—is £2 billion at this stage. We have more than £4 billion of work under construction or in procurement and we are making available £6 million for dualling the A9 between Perth and Inverness and the A96 between Inverness and Aberdeen. We are the first Government to commit to dualling both those roads, which should have been done decades ago. The investment of £5 billion going into our railways should give the lie to anyone who says that we are not concentrating on public transport investment. Together, those investments in road and rail will better connect our cities and help to create growth and jobs across this country. That is the reason why I ask members to support the motion.

The Scottish Government is working in partnership with the Department for Transport to improve access to Scotland’s rail network for everyone. That includes the £41 million access for all fund that is supporting the upgrading of 19 stations in Scotland to bring them up to the modern accessible standards that we expect. The Scottish Government is committed to encouraging bus operators to meet the Public Service Vehicles Accessibility Regulations 2000 that require buses to be fully accessible. The Scottish Government also sponsors the Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland, which continues to promote the travel needs of disabled people directly with transport planners, operators and infrastructure providers.

Much of the regulation in relation to taxis is devolved to local government through the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 and subsequent amendments to that act. It is true to say that disability legislation with regard to buses and coaches is reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament. However, the member can write to me with the detail of her concerns. If there is any possibility of further assistance being offered, I am more than happy to look at that.

I would be happy to incorporate that in the regular dialogue that we have with bus operators. However, it might be worth clarifying that we are going through a staged process. Since 31 December 2000, all new buses have had to be accessible. All single-decker buses must be accessible by 1 January 2016, all double-decker buses by 1 January 2017, and all coaches by 1 January 2020. The timetable was set out by Westminster, but if there are particular issues, especially in relation to the co-operation of drivers, I would be happy to incorporate them in the dialogue that we have with operators.

Enable Scotland will meet Transport Scotland to discuss in further detail the issues that have been raised. However, it is worth acknowledging the fact that the Scottish Government, along with ScotRail, has already worked to ensure that we do not have the same notice period of 24 hours, which is the norm across the rest of the United Kingdom. That has now been reduced to four hours, but that can still be an issue for some people. The new franchise allows us to encourage bidders to come forward and say whether they can improve that even further. We are aware of the campaign; it is a very good campaign, and we will engage with those who are behind it.

A range of factors including traffic flows, safety, environmental and economic impacts are considered when deciding infrastructure priorities; that includes the dualling of stretches of trunk road.

If it is so important, why did the previous Administration not look at the issue during all the time that it had to do so? We have looked at the issue, and I repeat the response that I have previously given to the member: we have no plans for dualling the A1. He requested an update of our plans in view of a report that the UK Government was set to approve an upgrade of the A1. That is not the case, as the member has rightly said. All that the UK Government has said is that it will conduct a feasibility study. We believe that the A1 in Scotland, which is nearly all dualled, enjoys relatively safe and efficient transport operations and experiences few journey time reliability issues, despite some capacity constraints and congestion points, which we have acknowledged. We have a route management strategy and measures in place on the A1 to maintain the route’s physical condition and safety standards. We do not intend to fully dual that road.

It is more than four years since John Swinney came to Parliament to explain the reasons why we cancelled the GARL project. That was the right decision then and it is the right decision now, yet here we are again going over the same old ground with the Labour Party. We knew that the costs associated with the cancellation would be around £30 million—we made that clear to Parliament at the time. However, we had to balance that cost against the £176 million in savings from not going ahead with the project. Let us not forget that the project was one in which the costs and risks had been massively underestimated by SPT, the original promoter. I have just heard in the background a comment on the trams. I wonder what the people of Edinburgh would say if we could go back in time and not spend £776 million on that project. Labour’s motion conveniently ignores the fact that, in the intervening four years, there has been a massive investment in the rail network that serves Glasgow, Paisley and Inverclyde. More than £660 million has been provided, with £230 million being spent on upgrades to the track and the stations and new platforms at Glasgow Central, and £430 million being committed over 16 years to the new fleet of class 380 electric trains, which are now running. That underlines our focus on delivery for the people of the west of Scotland, and our determination to prioritise the right investments and not to flinch from taking hard decisions to drop projects that simply do not deliver value. I turn to the context in which the decision to cancel GARL was made. It was taken in a period when maintaining capital expenditure was vital to Scotland’s economy. Action was required to ensure that the impacts of the exceptional cuts that Westminster had imposed were kept to a minimum. We can all remember the words that the Chief Secretary to the Treasury wrote as Labour departed from office in 2010: “There is no money left.” In those circumstances, we faced some extremely tough decisions. The cuts had started well before that, when Labour drove the economy into a ditch. This Government was prepared to take the resulting difficult decisions. A contributing factor in our decision to cancel GARL was the fact that the costs associated with accommodation work within the campus of Glasgow Airport Ltd were escalating. Let us look at some of the facts. Work by Transport Scotland in the first half of 2009 identified a fourfold increase in the scope and capital compensation costs that we had inherited from SPT.

In a second. In January 2007, SPT estimated that work in the airport campus would cost £7.8 million. In May 2008, when the project was handed over from SPT to Transport Scotland, it was estimated that SPT work in the airport campus would cost £16 million. Following a thorough review of the potential scope of the project from January to July 2009, Transport Scotland estimated that work in the airport campus would cost £70 million.

Yes, of course I was aware of that. Transport Scotland has said the same thing throughout the process, which is that we do not support a replacement GARL project. Nobody who was involved in that study group said that there should be a publicly funded GARL project. Two of the partners in that study have said that they are willing to look at a private sector-funded bid for GARL. They are pushing that, but the Government position has not changed throughout the process.

No, I will not. The Government was not convinced that that level of public expenditure to compensate what was a private company could be justified at a time of significant cuts to public budgets and services. The cancellation saved £176 million of our hard-pressed capital budget. Parliament was kept informed of our intentions at the time, and has been kept informed of them ever since. Labour’s accusation that the disposal of land lacked transparency is simply not true. We kept Parliament informed of the costs associated with the GARL cancellation and of our intention to dispose of the land throughout 2010. We could not have been clearer in doing that. We also made clear time after time that the land would be disposed of in accordance with the guidance and principles that are set out in the “Scottish Public Finance Manual”. Some of the disarray in the Labour Party can be explained by the fact that its leader accused the First Minister of being too close to the issue. Johann Lamont insinuated that there was a connection between one of the people involved and the First Minister. Labour has gone from saying that the Government was far too close to the process to saying that we are not involved in it enough. That is despite the fact that we are following exactly the same procedures—those that are set out in the “Scottish Public Finance Manual”—that the previous Administration followed; I do not know whether Mr Kelly was a member of the previous Administration. We have done exactly what was done in the past, but the Labour Party has to find something to criticise. It does not want to be held to the same standards—

No, I have already taken an intervention. I have less time than the member had.

No, I do not have enough time. We made it clear time after time that the land would be disposed of in accordance with the “Scottish Public Finance Manual”. It sets out the requirements on how Scottish ministers and officials should go about ensuring propriety in land transactions. It is for officials to ensure that those guidelines are followed. The decision to declare the land surplus was taken only after an extensive trawl of other Government departments had been carried out to determine whether the land could be used for some other purpose. Our record of investment in west of Scotland transport infrastructure speaks for itself. I have already mentioned some of the figures. On the rail network, we have continued to invest in works at Glasgow Central station and the rail corridor that serves Glasgow, Paisley, Ayrshire and Inverclyde at a cost of around £230 million, and £430 million has been invested in the introduction of the new class 380 trains, which are providing 9,000 additional seats and between 50 and 120 additional seats in the peak hours. With regard to roads projects, members might remember the M74. There was a time when the Labour Party was committed to that and was going to see it through; once again, it did not, but we did at a cost of £692 million. [Interruption.] Perhaps some members think that the Labour Party completed the M74 project. Well, it did not—it was the SNP Government that completed it. The M80 Stepps to Haggs project, which, incidentally, won a saltire award last week for the excellence of its engineering, was delivered on time and on budget at a cost of £320 million. As for the future, we are looking to the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement project, which will deliver longer trains and extended platforms at Glasgow Queen Street station and the electrification of the core Edinburgh to Glasgow via Falkirk line.

I should also mention the £80 million electrification of the Cumbernauld line, which will introduce electrified services in advance of the Commonwealth games; the electrification of the Paisley canal line; the completion of the M8 motorway link; and the upgrading of nearly 7 miles of the existing A8 between Baillieston and Newhouse. Those investments will bring real benefits to Scotland; for example, the Paisley corridor improvements have delivered 61 operational jobs, whereas GARL promised 67. In total, the Paisley corridor improvements have delivered 45 per cent of the construction and operations jobs that were forecast for GARL and, of course, the new class 380 trains will provide an additional 9,000 seats.

The Government is not afraid to make difficult decisions when it has to and, once we have made a decision, we move on from it. Our focus is to prioritise investment as an essential tool in enhancing productivity and delivering faster, more sustainable growth. The private sector is free to develop proposals to construct a rail link to Glasgow airport. It should not require support from the public purse for project development, but the fact is that no credible proposal has come forward in the intervening four years. I move amendment S4M-08173.2, to leave out from “deplores” to end and insert: “recognises the saving of £176 million from the cancellation of the ill-conceived Glasgow Airport Rail Link project; notes that the Parliament was informed of the decision to dispose of surplus land in March 2010 and accepts that this was carried out in accordance with the principles and guidance in the Scottish Public Finance Manual; welcomes the fact that the Scottish Government has made substantial investment, including the successful implementation of the £660 million of improvements to rail infrastructure, trains and services serving Glasgow, Paisley, Inverclyde and Ayrshire, and notes that all of this was achieved by the Scottish Government at a time of reductions in capital funding through prioritisation of the transport projects that will provide the greatest benefit to the people and economy of Scotland.”

We have heard a very different view of GARL in the last two speeches—and of the committee stage 1 report, from Stewart Stevenson. The stage 1 committee report also stated, in relation to the people who would use GARL: “the largest of these groups in patronage terms is ‘Non Airport related trips’ (60% of the total GARL patronage in 2009). Even by 2030, this group will still account for almost half of the trips, while actual air passengers will still be a minority”. I have mentioned the work that has been done on the Paisley corridor delivering the additional capacity on that part of the network. I have also mentioned the class 380 trains on the Ayrshire and Inverclyde routes, which are providing more than 9,000 additional seats to the existing fleet and between 50 and 120 additional seats in the peak hours. I know that there are still Labour MSPs who are determined to see that as a bad-news story for their own reasons. As we have heard, the business case for GARL estimated that 67 operational jobs would be created. The Paisley corridor work that we took forward delivered 61 of those jobs and 45 per cent of the construction and operations jobs that were forecast in the business case were delivered by the parts of the project that were delivered. In 2009, we asked the Labour Opposition which budgets it would cut to enable the continued delivery of the project and it offered none. We looked at a number of alternative funding options at the time, but none was viable. Patricia Ferguson has been scaremongering relentlessly about some of the services in Glasgow. If Labour intends that the £176 million—now substantially more than that—that it would take to reinstate GARL is to be found by cutting the services that Patricia Ferguson professes to defend, perhaps we should be told that by the Labour Party. We have made perfectly clear, a number of times, our commitment to the services that Patricia Ferguson mentions. As I said, we looked at a number of alternative funding options but we could not find any at that time that was viable. It is interesting that, at the time, the current supporters of a rail link were not prepared to contribute to its costs: “The only direct financial support from the council would be through the contribution that is made to the running costs of SPT.”—[Official Report, Glasgow Airport Rail Link Bill Committee, 24 April 2006; c 15.] That was Glasgow City Council’s position on 24 April 2006. There is also this comment from BAA Scotland’s finance director, again in 2006: “The rail link is about enabling Glasgow city centre to benefit from the airport, rather than allowing the airport to benefit.”—[Official Report, Glasgow Airport Rail Link Bill Committee, 8 May 2006; c 55.] The study that has been commissioned and led by Glasgow Airport Limited has been mentioned and Alex Johnstone will be pleased to hear that one of the proposals—one of the options—is a light rail study. That option is being looked at in relation to the study, which will inform the next surface access strategy. The airport is leading the study with other partners. In the longer term, the study may inform future investment by those partners. As I have said, ministers will give due consideration to any private sector proposal to construct a rail link to Glasgow airport. However, no support will be given from the public purse for project development, construction and/or on-going operating costs. The land that we have been talking about, of course, was acquired—as has been pointed out—by Strathclyde partnership for transport in February/March 2008 at the height of the property market. We are well aware of what happened to the property market in the wake of the global recession towards the end of 2008. We could never expect to recover the purchase price of the land when we came to sell it, given the downturn in land and property prices. We have followed the principles and guidance that are set out in the Scottish public finance manual. Mary Fee says—

The crucial point—I have said this three times now, I think—is that the land transactions were carried out in accordance with the Scottish public finance manual. The member will know—I think that he will know—that officials regularly buy and sell land—[Interruption.]

And not every transaction comes to ministers unless there are specific reasons for it. I was going on to say that it was exactly the same process. James Kelly has questioned my competence in this and that is up to him. Let us look a little bit at competence. The Labour Party, when it raised the issue most recently, did not even seem to know that the land was bought by SPT. The Labour Party did not know that its own councillors had been involved in buying the land in the first place. First it alleged, or tried to insinuate, a connection between the First Minister and a businessman who we have heard was not here to defend himself; it will be interesting to find out about the apology, which has been raised already. The Labour Party then moved from saying that ministers—the First Minister in particular—were too closely involved in this to saying that I am not involved enough. The Labour Party is not exactly demonstrating competence in relation to this issue. It has all the figures, which have been released into the public domain. In response to Mary Fee’s comments, ministers have said that there has been no untoward activity, so there should not be an inquiry. If Labour thinks that there are untoward activities, it should demonstrate that if it wants an independent inquiry. Labour has come up with absolutely nothing so far. As for being reluctant to debate the issue, I will debate it every time that Labour brings business to the chamber if it wants to. We have nothing more to say—[Interruption.]

You have nothing left to say about it, and nothing to fear in releasing the figures. The incompetence, in my view, lies in the Labour Party. You have been six years in opposition and you still cannot work out how to be an effective Opposition. It is absolutely appalling. Going back to the same subject, we do not have any evidence to support some of the accusations that are being made. I understand that the Labour Party might still aspire to be the next—or a future—Government of Scotland. Before you do that, you will have to become an effective Opposition—

This is not effective opposition, believe you me. I have mentioned the things that we have delivered. We made the right decision at the time, and we stand by it, so let us look forward to the future. We have focused in the intervening four years on delivering record investment to improve and upgrade the transport infrastructure. There are many jobs that Labour never managed to complete, and we have completed them. I mentioned the M74; there is also the Airdrie to Bathgate line and the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line. We are the first Government to commit to dualling the A9, and there is the Borders railway too. Those are things that the Labour Party did not do. Your Liberal Democrat pals—the ones who were working with you in the past—are not here at all to defend what you have put up today. That tells its own story.

The investment has been key to the continuing economic recovery of this country—[Interruption.]

I ask members to support the amendment in my name.

The member is making it up now. [Interruption.]

I ask the member to reconsider that last point, because there was no recommendation contained in that study that there should be a heavy rail link to the airport. Given that the member says that the civil servant whom he keeps on talking about acted alone, is he saying that ministers should be involved in such decisions and that the manual that proscribes us from being involved—the same manual that Labour followed—is wrong? Perhaps he could clarify that.

We are improving road safety for cyclists through a wide range of measures around the three Es—engineering, education and enforcement. We are increasing investment in cycling infrastructure, with additional funding of £20 million over the next two years being announced in the draft budget on top of the £58 million already allocated since the 2011 spending review, and we have developed road user awareness campaigns to foster mutual respect on the roads. The Scottish Government’s road safety framework to 2020 includes commitments on education and training, improved signage, consideration of cycling in the context of roads maintenance and design, and the use of 20mph zones in all residential areas. A broad portfolio of approaches is needed and will continue to be developed to improve cyclist safety.

The police have a major role to play in the enforcement measures that I mentioned in my first response, but it is also the case that substantial initiatives are under way to ensure that all children get the chance to have on-the-road safety training. Previously, training was often done in the playground, whereas now it is done on the road. That is the right way in which to proceed. On safety in general, we have seen a decrease in fatalities; the figure is down to 174 people from the previous 185. We have seen decreases in total casualties, child casualties, child fatalities, pedestrian casualties and motorcyclist fatalities. The stand-out is the increase that we have seen in cyclist casualties, so there is no question but that we must give the matter further attention. The best way in which to deal with the matter is to make sure that every child has the chance to have on-the-road training, which will reassure both them and their parents that it is safe to cycle.

First of all, I welcome the work undertaken by Maureen Watt and her colleagues on the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee into community transport in Scotland. As I stated in my response to the committee in September, its report is an important piece of work on a significant transport sector that does not always receive the recognition that it deserves. I hope to demonstrate that, even in relation to the Government’s response, the report has already had an impact on the sector. The Government has invested more than £8.3 billion in transport since 2007, which is the largest transport investment programme that Scotland has ever seen. Bus services account for around 80 per cent of all journeys by public transport. In difficult economic times, and despite Westminster budget cuts, we have managed to sustain direct central Government spending on bus services, at around £250 million a year in cash terms. That is on top of the considerable funds that come via the local authority funding settlement. Nevertheless, as the committee identified, it is a fact that public transport is easier and more affordable to access for some areas and groups than it is for others. Community transport has a significant role to play in addressing some of the needs to which conventional services are less well suited. As members will be aware, funding of community transport was devolved to local authorities following the concordat with the Scottish Government. That is the right approach, because councils have a better understanding of transport needs in their areas, and those needs are not the same throughout Scotland. Despite the dramatic reductions in public spending imposed by the United Kingdom Government to which I referred, we have maintained the revenue funding available to local government. Between 2007-08 and 2012-13, the resources available to the Scottish Government from the departmental expenditure limit and non-domestic rates increased by 6.4 per cent. Over the same period, the local government budget increased by 8.9 per cent. It is that budget that provides the resources that enable local authorities to support community transport provision in their areas. As well as maintaining overall funding, both direct and through the budgets made available to local authorities, the Government has made a number of changes that are benefiting many organisations in the sector. For example, last year, we changed the rules on bus registration to allow demand-responsive transport services that are available to the general public to qualify for concessionary travel and the bus service operators grant. At the same time, changes were made to the BSOG, so that the calculations are now based on distance travelled rather than on fuel used. I know from discussions with operators that the change has been of benefit to many rural bus operators in particular, including eligible community transport operators. For example, in its written evidence to the committee, Buchan Dial-A-Community Bus said that the changes to the BSOG have made “a vital difference to CT operators, specifically those in rural areas, and ... supported the services a great deal.” Despite those policies and changes, we know that community transport faces a difficult time. I add my thanks to everyone who contributed to the inquiry, whether orally or in writing, whose evidence brought into sharp relief the problems that the community transport sector faces in the current economic climate. Previous debates that we have had on the subject suggest that we all recognise the important role that community transport services play as part of the transport network in Scotland. We appreciate and admire the dedicated volunteers who freely give their time and effort to organisations in their local communities. That is done for no financial gain, sometimes over many years, because it is the right thing to do. Recently, I talked to someone who had contracted cancer. She was a driver, as was her husband, but he, too, had health conditions. On a couple of occasions, because she could not get to the Beatson centre under her own steam, she was offered support in getting there and back by a community transport provider. That included the provider hanging around for a number of hours in Glasgow while the treatment was administered. That assistance was vital to the individual concerned. That is just one example of what such providers often do. It exemplifies the fact that, in providing the service that they provide, they are helping people who might otherwise be excluded from playing a bigger part in the community. The provision of community transport helps to support independence, enables people to have a more active lifestyle and encourages less reliance on social and health services. I will now say a few words about the Government’s response to the committee’s report. I am well aware of the number of calls that have been made—most recently in relation to Age Scotland’s still waiting campaign—for all community transport services to be included in the national concessionary travel scheme. Many members have written to me on behalf of constituents on the subject. As we have heard, the committee acknowledged the logistical and administrative difficulties that extension of the scheme to include all community transport projects would present. It concluded—rightly, I think—that that would not be the best way forward. The Government agrees with that conclusion for a number of reasons.

In relation to eligibility for concessionary travel, which in many circumstances covers access to bus services for people with disabilities, we did not think it necessary to progress with extending that. On Rod Campbell’s specific question, I am happy to look into whether it is true that the position with regard to disabled people breaches the Equality Act 2010. I think that it is fairly safe to say that the Government does not believe that it does, because we would not support that. The Government thinks that the proposed extension of the concessionary travel scheme to cover all community transport projects would not be the best way forward, first, because of the cost of doing so, which Maureen Watt mentioned. Our best guess at this stage is that extending the scheme in that way would increase the scheme’s costs by around £11.2 million a year, but we suspect that the figure might be substantially higher. For example, we do not know how many community transport organisations operate in Scotland. In addition, the figure of £11.2 million does not include the cost of the back-office equipment and electronic ticket machines that are needed to participate in the scheme. That is problematic, given that some of the services in question are provided by cars rather than buses.

I have already acknowledged that the provision of community transport is uneven across the country. The Government has no control over that—by its nature, community transport is often provided by voluntary organisations. We cannot insist on provision being equal throughout the country, but we can do what we can to ensure that the gaps are filled. I am not sure whether what David Stewart said was a plea for community transport services to be included in the concessionary travel scheme, but we do not agree that that is the right way to proceed, for the reasons that I have mentioned. The figure that I gave does not include the back-office costs, which can be substantial. If such services are provided with a car, the installation of electronic ticket machines is a difficult issue. Without such machines, it is not possible to have the audit process that is necessary to ensure that the scheme is not being abused. That process has to be provided for. Moreover, the national scheme for older and disabled people is primarily for free bus travel throughout Scotland. As I have mentioned, community transport covers many different modes, including cars; in fact, the “CTA State of the Sector Report for Scotland 2012” estimates that cars make up two thirds of the vehicles used in Scotland’s community transport. Finally, the current scheme offers operators a reimbursement rate of around 60 per cent in 2013-14, falling to 58.1 per cent in the following year, but Age Scotland is asking for 100 per cent reimbursement for community transport operators, and it is not clear how practically that could be accommodated in the same scheme. We are very clear that the committee’s report, which highlights the increasingly difficult operational environment for community transport, places some demands on the Scottish Government. Indeed, demand for services is going up from our aging population, which itself is likely to increase, and we need creative thinking about how we can help the sector further. The committee has made a number of recommendations, including some for the Scottish Government, and I intend to provide practical help in the following ways. First of all, Transport Scotland will from next month double its funding for the CTA. That additional funding will allow the association to enhance and expand its work in the community transport sector—the committee specifically asked for that in its report—and enable it to build on its 2012 state of the sector report, which represents probably the most extensive research on the subject to date. For its report, the CTA surveyed 80 of the largest community transport groups and estimated that there were at least 100 additional organisations in Scotland. However, as I have said, we do not know how many community transport organisations operate in Scotland. The new research will provide a more comprehensive picture of the community transport sector in Scotland than we have had before, which will, in turn, give us a better idea of the requirements of the sector as a whole and make it much easier to target help where it is needed. Furthermore, the additional funding will enable the CTA to increase the level of advice and support that it provides to the sector and, by extending its CT online portal to Scotland, it will also offer better service information and direct links to the community. On the issue of D1 licences, which was raised in the committee’s report, the Scottish Government will continue to look at options for securing D1 licence driver training more efficiently. Through Transport Scotland, we have already spoken to the CTA, the Department for Transport and local authorities, which also need qualified minibus drivers, and will continue to seek ways of addressing the issue without compromising safety standards. The issue of funding for new vehicles has also been highlighted, and I recognise that it is one of the main difficulties for community transport providers. There are two issues to address: the first is to identify resources in very difficult times; and the second is to ensure that we get the right process for a grant system. However, we are giving very positive consideration to what we can do in this area and expect to come back with a conclusion very shortly. The bus investment fund was launched in April 2013 to provide opportunities for local transport authorities and others to bid for resources to deliver bus-related projects. Community transport organisations have made a number of interesting applications to the fund in its first year; the results will be announced very soon, and I expect some of those applications to be successful. I certainly look forward to the sector’s continuing engagement in future rounds. Obviously, there are no quick fixes to the problems faced today by community transport groups in Scotland. However, I trust that the measures that I have outlined demonstrate the Scottish Government’s commitment to continuing support for the sector, as I think was evidenced in our response to the committee.

Will Mark Griffin clarify what he is driving at? Is he against the idea that we have taken away the ring fencing for the funding, or is he arguing against the fact that the cuts that we have had imposed on us in the Parliament have been greater than the cuts that we have had to inflict on local government, as I demonstrated in my speech? There has been a larger increase in funding for local government than for the Scottish Government. Is he suggesting that we should get rid of ring fencing? Is he suggesting that we should bring back ring fencing as it used to be and, if so, does he have the councils’ support for that position?

Do the member’s comments suggest that he would support the reintroduction of ring fencing in this regard? If not, does he think that we should put in more money to support those local authorities that have invested less than others in community transport?

I have listened with interest to all the contributions and, although they have been diverse, they have largely been consensual, and there is some consensus around this issue as has been mentioned by previous speakers. I had hoped to be able to say that James Kelly’s speech was absolutely smashing but, as his subsequent comments about the Scottish Government prove, he is a glass-half-empty—or a glass-completely-empty—kind of guy. I want to respond to some of those comments. Mr Kelly talked about me wringing my hands. The very essence of wringing one’s hands is complaining about the effects of dropping ring fencing while not proposing to reintroduce it. Similarly, if Mr Kelly disagrees with the rate of reimbursement, which has been independently arrived at and jointly agreed with the bus industry, it is open to him to propose a different rate of reimbursement during the budget process. I look forward to seeing whether he has the conviction to make that proposal. I will now concentrate on some of the points of consensus. There has been a lot of recognition of the value of the contribution that has been made by the community transport sector. I am aware that the transport sector has been described by many members as particularly diverse. It has no predetermined shape but it springs from local communities working together to meet transport needs in a particular way. To endorse Alex Johnstone’s comments, community transport does not want or need a centrally driven agenda, but I acknowledge that, in these tough economic times, it could benefit from some further help. Because of that, the Scottish Government will work with the CTA and other stakeholders to strengthen the support that we provide. I return to one or two of the points that have been raised by individual members. Perhaps I did not understand the import of Roderick Campbell’s question when he asked it, but I confirm that the Scottish Government does not accept that a failure to provide a concessionary travel scheme covering community transport is in any way unlawful under equality law. On a point that was made by Duncan McNeil, the Scottish Government is providing approximately £400,000 over two years for at least two pilots—one urban and one rural—in healthcare transport. We will seek applications from NHS boards as the lead authority, acting in collaboration with relevant local authorities, regional transport partnerships and the Scottish Ambulance Service. As Duncan McNeil suggested, those pilots will explore new approaches to the provision and integration of health and social care transport. That is therefore being implemented and I take on board Duncan McNeil’s points. Cameron Buchanan mentioned the suggestion made in his area that we should try to simplify BSOG applications. If he wants to write to me on exactly what the proposed modifications that would be helpful to operators are, I am more than willing to have officials look at that and get back to him. Alex Johnstone criticised one-year funding. We have heard about that many times before from different authorities, especially from the third sector. Although that charge could be levelled at the Scottish Government or local government, we are currently in the process of a one-year spending review from Westminster. Much flows from that; under the current situation, what we do flows from that, which influences what local authorities do. There has to be a joint approach if we are to get the longer-term, more stable funding that has been mentioned. Mark Griffin made many of us very envious when he said that he sat his driving test after 1997, and I am very grateful that he did not say how long it was after 1997 that he sat his test. I could have sat my test when I was 17, gone back to zero and then sat it again before 1997, so I am very envious. He made an important point about people who qualified to drive after 1997 not being able to drive minibuses. We will look at that and I have mentioned some of the measures that we have said that we should take to ensure that we have enough trained and qualified people to undertake driving voluntarily. We should not be putting obstacles in the way; we should try to make it as easy as possible. Elaine Murray made the point that the situations that she finds herself in would make it wrong for her to benefit from the concessionary travel scheme; that demonstrates the difference between us, although it is a sincere point and I know that she is frustrated at the reaction that she gets. Many in the SNP have gone through many elections being told that we were going to cut the concessionary travel scheme, which perhaps explains some of the sensitivity around that area. Of course, Elaine Murray is quite right to say that debates such as this are times to put forward contentious points of view; I do not disagree with that at all. I am sorry that I cannot remember who made the very important point about using the procurement powers of local authorities and the Scottish Government to make it easier for community transport organisations to procure, for example, new buses. I have looked into that in some detail, and I was very keen that if the Scottish Government was able to help out with the provision of new assets, we should do so—as we are doing with the green bus fund—by buying vehicles that are much more environmentally friendly. However, if members look into that, they will see that there are very few or no vehicles on the market that achieve that to any extent. There is no guarantee that even new buses will be more environmentally friendly than the ones that they replace—I understand that point. The buses that have been bought through the general bus fund have in many cases been hybrids, which are much more environmentally friendly. I looked into the issue with Alexander Dennis, which said that it would have to have 200 to 300 buses on order to make it viable for it to develop a bus of that kind. If we can work together with local authorities and the Scottish Government, as has been suggested, and start to give that certainty of orders to some of the suppliers, we could achieve even more of that. That will not stand in the way of us very quickly coming to a conclusion on what support we can give through a grant scheme to help some operators replace their current vehicles. Mark Griffin made a point about the level of funding for local government. I asked for the figures and, in 2006-07, it was around 34.7 per cent of Scottish Government expenditure. The figure is currently 38 per cent and it has been more than 37 per cent in every year in between, which shows the commitment that we have made to local authorities.

Those figures completely contradict one of the first points that I made. The Scottish Government has had an increase of 6.4 per cent and the increase in the local government budget has been 8.9 per cent. It is not possible to square that with the allegation that cuts have been passed on to local government to the extent that James Kelly said. He is wrong on that. I am very grateful that Dennis Robertson mentioned Duncan Pearson in my constituency for his work and the award that was made. I also mention quickly Kathleen Welsh, who was a woman with substantial disabilities in my constituency. I represented her as a councillor and an MSP for the best part of 17 years. She worked tirelessly with the dial-a-journey service for many years to help people to access such services and her death is a real loss to the sector. I record my thanks for what she did. I reiterate the points that I made at the start about what we are doing. James Kelly mentioned leadership. We are providing leadership through providing the research on the community transport sector that has been talked about and improving the support and advice to the sector. We are also doubling the moneys that are made payable to the CTA, which will allow it to get a better database of information for how we go forward; many members talked about that. There is also what we might still be able to do on bus investment through a grant scheme. The Scottish Government is doing a great deal. We are showing leadership. The committee by and large agreed that we had responded positively to the important points that it made. In the first year of the new bus investment fund that I mentioned, a number of community transport projects have already submitted big bids for funding. As I said, I am hopeful that they will be successful. We have shifted the basis for BSOG to mileage rather than fuel used, which makes sense to me. To some extent, that was opposed, but it has worked out extremely well. We were right to do it. It has tended to benefit operators, especially those in more rural environments. There is a great deal that is positive in the debate. It is good to see the level of consensus that has emerged. If it was possible, I would like to get absolute unanimity on one thing: the point that Duncan McNeil made about the jungle of acronyms. He mentioned, for example, ICI—a name from the past—and the SAS, although that was the Scottish Ambulance Service, rather than anything else. Duncan McNeil also said that I should not be categorised with Jim Hacker, who was alleged by Sir Humphrey to have been unable to tell his ACAS from his NALGO. As an ex-shop steward and member of NALGO, I am glad that I am not categorised in that way. The debate has been genuinely positive. It is important that we learn the lessons from the comments that members made in the debate and from the committee’s report. We have responded to a number of the requests that the committee made but we have not finished at that point. There is more that we can do and, on behalf of the Scottish Government, I undertake to do that.

It has been interesting to hear the diverse views that exist in the Parliament on the issue. I confirm—as some people doubt it, I am sure—that I take road safety issues very seriously and I agree that one death on Scotland’s roads is one too many. We do all that we can, where there is an evidence base to suggest action, to implement measures to reduce road casualty figures in line with our road safety framework and the targets to reduce casualties. I should first set out the Scottish Government’s position on liability in relation to road traffic accidents. In 2010, the “Cycling Action Plan for Scotland” committed Transport Scotland to looking at incidents of killed or seriously injured—KSI—cyclists and to examining the implementation of liability laws in other countries to see whether there was any evidence to suggest that the intervention reduces cycle accidents and fatalities. As was noted in the refreshed CAPS document that was published in June, we have not been able to establish a robust evidence base that links liability laws to cycling accident rates. The research, which has been circulated and is available via the Scottish Parliament information centre, looked at various countries across Europe and their cycle fatality rates between 1990 and 2010 and compared them with figures for the UK and Scotland. Comparisons between countries are inevitably hindered, as has been suggested, by the different circumstances in the countries. Each country has a different legal approach to liability as well as different laws on road speeds, different cycling cultures and different geographies, and there are many other factors. As a result, other questions have to be addressed when the evidence is looked at. Between 1990 and 2010, Germany, where strict liability is in place, and Scotland, where it is not, had similar reductions in fatalities. Scotland’s fatality rate reduced more than Italy’s, despite that country having strict liability legislation in place. Figures on our reported road casualties for 2012 were published last Wednesday and the headline figures, overall, are the lowest since records began. That is obviously better news than if they were higher. However, we know that we still have a long way to go and we take the approach that one death is too many. We also know that there are continuing concerns to address in respect of pedestrians, cyclists and motorcyclists, although pedestrians have not been mentioned in the debate as much as I expected. Collectively, we must continue to ensure that everyone plays their part to make the roads safer. Cycle Law Scotland has been lobbying for a change in Scotland’s civil laws regarding presumed liability for road traffic accidents. Indeed, its representatives have met Transport Scotland officials twice to discuss the issue, and the Government has not turned a deaf ear to the representations that have been made. The argument for stricter or presumed liability is that it would raise drivers’ awareness of vulnerable road users, thereby making drivers more careful. However, from a road safety point of view, there does not appear to be robust evidence to suggest that the number of road accidents would be reduced if the law were changed in such a way. As has been said, first by Alison Johnstone, there is no magic bullet to improve cyclist safety. Rather than one intervention, a package of measures must be implemented, as the motion states. We are already delivering better infrastructure—although we know that we have much more to do—as well as the cycling training that Alison Johnstone mentioned and the road safety campaigns. The nice way code has attracted criticism from cycling groups, but it is difficult to change the culture. That does not happen overnight. We have seen, through other social marketing campaigns that have been pursued over time, that it takes time to do that. The code is a good step forward and is not one that the Government just dreamed up—it was drawn up with many cycling groups. On that point, I have different information from Alison Johnstone. I understand that it is not the case that Sustrans supports the change to which she refers. In fact, a number of other organisations—for example, Living Streets Scotland and Paths for All—are against the change that has been mentioned. Perhaps that is worth investigating further. John Lamont talked about spend per head of population, but he restricted his comments to the Conservative Party and what Boris Johnson is doing in London. Outside London, the spend per head of population in other parts of England is around £1.50 whereas in Scotland this year it is around £4.00 and will be around £6.00 next year—and that does not include the contributions from local authorities. The fact that we have recognised that there is much more to do is reflected in the increasing levels of investment that are being made. We are delivering better infrastructure. Kezia Dugdale, who has left the chamber, mentioned Easter Road. One of the officials from Transport Scotland who is sitting at the back of the chamber regularly cycles up and down Easter Road and feels that it is a safe road to cycle. Such things are subjective and depend on people’s experiences and perceptions of the environment around them, but other people feel that the road is safe in the circumstances. One of the main infrastructure initiatives that we are delivering, not far from Easter Road, is the Leith Walk initiative. We recently announced support for the City of Edinburgh Council’s initiative to have infrastructure put in there to improve active travel. I have mentioned the cycling training that we are providing. We are specifically delivering on-road cycling training to improve people’s confidence. In the past, training has been delivered in the playground but that is not a real environment for many parents, and as crucial as getting children to feel that it is safe to cycle is getting parents to feel that it is safe for them to cycle. Claudia Beamish highlighted problems with the roads around schools. Car journeys to school are often short and quite environmentally damaging. However, it is true to say—I am not passing the buck—that 94 per cent of the roads in this country are controlled not by the Scottish Government but by local authorities. We have a responsibility to help them to improve their roads and there have been initiatives in the past such as safer routes to school. Nevertheless, local authorities and schools themselves have a role to play. Claudia Beamish made a good point about the state of the roads, which should be looked after and kept in good condition. Also, during the winter, we can tackle the perception that the roads might be unsafe because of ice or snow. We are looking at that on a cross-portfolio basis and I have met Paul Wheelhouse, Shona Robison and Alasdair Allan a number of times to discuss that very issue. We are trying to address the three issues on which Alison Johnstone finished her speech: road safety, better infrastructure and campaigns on cycling training and road safety. We are also encouraging local authorities to implement lower speed limits, not least in Edinburgh. That work involves the three Es—engineering, education and enforcement. On engineering, we are steadily increasing investment in cycling infrastructure. Members may not think it, but we are spending more on that than any previous Government in Scotland. At the first-ever cycling summit on 24 September, I announced £20 million of match funding for local authority-led community links schemes over the next two years, which includes money for tackling problem junctions. On education, we have developed road user awareness campaigns to foster mutual respect, which is another issue that Alison Johnstone raised. Preliminary results from the evaluation of Cycling Scotland’s nice way code campaign suggest that it has been useful in shifting public perceptions in favour of giving cyclists more space and respect on the road, particularly at junctions, and in leading to an increase in the number of cyclists who say that they feel comfortable cycling on the roads. There has also been an increase in driver awareness of pedestrians. There will be an opportunity to discuss that further at the next meeting of the cross-party group on cycling on 3 December. We have tried to be as helpful as possible on Edinburgh’s 20mph pilot project, which is being rolled out to all business and residential areas of the city. A 20mph limit has been introduced in other countries such as the Netherlands, where the number of cycling fatalities has reduced as a result. The Netherlands—which I visited to see what is done there on cycling—provides hard evidence of which we should take notice. I was highly encouraged by the positive engagement that local authorities and other delivery bodies showed at the first national cycling summit that was held last month. For my part, I will continue to seek constructive discussion about what more we can all do to make cycling a more attractive and safe travel option in our communities. The motion makes a plea for us to debate the issue further, which has been echoed by a number of members. I welcome debate on protecting the most vulnerable road users, but we must proceed on the basis of robust data. If people think that the exercise that we said that we would undertake, which we have undertaken and the results of which we have published, is wrong, I would be more than willing to look at other evidence—proper, objective evidence—that suggests that another approach can be taken. For that reason, although I am supportive of nearly all the statements that are made in the motion, I cannot support it in its current form, given the lack of robust evidence that stricter liability could have positive benefits for vulnerable road users. However, there will continue to be debate on the issue, in which we will continue to participate. Meeting closed at 18:16.

I met Barney Crockett, leader of Aberdeen City Council, last Thursday to discuss the timescales for the Haudagain improvement.

I made clear to Barney Crockett the same position on Haudagain that I have made clear to Richard Baker, Lewis Macdonald and Mark McDonald’s predecessor Brian Adam and in numerous public statements: the Scottish Government will pay proper compensation for any affected households. We have already started the design work on the Haudagain at a cost of around £3 million. I had what I thought was a very constructive meeting with Barney Crockett that covered a range of issues on which the Scottish Government and Aberdeen City Council can work together. Unfortunately, as seems to be the pattern with such meetings, as soon as Councillor Willie Young heard that some constructive dialogue was going on between the council and the Government, he got very agitated and responded by trying to create a drama out of a non-existent crisis. Perhaps the best thing that could happen in the circumstances is for Councillor Willie Young to let the leader of the council, Councillor Crockett, undertake the dialogue with the Scottish Government and to enter into a period of silence for everyone else’s benefit.

If Mr Baker considered the procedures that have to be followed for purchasing land, making legal commitments and avoiding, if possible, protracted legal cases such as the one involving the Aberdeen western peripheral route, he would understand why we are taking this approach, which is, in fact, the approach that was taken by previous Administrations. If, for example, we committed to giving compensation to households that we did not intend to take over, that could be held against us at the public local inquiry. I am determined to approach this in the correct way: Haudagain will happen as soon as the AWPR is completed. Indeed, the council itself has accepted that; its own engineer’s report said that that was the right way to do things. I thought that Richard Baker had accepted that position. Barney Crockett has accepted it; perhaps it is time for those on the Labour benches to do likewise.

Presiding Officer, thank you for the opportunity to close the debate. We have heard members’ views on the high-level benefits of a direct rail link between Perth and Inverkeithing, but it is important to bear in mind that more than a quarter of our capital budget has been cut since 2010-11, as the previous speaker said. It must be recognised that such a cut impacts on what the Government can do through capital investment, particularly under the current devolution settlement. In spite of that cut, the Scottish Government is committed to delivering the recommendations of the 2008 strategic transport projects review, including the Inverkeithing to Halbeath line, which Liz Smith mentioned. That will deliver journey time savings for the Edinburgh to Perth route, albeit to a lesser degree but for a fraction of the cost of a direct link between Perth and Inverkeithing. On the cost, I note that Liz Smith acknowledged the high financial and construction cost at the start of her speech. The estimates that I have seen suggest a cost of anything between £0.5 billion and £1 billion for the project. It is a fact that the 2008 strategic transport projects review undertook a study into the matter and found that the Perth to Inverkeithing proposal did not represent the best value for the taxpayer. That said, ministers are always willing to consider rail interventions outwith the STPR recommendations where a positive case can be made and, of course, if they follow the Scottish transport appraisal guidance. I was happy to discuss the proposal with Transform Scotland in March this year. As Liz Smith mentioned, officials have discussed Transform Scotland’s proposal with it, and will continue to do so. Officials have also recommended to Transform Scotland that it should approach the relevant regional transport partnerships—the south east of Scotland transport partnership and the Tayside and central Scotland transport partnership, with interest from the Highlands and Islands transport partnership and the north east of Scotland transport partnership, obviously—to discuss a new study that incorporates all possible transport solutions, not just rail, in line with the Scottish transport appraisal guidance process. Generally, our commitment to our railways is reflected in the ambitious £5 billion package of funding and investment until 2019, which will support improvements to the infrastructure and services right across the network, including substantial improvements to the Highland main line and the Aberdeen to Inverness line. We have heard that the Government has been instrumental in reversing a number of the Beeching-era cuts and has moved Scotland back to something approaching a golden age of rail. Last year, there were 83 million rail journeys in Scotland, which is a record high. Since 2007, we have invested more than £8.3 billion in transport. We have reopened the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line, which Liz Smith mentioned and which I was involved in proposing as the council leader in Clackmannanshire at the time. We have also reopened the Airdrie to Bathgate line. Both lines have been a great success. As has been said, the Borders railway will restore the link between our capital and the Borders by 2015. Furthermore, phase 1 of the Highland main line project provided two additional services daily as well as journey time savings of up to 18 minutes, which have directly benefited the people of Perth. Timetable improvements in 2008, 2011 and 2012 have delivered additional calls and services on the Edinburgh-Perth-Aberdeen corridor. That shows our commitment to delivering improved journey times and connections, as I specified in last year’s high-level output specification.

If I have time at the end of my speech, I will come back to Mary Scanlon. Those improvements have helped us to deliver sustainable economic growth. Obviously, having those connections is vital to the economy. As members may know, work is under way on refurbishing the rolling stock on the Edinburgh via Fife to Dundee, Perth and Aberdeen routes to make passenger journeys more comfortable. Wi-fi and appropriate modern facilities will be available on all the class 170 trains that are used to connect Scotland’s cities. On Mark Griffin’s point about journey times being longer than they were 100 years ago, quite a lot has happened in those 100 years, including the Beeching cuts, which we have talked about. I certainly know that cities in the north of England in particular are very envious of the Scottish Government’s record in reversing some of the Beeching cuts. However, we must have an eye on the moneys that are available. The STPR was the right way to go about assessing the proposal. There was a nationwide, multimodal and evidence-based review that ruled it out on the ground of poor value to the taxpayer, as I have said. Therefore, we have had the feasibility study that Liz Smith calls for. It is there and it is evidence based; I have also mentioned that there is another route through the regional transport partnerships to have further work done. We are as committed to improving services for the people of Perth and Fife as we are to improving services across the network. Phase 2 of the improvements to the Highland main line will deliver greater capacity and faster journey times. That will help to improve connectivity for passengers and businesses. Network Rail is developing proposals for the Aberdeen to central belt rail enhancements project for future delivery. That project could increase capacity and produce further journey time savings in the Perth and Fife area. We have announced the £60 million network improvement fund, which will be available to support the funding of infrastructure works across the network, in line with the Scottish ministers’ strategic priorities, which include improved journey times, connectivity and resilience. Liz Smith mentioned the possibility of taking traffic from road to rail. The study that was done showed that that would amount to a shift of 1 per cent of current traffic. That is not insignificant, but perhaps it does not represent the savings or the modal shift that we would want. In addition, future phases of our electrification programme will include electrification of routes between Edinburgh, Perth and Dundee, Dunblane to Aberdeen, and Perth to Inverness. We also have the specification for the next ScotRail franchise, which will come in the next 18 months or so. The specification underlines the Government’s commitment to providing enhanced rail services across Scotland, which will perhaps be more obvious when we issue it and the invitation to tender. By providing the longer franchise, which we asked for, we will look for bidders to provide innovative enhancements to train services that could be of benefit to passengers in the Perth and Fife area, although that is clearly a matter for bidders.

I have answered that question by pointing to some of the cuts that we have seen. However, we have reversed many of the cuts. The Borders rail link is a classic example, and the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line was closed for 40 years. We have to deal with the railways that we inherited from previous Administrations. Perhaps Mary Scanlon should ask those who represented the previous Administration in Scotland—she could also formally ask the UK Government—why further improvements have not been made. We have to have regard to the moneys that are available. If she was serious about the issue, she could perhaps identify where the £0.5 billion to £1 billion would come from to do the project. It is not credible to make demands without saying where the money would come from. Despite what some say, we are rising to the challenge of those budgetary constraints, which have been imposed by the Government that Mary Scanlon supports. Does she support the 26 per cent cut in our capital budget? If so, how does she square that with the ever-increasing demands that she makes on services provided by the Scottish Government? We have demonstrated that we are committed to improving Scotland’s railways for the benefit of people across Scotland. I again thank Liz Smith for bringing the debate to the chamber. Meeting closed at 17:32.

The Scottish Government has already made improvements in rail services to Edinburgh from areas to the west and south-west of Glasgow, with passengers now able to travel to Edinburgh via Shotts and Carstairs services from Glasgow central station. The Paisley corridor rail improvements have also increased capacity and improved journey quality on one of the busiest sections of the Scottish network. Additionally, through the provision of a longer franchise, we are seeking the next franchisee to develop opportunities and strategies for delivering innovative enhancements to train services.

As I said in my original response, it is no longer necessary to change between Glasgow central and Queen Street stations for most of those services because people can change at Carstairs. On Willie Coffey’s point about a direct service from, say, Kilmarnock to Edinburgh, work is currently going on to allow people to take a train from Kilmarnock to Glasgow central station and, although it is a Glasgow service, to stay on the same train through to Edinburgh. Work on that is going on in relation to the new franchise. It might be a good idea for Willie Coffey to engage with the potential bidders for that franchise to ensure that they are well aware of his and his constituents’ aspirations.

The Government does not support that scheme because we believe that it would disadvantage many existing passengers by diverting existing services from the city centre stations to run via crossrail. It would also substantially increase the subsidy requirements through the addition of new services, and it would require increased infrastructural investment at critical points elsewhere on the network. In 2008, when the scheme was looked at through the strategic transport projects review, we estimated that its cost would be between £150 million and £250 million at that time. If that is the Labour Party’s proposal, we would expect it to propose that in relation to the new franchise, or perhaps in its budget proposals, but the Scottish Government does not intend to take that project forward.

I have given the reasons why the Government does not support the crossrail project. As I said in response to Willie Coffey’s supplementary question, there are different ways to effect the improvements that the member is looking for, and we are seeking to do that through the new franchise. It will be a longer franchise that will therefore allow substantial capital investment, which has not been as easy in the past, and the Government is committed to around £5 billion of investment over the first five years. There is the potential to improve those services vastly, but we would not do that through crossrail.

I thank you, Presiding Officer, for the chance to speak on the order, which I believe offers benefits for Scotland and the local area by providing for the development of modern port facilities, providing jobs both in construction—an estimated 500 jobs—and in operation, and contributing to our economy.

There are two further processes that should give the assurances that the member seeks. The first is the construction environmental management plan—the CEMP—and the second involves the marine licence being approved, which is still to be done. No work can take place either on the river or onshore until the marine licence is approved. The project was included in the second national planning framework—NPF2—and I remain of the view that the proposal meets the criteria outlined at that time. The site has rail infrastructure, which can be brought into use if the demand is forthcoming. I also recognise that there has been on-going local objection to the proposal. However, that objection and many others were considered at a lengthy public local inquiry. In proposing to make the order, I have taken into account the majority of the recommendations from the inquiry and some additional changes following the further period of consultation. The changes include mitigation measures and safeguards, including a requirement that the works cannot commence until the CEMP, which I have mentioned, is refined and approved by the Scottish ministers following further consultation with local communities and environmental bodies. I can assure the Parliament that that will not be deleted from the draft considered by the reporters. I acknowledge that further assessment of the impacts of the proposed dredging is required. I consider that, in line with the reporters’ recommendations and in keeping with habitats regulations, that can best be carried out using the expertise of Marine Scotland in considering an application for a marine licence, without which the project cannot proceed, as I have said. I believe that the project will strengthen our commitment to a diverse and market-led ports industry and provide our manufacturers and importers with choice in moving their goods to markets. I commend the order to members.

Investment in the existing franchise has already resulted in increased passenger numbers, reduced journey times and fewer cancellations due to rolling stock or infrastructure failures. We aim to build on that success, so following public consultation, the new franchise agreement will stipulate continued investment to improve and replace dated rolling stock, provision of an overall improved passenger experience, better utilisation of the network, improved connectivity, and the operation of a more environmentally friendly service.

In the specification for the next franchise, which we will publish towards the end of the year, bidders will be required to provide rolling stock that is sufficient to meet anticipated passenger demand, and new trains will provide an increase in capacity, for example, on the Edinburgh to Glasgow route. Facilities such as space for cycles and buggies, and tip-up seats, are already provided on many of Scotland’s trains and will continue to be provided on new trains. David Torrance referred to the appeal that our marvellous scenic countryside has for cyclists and mountain bikers. I recognise that appeal and the potential that it offers. Accordingly, I will require bidders to produce plans that will enable many more bicycles to be conveyed to destinations that are served by, for example, the west Highland line and the Borders line. As a nation, we have to do more to be more cycle friendly, to recognise the benefits that cycling offers for our health and general wellbeing and to see whether it can help to improve Scotland’s economy even further.

I have tried to answer that question before for Mark Griffin, and he has lodged a written question, for which we will provide a full answer to the points that he raises. As I have said previously, in so far as EGIP relates to the new franchise, we want to minimise disruption, because disruption is not in anybody’s interest. A substantial amount of work needs to be done to ensure that disruption is minimised. As I said, I will give a fuller response to the written question.

The Scottish Government has been regularly engaging with stakeholders to ensure that we are supporting them effectively to achieve our common aim of improving Scotland’s connectivity.

As Chic Brodie will be aware, the majority of legislation relating to aviation is currently reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament. To date, the Scottish Government’s focus has been on the limited number of areas where we can take action. Prime among those is increasing the number of direct air services from Scotland—an example being the recently announced Edinburgh to Chicago service. Should Scotland become an independent country we would, of course, have the power to establish a more wide-reaching aviation strategy that would take account of the particular needs of Scottish aviation and the people of Scotland. I would expect any such strategy to recognise and support ancillary services such as are provided at Prestwick, and to have a much more amenable process for air passenger duty, which we have campaigned for the UK Government to change for a number of years now.

Transport Scotland carried out a route accident reduction plan study along the entire length of the A76 trunk road from Kilmarnock to Dumfries. A number of road safety measures were recommended, including between Dumfries and Kirkconnel. Those included surfacing, signing, lining and bend assessments and were completed in March this year. There are no plans to introduce further measures. Transport Scotland will, of course, continue to monitor the safety performance of the route.

I have already mentioned some of the measures that we have taken along that route generally. In addition, some aspects, including bus shelters and so on, of the Ellisland project, which was scrapped, have been taken forward with south-west of Scotland transport partnership and Dumfries and Galloway Council. As things stand, we await information in relation to the caravan park near Courthill—we are waiting for SWESTRANS and Dumfries and Galloway Council to come back to provide an update on possible solutions. Further work will be done in that area. As I said, we await the response from Dumfries and Galloway Council and SWESTRANS.

The next ScotRail franchise will commence in April 2015. Bidders will be required to develop plans to improve rail’s integration with the wider transport system, which, of course, includes improvements to facilities for cyclists. In the next rail investment period, from 2014 to 2019, Network Rail is required to work with partners to deliver improvements at stations through the £30 million Scottish stations fund, including more and better facilities for cyclists. Network Rail is continuing to improve facilities for cyclists at the stations that it manages in Scotland—for example, with the excellent redevelopment at Waverley station, where it has arranged pop-up maintenance workshops for cyclists and has been collecting feedback to help inform future cycling provisions.

It is worth saying that the specification for the franchise is deliberately designed to encourage the bidders to come forward with their own proposals. In some bidders’ minds, there is a much greater emphasis on having access to bikes at stations—as happens in Amsterdam, for example—rather than on taking bikes from station to station on a train. If they want to do that, they have to have secure cycle storage facilities, as the member suggests. We are encouraging bidders to come forward with their own proposals, but we are also seeing developments such as the Stirling hub, which is an excellent new development that improves cycle storage and the facilities to maintain bikes as well as telling people where they can go in the local area. We are doing that just now, but the big leap forward can come with the new franchise.

The same conditions will apply as I outlined in my previous answer, in as far as storage will come with the new franchise, over and above the development of the Borders railway itself. It will be the same as the rest of the rail network; there will be cycle storage facilities on board and the franchisee will be required to balance the needs of cyclists and non-cyclists. Of course, there is an alternative Dalkeith cycle route to replace the paths that will be lost to the railway.

The member should be aware that we are not able to encourage one form of bid over another. To do so would be to breach the procurement regulations. We said that we were more than happy to receive a not-for-profit bid. We made it clear that any not-for-profit bid that came forward would have to contain an element or a partner that had substantial experience in running railways. Beyond that, it is not for us to go and encourage bids. In fact, we are specifically precluded from doing that by European procurement law.

The member will be aware that we have to balance the requirements and competing demands of foot passengers, cyclists, wheelchair users and others on the available on-train space. The current franchisee provides wheelchair spaces that can be reserved on longer express routes, and priority seating is provided on almost all ScotRail services. The assisted travel team in ScotRail can help to make reservations and can arrange assistance for individuals. In the next franchise period, from April 2015, we will continue to work to ensure that rail services in Scotland are accessible to all.

The updated cycling action plan for Scotland, which was published in June 2013, makes clear our commitment to the continued development of cycling infrastructure in communities as well as the continued development of the national cycle network. That commitment was reinforced in the draft budget that was announced yesterday by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth. We are further increasing our expenditure on cycling infrastructure by £10 million in each of the next two years. To clarify, that is in addition to the £58 million that the Scottish Government has already allocated to active travel since the 2011 spending review, using the opportunities for further investment that have arisen. Local authorities, as the local transport authorities, also have an important role in delivering on infrastructure improvements in their communities.

Yes, of course. Last week I was on a former rail line that is now used as a cycle track and for walking, and such routes offer excellent opportunities to develop the cycle network. Local authorities are best placed to determine what cycle routes should be developed in their areas. Where there are local opportunities to encourage wider participation in cycling, particularly for everyday journeys, I would encourage people to consider them carefully. The Scottish Government is providing significant funding via the Sustrans community links programme, through which all local authorities in Scotland can bid for cycle infrastructure projects.

Available research shows that average speed cameras will improve safety for all users, whether the HGV speed limit is retained at 40mph or increased to 50mph. However, our evidence suggests that a greater reduction in accidents will result if the 40mph speed limit is retained. As I have said before, we have not ruled out a pilot scheme to increase the speed limits of HGV vehicles exceeding 7.5 tonnes on single carriageway stretches of the A9 from 40mph to 50mph if the evidence supports that and the A9 safety group is currently undertaking further investigation work to better understand the suitability of such an increase.

I think that I have already said that further evidence is currently being gathered by the A9 safety group, which I think is the correct way to proceed. These are serious matters involving the safety of motorists. We want to try to make the road as safe as possible. The best way to proceed is to make sure that we garner all the evidence. I have said in debates in the chamber in the past that I am sympathetic to the idea of a 50mph speed limit for various reasons, but we have to proceed on the basis of the evidence. I should say that I have written today to all local and list MSPs to invite them to a presentation to talk about both the average speed cameras and the possible introduction of a 50mph speed limit.

I think that I have answered that question. I hope that the member, who has a track record in road safety, agrees that the best way to proceed is on the basis of real evidence. Work is currently being undertaken by the A9 safety group and I think it best to await that evidence and then decide how to proceed after that.

Transport Scotland has been working with the group led by Glasgow airport on future surface access to the airport since 2010. That client group received the completed initial appraisal report on the Glasgow airport strategic transport network study from Aecom on 29 August 2013. The study includes a range of options across all modes of transport, which are recommended to be taken forward to detailed appraisal.

First, I welcome Mark Griffin to his new position. I also congratulate him on his engagement over the summer. Mark Griffin’s question has a fundamental flaw. The land that was purchased that he mentioned was initially purchased by Strathclyde partnership for transport, not by the Government, although the Government subsequently bought it from SPT. He might wish to address some questions to SPT about that. We have just had the initial appraisal report. There is no question that the Government is delaying. The first time that it came to the notice of the client partners—the lead partner is Glasgow airport, not the Scottish Government, and the other two partners are Glasgow City Council and Renfrewshire Council—it was the two councils that asked for substantial changes to the initial recommendations, which had to be worked through. There is no question of any delay. There have been substantial benefits in the Paisley corridor and improvements in the area, paid for by the Government. The cancellation of the GARL project saved £176 million. Of course there has been a cost, because land was purchased at the height of the market and then sold during a recession—there is no question about that. However, let us compare that with reports that Mark Griffin talks about. Those reports refer to the £2 billion of additional costs for the aircraft carriers that the Labour Party signed up to, and the point that he raises today seems a much smaller matter. We took the right decision on GARL at the time, and our position remains the same. The Government will not be funding a heavy-rail link to Glasgow airport, albeit that the report recommends that such a link may be investigated if a private sector bid comes forward; the Government would of course consider that.

The sale of the land had to proceed from the decision that was taken by Parliament in the budget paper that was agreed. That falls under the Crichel Down rules. Like any other public authority, the Government is obliged to sell that land—there is no option but to do that. We did the right thing. If James Kelly thinks that it was the wrong thing, perhaps he should talk to his colleagues at Westminster and have the primary legislation changed.

The Scottish Government holds regular discussions with various stakeholders to discuss transport links improvements such as the A737 Dalry bypass, the M8, M73 and M74 motorway improvements, the A82 Pulpit Rock improvement work, and high-speed rail.

I suppose that the answer to the question—at least for Margaret McDougall—would be to identify which other things we should stop doing in order to fund that. I mention that because I had understood her to be pleased with the things that the Scottish Government is doing. She has been quoted as saying of some improvements that we have made to rail services in North Ayrshire: “These further improvements are great for the area, the increase in the number of trains on the Ayr line, and the extended car park in Kilwinning is something I lobbied for many years as a North Ayrshire Councillor”. I am pleased that this Administration has managed to deliver on some of the things that previous Administrations have not done, but we cannot do everything at the same time. We have to prioritise, and I am delighted that Margaret McDougall is as pleased with the action that we are taking in her area as I am.

Not only have we not had any intention to close that rail station but, as Mr Gibson knows, we have bolstered it by the introduction of the new ferry service to Campbeltown, specifically because it comes at a railhead. We have reinforced the viability of that station, far from even considering the question of closure.

Fife Council is responsible for the management and maintenance of local roads in Fife. Scottish ministers are responsible for Scotland’s trunk road network and we are investing more than £690 million in 2013-14 to ensure that our strategic routes facilitate the effective movement of people, goods and services between our major towns and cities, helping to deliver sustainable economic growth.

The actions of insurance companies are well outside my remit. I understand that the issue is a genuine one, but it is for local authorities that are on the receiving end of such claims to deal with the issue. I will look into the issue as far as it affects the trunk road network. To go back to the original point about roads in Fife, I should say that, as well as the investment that I mentioned, we have the intelligent transport system, which was introduced as part of the new Forth crossing project; the park and ride in the member’s constituency, which helps; and of course, the new Queensferry crossing from 2016. We have made substantial investment in Fife.

We welcome the report, as we continuously look at ways of improving our processes. On affordability, ministers have introduced a limit on how much of future budgets—that is, the total departmental expenditure limit—should be committed to capital investment now. The 5 per cent limit is an important part of the sustainable financial framework that we have put in place. Audit Scotland shows in paragraph 95 of its report that the five transport projects are affordable within that limit. On public reporting, we have always been clear that non-profit-distributing and rail investments will be financed over the long term from future revenue. It should be noted that Audit Scotland acknowledges in exhibit 1 of the report that four out of five of the projects are still in procurement, so much of the information is commercially sensitive and cannot be disclosed on a project-by-project basis at this stage. In its recommendations to the Scottish Government, Audit Scotland notes that the long-term revenue commitments for projects should be reported to Parliament once contracts have been signed. We will do that.

I agree with Patrick Harvie that there is much in Audit Scotland’s report that commends the work that the Government has done, particularly on the project management of the Forth road crossing, which is the biggest infrastructure project that the Parliament has undertaken. The report is very complimentary about the processes that have been gone through and the fact that, to date, that project is on target in respect of time and budget—in fact, elements have come in under budget already. As I mentioned in my substantive answer, the other four projects are currently in the procurement phase. Some of them are not even contracted out yet. It is therefore not possible to be as explicit as we would like to be on aspects that are commercially sensitive. It is also not possible to be as specific as we would like on the ultimate cost, because we will not know that until bids have been received. Patrick Harvie highlights some of the recommendations in the report that we will want to consider, not least on public reporting, which I think he touched on. To that end, I have asked that we have a debate that goes through these projects, so that any remaining questions can be asked. We have been making sure that the scrutiny required to ensure that the projects are on time and on budget has been put in place, through the infrastructure investment board and processes in the Government. The proof is in the pudding. The M74 and the M90 are projects that we have successfully completed on time and sometimes under budget. That is a record that we will try to continue.

Audit Scotland’s recommendations and comments on the business case for these projects were, in essence, around process and not necessarily around scope, as Patrick Harvie has drawn it. We want to listen to what Audit Scotland has to say, as it has a great deal of expertise in this area. With the projects that we have undertaken and completed up until now, we have shown that we have business case processes that are robust. Of course we want to listen to any further comments. Patrick Harvie says that there are “long-standing” concerns, and he has the opportunity to write to the Government on those concerns. I am happy to commit that we will provide him with a full response. There will also be the opportunity—whether through the Public Audit Committee or the chamber, in the debate that I mentioned—for members to ask questions on this area and get detailed answers.

Jamie Hepburn makes a very good point. Our capital budget has been cut by 25.1 per cent in real terms between 2010-11 and 2014-15. In response to that, and because we have not wanted to delay investment, we have had to look to alternative ways to finance our transport investments. We hope that the chancellor will see sense tomorrow and announce a significant increase to our capital DEL budget in 2015-16. It is worth pointing out that we have had decades of underinvestment. Even with one hand tied behind our back, due to the cuts that I mentioned, we have taken the tough decisions to start to bring Scotland’s transport infrastructure into the 21st century, even if many of these projects should have been undertaken and completed in the 20th century. Jamie Hepburn’s point about the budget cut has some resonance today, now that we have seen the note that Liam Burns left for the incoming coalition Government, in which he said, “there is no money.” That is the context in which we are taking forward this huge transport infrastructure pipeline of projects.

We recognise that there is always risk involved in projects. We try to make adequate provision, for example by following the procedure for adjusting for optimism bias that is recommended by the Treasury. In the case of the Forth bridge project, it is worth noting that we have taken on the risk of inflation and so far have delivered the project ahead of schedule and ahead of budget. We take risk into account. The 30-year period includes a large number of projects and a large sum of money—£7.5 billion—and of course there is risk in that. Our job is to manage the risks. We will look at Audit Scotland’s recommendations, as well as what the Public Audit Committee has to say, before taking a view on the recommendations in due course.

There are no current specific investment plans for the Perth to Edinburgh route, but the £60 million Scottish network improvement fund is being made available over the period from 2014 to 2019. That fund will support the funding of infrastructure improvements across the network in line with the strategic priorities of the Scottish ministers, which include improved journey times, connectivity and resilience. Network Rail will be expected to use the fund to exploit opportunities that are available through current or planned works.

On the latter point, officials are in discussions with Transform Scotland, which made the suggestion. I remember 2007 and a vote that committed the Parliament to £0.5 billion of investment in the trams network. One issue that relates to further train and rail works to improve the infrastructure is the availability of resources. I am sure that Liz Smith will know that there is a cut of over a quarter in our capital budget, which impacts on what we can do. As I have said, there will be continuing improvements to the line. Transform Scotland and officials will consider the overarching project of a new line or reinstating the old line between Perth and Edinburgh. The matter was previously looked at in detail in the strategic transport projects review, but it was ruled out on the ground of cost.

The Scottish Government recognises the valuable service that the community transport sector provides and applauds the volunteers who give their time to help to provide those services, which are very much appreciated by their users. The nature of the services differs from area to area due to a range of factors, such as how individual local authorities assess needs and allocate budgets in their area.

Applying concessionary travel to the community transport sector throws up a number of issues. For example, the current campaign that Age Scotland is running asks for a 100 per cent reimbursement rate, whereas our current system delivers around 60 per cent reimbursement, and because of the nature of community transport, which involves taxis, mopeds and bicycles, it would be very difficult to get the infrastructure that is necessary to the concessionary scheme to audit that. There is also the cost, of course, which has been estimated at in excess of £11 million before implementation. If a completely free service is provided, it is, of course, likely that usage will go up. There are real issues to do with the sustainability of the scheme. The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee is considering the matter in detail. I await its findings to see what lessons the Government can take from its investigation of the area.

We are looking at that area and many people within the community transport sector would see that as a more pressing demand than the extension of concessionary travel that was mentioned. If the Government was to do something on that, it would also be important to consider how we could encourage community transport providers to use buses that are more environmentally friendly, as we did with the green bus fund. The matter is being considered at this time.

To be honest, I think that that question would be best directed at councils. The principle of the concordat and the fact that we eliminated ring fencing almost completely from the grants that we give to local authorities were because we recognise that local authorities, as distinct from any other governmental body, have their own democratic mandate. It is up to them to take decisions on the issue. I was a local authority councillor for many years and we were pretty fed up with the Government telling us where we should spend our money. The idea of the concordat was that councils should be responsible for that. If councils have not invested in the areas in which local people have an interest, it is for local people to make that point to their local elected representatives and, of course, they can make those representatives accountable at the ballot box. We support the concordat even if sometimes it does not have the outcomes that we would like—that is a democratic inevitability of the system.

In October 2012, the Deputy First Minister launched the Scottish Government’s smart ticketing delivery strategy. The first phase of that strategy involves Transport Scotland leading and co-ordinating a programme of pilot projects across Scotland, working collaboratively with regional transport partnerships, local authorities and transport operators. The pilot projects are intended to be scalable and are designed to help to deliver the longer-term vision “That all journeys on Scotland’s bus, rail, ferry, subway and tram networks can be accessed using some form of smart ticketing or payment”. The pilot programme is diverse geographically, by transport mode and by smart ticket product. We have already had some success working with National Express and Dundee City Council, delivering a smart ticket for students that allows them to use part of their bursary to access citywide travel in Dundee.

Smart and integrated ticketing will feature heavily in new transport projects, whether the Glasgow subway upgrade, the Edinburgh tram or the next iteration of the ScotRail franchise. In addition, the influential Scottish cities alliance has recognised the importance of smart ticketing to achieving the alliance’s plans to leverage the strengths of Scotland’s seven cities. The alliance is funding a smart ticketing work stream, led by Dundee City Council, which is intended to generate further smart initiatives that can be adopted by each of Scotland’s seven city regions. In the meantime, we are also learning from other countries. For example, I visited Amsterdam recently to see what has been done there with smart ticketing. The information that we gained in Amsterdam will be applied to our future thinking on smart ticketing.

There is certainly something in what Patrick Harvie says. The reason for the current pilots is that we recognise that we have a number of different modes and quite a number of different operators, so we are not quite in the same situation as London where people have the simplicity of the oyster card—which, incidentally, is being looked at again, as the technology for these things tends to move on. Simplicity is very important and can be very easy to talk about, but it is also sometimes very hard to achieve. We need to learn what applications might be available for different modes with a multitude of operators, take the best learning from those and—I agree with Patrick Harvie on this point—then make the system as simple as possible for the user.

As I told Parliament during the rail debate on 30 May, our electrification programme is making good progress. The electrification of the Whifflet and Cumbernauld lines will be completed in time for the 2014 Commonwealth games. The electrification of the main Edinburgh to Glasgow line will be completed by December 2016, and will be followed by the electrification of the Stirling, Dunblane and Alloa lines by December 2018.

As I tried to draw out in my earlier answer, in important respects we are actually well ahead of schedule. We are some four years ahead of schedule for the Whifflet programme and we have said that we will complete the Cumbernauld line before the Commonwealth games. A substantial amount of work has already been done. Members who go through Haymarket station can see the work that has been done there. On the Stirling, Dunblane and Alloa lines, which are in my area, bridges in Alloa have already been lifted in preparation for electrification. We are doing everything that we can to progress the programme as quickly as possible. On the point about cutting the budget by a third, there is no point in spending money for no particular purpose. The £650 million that we are spending on the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme is a substantial sum of money. Consultants have had a hard look at the issue and we are confident that we are spending the right amount of money. The sum represents a huge investment in the infrastructure between Edinburgh and Glasgow, and the benefits of it will arise well before 2016, whether that is from the Cumbernauld line for the Commonwealth games, the Whifflet line, the improved environmental performance of the railways, or improved stations. Progress will happen throughout the project. Of course, we will try to ensure that it happens as quickly as possible.

I thank Alison McInnes for having succeeded in raising the issue in a members’ business debate. As a Government, we have invested around £8.3 billion in transport since 2007. I mention that because it is the largest transport investment programme that Scotland has ever seen. That has happened in difficult economic times and despite substantial cuts to our budget, including a cut of around 26 per cent to our capital budget. Despite that, our current investment in transport directly supports around 12,000 jobs across Scotland. The successful Scotland-wide concessionary bus travel scheme provides free local and long-distance bus travel throughout Scotland for older and disabled people at any time of day, on any route and for any number of journeys. In January this year, we reached an agreement with the bus industry that will safeguard the concessionary travel scheme for the next two years. The two-year agreement provides fair reimbursement for bus operators and secures the financial sustainability of the scheme—something that we were urged to secure by parties in the Parliament and by the Public Audit Committee. This has been a generally consensual debate, but there was something of a gibe at the start from Alison McInnes, who said that “we are still waiting for the Scottish Government” to take action. I point out that no action was taken on the issue by the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive, which she specifically exonerated from any criticism despite the fact that—as we have just heard from Elaine Murray—representations were made during that period for such a change, which was not made. It is also worth pointing out that no party in the Parliament has made a budget proposal for such a change. I mention that because we know that parties are serious about a proposal when they say how they will pay for it. Given the speeches that we have heard from members today, this is obviously a very live issue. The Scottish Government’s concessionary travel scheme is very successful but it is not the first such scheme. When I was leader of Clackmannanshire Council, we introduced Scotland’s first ever concessionary bus travel scheme that was fully free—as opposed to one that was free just during off-peak periods. I think that it is great that the previous Administration and the current Administration have extended that scheme to cover the entire country. Jim Eadie raised some important points, and I am interested in the extent to which the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee will examine those in its consideration of the issue. There are real issues, some of which we have heard about today, not least the fact that many community transport journeys are made in cars. As I have said, we will look at the provisions in the proposed member’s bill that Iain Gray mentioned, and I repeat that we will look at the cost. If the issue is to be addressed in the bill or to be supported otherwise, we must consider the question of cost. Last year, I enabled community transport organisations that run services under section 22 registrations, which are open to the public, to be part of the concessionary travel scheme. I acknowledge that it is not an option for all providers. I recognise that such demand-responsive registered services are not the answer for everyone, but I can see that community transport has an important part to play in filling the gaps. The Government supports—as previous Administrations have—the Community Transport Association. I add my tribute to the dedicated volunteers who make up the backbone of community transport organisations and provide those services—sometimes over many years—to their local communities. I admire the commitment that is made by each and every person who becomes a driver or a passenger escort.

In response to Alison McInnes’s intervention and her previous comments, I state that that will be the case unless transport is provided free for everyone, which I do not think that anyone has proposed. I acknowledge that some groups will not have the same access as others. Alison McInnes indicated support for raising the age of eligibility in line with pension ages, which is the first time that that has been proposed.

It has been mentioned, but it has not been proposed. If that is the Liberal Democrats’ position, it is an honest one, because Alison McInnes is saying that some or all of the additional costs of an extension can perhaps be paid for—

I will try to make some more progress.

Well, it is the first time that I have understood it to be the position of a party. If it is the Liberal Democrats’ position, it is—as I said—more honest, because Alison McInnes is suggesting that she can find the money from another place. I make clear to every member who has mentioned the issue that the Scottish Government does not intend to change the age of eligibility. We believe that, in the times in which we currently live, it is important that we continue our current provision for people at that age. However, I acknowledge the point that Alison McInnes makes. We made changes to bus registration legislation from 1 April 2012 to allow demand-responsive transport services that are available to the general public to qualify for concessionary travel and for the bus service operators grant. At the same time, changes were made to the BSOG so that it will be calculated on the basis of distance travelled rather than fuel used. It would appal some people to know that the previous scheme allowed bus service operators grant to be paid in respect of buses that carried no passengers, but the position has now been changed, at least in respect of what is known as “dead running”. I know from discussions with operators that the change has benefited many rural bus operators, including eligible community transport operators. Age Scotland recognises in its research that transport services are crucial and are appreciated by older people, which is a point that all members in the chamber have highlighted today. Age Scotland also presents some useful information from the CTA on the scope of the sector. Its research provides the following estimates: 100,000 people benefit from CT in Scotland each year; there are currently 70,000 older CT users and 3.5 million CT trips per year; 62 per cent of CT users are aged 60 or older; and 16 per cent of users are disabled. Overall demand may rise—as Christine Grahame noted—to an estimated 83,500 older users by 2022, which does not take into account the potential exponential rise if the service is provided as a free good. The Government provided local authorities with resources for the provision of community transport services through the local government finance settlement following the concordat between local authorities and the Scottish Government. That is the right approach, because councils will have a better understanding of transport needs in their immediate areas. Local authorities can also commission bus services that go further in meeting the needs of people throughout Scotland and in more rural, isolated areas. Strathclyde partnership for transport is already co-ordinating a forum for community transport operators, which will help to develop the sector. That is to be welcomed. We have also worked closely with local government to provide fair and equitable settlements. Between 2007-08 and 2012-13, the resources available to the Scottish Government from departmental expenditure limits and non-domestic rates increased by 6.4 per cent. Over the same period, local government’s budget increased by 8.9 per cent, which is a strong financial settlement and allows local authorities to do things on community transport if they choose to. We are also maintaining the revenue funding that is available to local government. The total funding from the Scottish Government to local government next year will amount to around £10.3 billion, which is roughly a third of our whole budget. That will provide resources to allow councils to support community transport provision in their areas. Age Scotland has proposed the extension of concessionary travel arrangements to community transport. Over and above affordability, there are some practical issues around that, although many were not raised in the debate. However, a number of issues were raised, not least by Jim Eadie. I will listen to the points that are made as the campaign progresses and will study with real interest the findings of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s inquiry into community transport when it reports later in the year. 13:15 Meeting suspended. 14:29 On resuming—

Scotland’s railways are in the midst of a transformation and there is a real success story to tell. Now is the right time to take account of our achievements as we plan for the next franchise and rail investment periods. The network performance is up and passenger satisfaction reached a high this year, which confirmed that rail’s performance impacts significantly on passengers’ opinions of the rail system. I congratulate Network Rail and First ScotRail on their efforts. Although we have benefited from a relatively mild winter, that reflects their successful collaboration. Whether it is in services, lines, rolling stock or performance, we recognise that there is more to do, but there is a good story to tell about what has been done so far. An example is that passenger figures today are higher than they were in the last golden age of rail in the 1920s and 1930s. Last year, there were a staggering 83 million passenger journeys in Scotland, which was a 33 per cent increase since the start of the current franchise. That figure undermines the Beeching assumption that rail would lose out to the car and rail passenger numbers would wither. This Government has been instrumental in reversing some of the Beeching cuts and creating for Scotland the possibility of a new golden age of rail. Nothing illustrates that more clearly than our commitment to the new Borders railway line: a link that has been broken for 40 years will reconnect communities in the Scottish Borders and Midlothian with our nation’s capital. We have recently seen the positive impact of bringing communities together, with the reopening earlier this year of Conon Bridge station in the Highlands. We have also completed phase 1 of the Highlands main-line project, which has provided two additional services from 2011 and has meant, from December 2012, journey time improvements of up to 18 minutes on some services. Further south, in the central belt, the Airdrie to Bathgate line project, which received cross-party support in Parliament, has provided a new through line from the west of Scotland to Edinburgh, with new stations and new travel opportunities. We have ensured that our new stations are accessible by offering step-free access for people with reduced mobility, and we have increased the number of accessible stations in Scotland. We have made passenger journeys more comfortable by investing more than £430 million in new electric and refurbished rolling stock. We are enhancing the passenger experience by providing wi-fi and modern, appropriate facilities. We are making strides towards better integration of rail services, and between rail services and other modes. Our commitment is manifest in the recent opening of Scotland’s first rail-cycle hub in Stirling. That exciting three-year pilot will offer expert knowledge on local roads and cycling facilities. It will also raise the profile of greener active transport options to reach our rail stations. In respect of cross-border rail, there have been huge successes, with unprecedented passenger growth—more than 144 per cent on the Glasgow to London route since 2008. Last year, after much pressure from Scotland, we finally saw the introduction of a full hourly service between Glasgow and London. We have also seen the extension to London of Edinburgh to Birmingham services, which has opened up new connectivity for passengers. The recent announcement of an additional 2,500 seats a day on services between Scotland and Birmingham underlines the importance of Scotland to the United Kingdom rail market and dispels the myth that we do not need more passenger and network capacity north of Preston. Yet, despite huge passenger growth between Scotland and Birmingham—more than 261 per cent since 2008—the role of the Scottish people in determining the specification of the franchise on the arterial east and west coast main lines is extremely limited; we remain at the mercy of Westminster. I have long argued that the prevailing UK legislation prevents me from being empowered to act in the interests of Scotland. On cross-border issues, rather than Scotland being treated in a subordinate manner, we should be equals.

The example that has been given by Stewart Stevenson illustrates that cross-border services can be organised in the mutual interest of two countries if the will exists to do so. I have heard general reports about the success of the line that he mentioned. There is no reason, of course, why an independent Scotland and the rest of the UK could not collaborate in that way on cross-border services. On cross-border issues, we should be treated as equals, which is the point that Stewart Stevenson made, rather than being treated as subordinates. This is the first time I can remember having any say whatever in the east coast and west coast main lines and the future franchises. I see Gavin Brown shaking his head. Perhaps he prefers the outcome of the west coast main line franchise process to one of collaboration, in which the Governments can talk about these things and get it right first time. In the immediate future, we face challenges in the lead-up to 2014, when our country will host the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup, and there will be an increased focus on Scotland with another homecoming Scotland year and, of course, the forthcoming referendum. We are in a good place to deliver transport services that meet the expectations of Scotland’s residents and their visitors during what will be a milestone year. There have been significant investments in Gleneagles and Dalmarnock stations, along with Strathclyde Partnership for Transport subway improvements, which will result in better connectivity for Scottish visitors during 2014, as well as increased access to economic and cultural opportunities for residents. Affordability is another issue. I know that the cost of travel is very important for the people who live and work in Scotland, so I am determined to offer some relief from the current pressures on household budgets. That is why, in December 2012, as part of my statement on the franchise continuation, I announced a freeze on off-peak fare rises, and peak fare increases were restricted to the retail prices index. Since then, my officials have worked with ScotRail to identify and eradicate fares anomalies to make our fares fairer. Although the UK Government has promised to put an end to inflation-busting fares, we are taking action now and from 2016 we will be going further by ensuring that regulated peak fares cannot rise above inflation and that regulated off-peak fares will be restricted to RPI minus 1 per cent.

In dealing with about a quarter of a million journeys on which anomalies had occurred, we made substantial progress. That progress could have been made many years ago, but it was not. I am convinced that we have made great strides, but the next tranche of dealing with anomalies will have to come when we renegotiate the franchise, which will happen soon. I am pleased that Jenny Marra has acknowledged the work that this Government has done—work that was not done by previous Governments—to address anomalies. On the future of the ScotRail franchise, which is due to be renewed in 2015, I confirm again that we will let two new franchises—the main ScotRail franchise and a separate sleeper franchise. We had the largest-ever rail consultation in Scotland, which has helped us to shape the specifications for those franchises. More than ever, we are able to specify services that will best meet the needs of our cities and rural communities. I have also been mindful of the Laidlaw inquiry and the Brown review into the UK’s west coast main line fiasco in the franchising process. We have learned lessons from them. Where appropriate, they have informed our franchising process, so I am confident about the competence of the officials and about the process that has been followed by Transport Scotland to ensure that we secure a contract that meets our needs and offers value for money. The sleeper franchise process has already commenced; pre-qualification questionnaires were returned by four potential bidders this month and the draft invitation to tender will be issued in August. For the main ScotRail franchise, the questionnaires will be issued to potential bidders in July this year. That contract is still the biggest that the Scottish Government procures. We have learned what Scotland can achieve through the successes of the current franchise and I intend to ensure that we build on those successes for the future. I look to the next ScotRail franchisee to work closely with Network Rail to drive down costs and to improve the passenger experience.

I think that I answered that question from Ken Macintosh last week. I am interested to know what the Labour Party’s position is. I reiterate that I cannot encourage one bid over another bid. That is how the process goes and that is what is laid down in law. If the Labour Party would encourage one bid over another, it would be useful for it to confirm that today, because its doing so would be in breach of the procurement regulations. I am happy to discuss—as, I am sure, we will as we go through the debate—the issues related to public ownership of railways. However, I repeat what I said last week: from when the previous Labour Government took office in 1997 right through to 2010, it did not change the Railways Act 1993, which leaves us in the position in which we can accept public sector bids, but only from foreign countries: we cannot allow one of our public bodies to bid. I do not know why the Labour Party supported that position. I do not support it, but that is where we are. We have asked the UK Government to change the act, but it has said that it will not. In the meantime, it is important that we drive down costs where we can. The alliance between ScotRail and Network Rail delivered the Paisley canal electrification scheme in record time and significantly below the original cost estimates. I am pleased to announce that—subject to approval by the Office of Rail Regulation—Network Rail and First ScotRail will work together, through the alliance, to accelerate the electrification of the Whifflet route. Through close collaboration and application of the approaches that we used for the Paisley canal scheme, we expect that the costs of delivering the project can be reduced below Network Rail’s planning estimate of £29.6 million. That will be the first major output of the next five-year rail investment period—known as control period 5—which starts on 1 April 2014. The route, which runs from Glasgow to Coatbridge, was originally planned for full electrification by 2018-19. We now plan to deliver that by summer 2014, which will give us greater flexibility to support passengers for the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup. Last year’s high-level output specification set out more than £3 billion of capital investment for control period 5, which put us on the cusp of the most transformative rail programme ever in Scotland. We also have a £30 million stations fund, in which there is a huge amount of interest.

I want to make more progress, but I will see if I have time at the end to give way. The £30 million fund will provide investment for new and improved stations. In addition to that, I will fund substantial enhancements to the line between Aberdeen and Inverness. There will be further work on the Highlands main line, which will reduce journey times and support more efficient freight operations. Those investments, along with road improvements including the A9 upgrade, will ensure better connections between our cities and beyond. To ensure that our rail services meet the expectations of our communities, I have made available up to £200,000 over the three years to 2015 to establish community rail partnerships. On the west Highlands line, we are improving connections to the islands and boosting tourism. We have already provided additional Sunday services and, from May 2014, the number of trains between Oban and the central belt will double in the summer from three to six services each way. In July last year, I announced our £650 million investment in the first phase of the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme. Since then, EGIP has made significant progress, delivering new services on the Edinburgh to Glasgow via Carstairs line a year earlier than planned. A £27 million redevelopment of Haymarket station is making excellent progress towards opening to passengers later this year. The electrification of the main Edinburgh-Glasgow line is scheduled for completion by December 2016. We will also fulfil our commitment to electrification of the Cumbernauld line in time for next year’s Commonwealth games. I intend to publish our EGIP business case soon. That will set out the delivery of EGIP improvements for the next rail control period, starting with electrification of the Edinburgh to Glasgow route by December 2016. By December 2018, we will complete electrification of the Stirling-Alloa-Dunblane line, and we will have delivered a 42-minute fastest journey time between Edinburgh and Glasgow. The redevelopment of Glasgow Queen Street station offers a once-in-a-generation opportunity to transform one of Scotland’s most iconic stations, and will enable eight-car train operation to increase capacity on our busiest route. A potential future high-speed rail line will further increase capacity and offer speeds of 140mph and journey times of less than 30 minutes. The additional rail capacity will bring benefits for the rest of the rail network in the central belt and beyond. I am impatient for change, so I am bringing forward £5 million for shovel-ready projects in stations. Those include car park expansions, cycling facilities and bus interchanges. Through that fund, and along with the future Scottish stations fund investment, bus connectivity to the Borders railway and the Stirling cycle hub, the Government will ensure better transport integration across our rail network in the next franchise period. To summarise, we are in the midst of a transformation of Scotland’s railways. We have made substantial improvements to date with passenger numbers growth, increased passenger satisfaction and better performance. Our plans for investment in the network and our considered approach and plans for new franchises underline our commitment to rail. To that end, I ask the Parliament’s support for my motion. I move, That the Parliament notes record passenger numbers of 83.3 million on Scotland’s railways, high levels of passenger satisfaction and improved performance; recognises the benefits of a collaborative approach by the Scottish Government and industry in achieving value for money for passengers and the taxpayer; commends the Scottish Government’s action to make fares fairer by reducing anomalies; welcomes the measures to reduce pressures on hard-pressed household budgets while still investing to enhance services, improve stations and build new stations; acknowledges the measured approach taken by the Scottish Government to refranchising and welcomes franchise specifications that will better meet the needs of the people of Scotland, and acknowledges that, although further improvements will always be necessary, significant investment has been made by the Scottish Government in rail to support communities, improve connectivity, reduce car use and encourage sustainable economic growth.

Will Elaine Murray give way?

I have said a number of times that I have approached the Secretary of State for Transport about changing the terms of the 1993 act to allow us to open up the bidding process. I have said that we will, of course, consider a not-for-profit bid—I said that to Kenneth Macintosh last week. The issue is simply that we could not encourage one bid over the other. I have also said why we are prevented from having a publicly funded railway bid. Can Elaine Murray say whether Ed Milliband agrees with her notion of a publicly owned railway in Scotland or the UK?

One way to reconcile those two priorities is to look at our commitment to the new high-speed line between Edinburgh and Glasgow. When that is established, the other four lines will be more accessible to the opening of other stations. If journey time is important to people, they can use the fastest line, but others can use the other links. That is how journey time improvements and more accessibility can work together.

Murdo Fraser mentioned the Transform Scotland proposal. Its spokesperson said today that there is no shortage of money. However, Transform Scotland also says that the proposal would cost around £1 billion. Does he have any idea where he would find the money for the project?

I thank members who have participated in the debate, which has been interesting and has demonstrated that rail services play a crucial part in connecting people and businesses across Scotland and, therefore, deserve the Parliament’s attention and recognition. In the motion, I had the temerity to point out one or two things that I think the Government is doing quite well. That was a misjudgment on my part, because I understand from what members of other parties said that if I had only pointed out all the areas in which we still need to make progress, instead of just acknowledging that “further improvements” are needed, the other parties would have said, “Well done. What a great job the Government is doing.” Only my not pointing out all the areas for improvement stopped the other parties recognising the progress that we have made. As I said, the Government is not doing it alone, but is playing a part in transforming the railways. The benefits have been recognised by passengers, as the high levels of passenger satisfaction show. That is not to say that everyone is getting the service that they should get; of course, we must improve things. However, at a time when public spending is massively constrained by the cuts that the Westminster Government has imposed—there is no question about that; it is a fact—we have managed to increase our commitment. Suggestions have been made about how we might further enhance the network, reduce fares and provide services and projects. In the context of Murdo Fraser’s comments about the Perth line, I noted that this morning someone said that there is no shortage of money. I am afraid that there is a shortage of money. Members talked, quite rightly, about the improvements that they would like in their areas—I think that one member referred to wish lists. I understand that; I have done the same thing in the past in my area, when I was on the council.

I do not believe that I have misled Parliament, so I have no intention of apologising. Members have wish lists, and in many areas their long-term ambitions have been realised as a result of projects that the Government has undertaken. However, we must acknowledge that there have been decades of underinvestment in the railways. That is also true of the roads network—anyone who wants to disagree should feel free to intervene. We are trying to roll back on that underinvestment. In the presentation in Parliament from Virgin Trains—I think it was on Tuesday night—we heard that in the early 1980s the Serpell report proposed that the railways in Scotland should comprise the Edinburgh to Glasgow line and should point south, with nothing else. The chap from Virgin said that there was no fanfare of opposition to the proposal to limit the railways in Scotland in such a way. In his view, no one was interested in railways or in expanding the railway network. Tavish Scott said that we should acknowledge what previous Governments did. I am always happy to do that. In 1999, when I was leader of Clackmannanshire Council, I approached the first transport minister, Sarah Boyack—I do not think that she is in the chamber—about the proposal to reopen the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line. To her credit, Sarah Boyack allocated the largest-ever sum of money under the public transport fund, as it was then called—around £6 million—to the council, at the second time of asking. By the time Tavish Scott was minister many years later, the cost was £85 million and the line had become a freight line. However, foresight was shown in making money available. Previous Administrations, particularly since devolution, have advanced the case for rail travel in Scotland, but I think that we are now seeing much greater improvements than we have seen up to now. That might be because, as Tavish Scott hinted, there has been a major shift. There was perhaps a slow start and then a change of direction. We have invested massively in rail and we are seeing the benefits of that. We are accelerating the investment that is planned for the next control period. I mentioned the Whifflet route electrification, which will take place by summer 2014. Work on that will start next month—years ahead of what was previously proposed. That demonstrates the importance that we accord the rail industry and our confidence in its ability to help us to realise sustainable economic growth. We will not price that growth off the network, but will support and sustain it. Members expressed views about the state of the railways in Scotland. I did an interview recently for the BBC in Yorkshire, where people say that they are envious of us in Scotland, because we are bearing down on fares in a way that the previous Westminster Labour Government did not and the current Conservative-Liberal Democrat Government has not. The current Westminster Government made changes recently, but we acted much faster. As members have said, people in other places in the UK are envious of what is happening with railways in Scotland. I have said that there is a transformation going on. I repeat that that is not entirely due to the Government—of course, other partners are involved. However, it would be nice to have that transformation recognised in the chamber, because it has certainly been recognised outwith the chamber. Industry alliancing and industry regulation are starting to ensure that we get real value for money. The investments that we make in control period 5, from 2014 to 2019, will offer faster and better-connected services on improved infrastructure, and will connect more and better stations. I spoke earlier about large-scale projects, many of which have been mentioned by other members. The £650 million investment in the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement project, or EGIP—which should not really be characterised as “Egypt”, as I have no responsibility for Istanbul or Cairo—is a huge investment that will deliver significant benefits for Scotland, plus major refurbishments at Haymarket station. Members who get the train regularly at Haymarket station will have seen how it is being transformed. Queen Street station will, of course, be transformed in the longer term. We are looking forward to implementing our ambitious plans for high-speed rail, which will ensure resilience and better journey times between our two largest cities. It would have been nice for some of the UK-based parties to have said what they think about the UK Government’s attitudes to high-speed rail coming to Scotland. There was no commitment from the previous UK Government and there is no commitment from the current UK Government. Why not? Why are we not seeing productive work happening between—

I am going to come back to Jenny Marra’s points shortly, but I will make more progress first. In the shorter term, the recent announcement that I have made of £5 million to fund station improvements will help us to improve stations such as Gleneagles ahead of the Ryder cup in 2014, and to make lasting improvements that will benefit passengers across the network. Improved integration between rail and buses, in particular, was mentioned. There is a problem that is not easy to solve, in that several operators are involved. However, we have already said that within the franchise agreement, we will oblige bidders to lay out their plans for ensuring proper integration between modes of transport. On the amendment that was lodged by the Green and Independent group, I was quite surprised to find that there was virtually nothing that I could agree with in John Finnie’s closing speech—I say that not least in relation to the A9. We are committed to upgrading the A9 and will fund that; it should have been done many years ago. We will do it at the same time as we invest in our railways. I turn to the Liberal Democrat amendment. I think that Alison McInnes basically said that the improvements in our rail services and the 83 million passenger journeys last year had nothing to do with the Government. I do not know how she can reach that conclusion. I am not saying that it is all down to us, but new stations, bearing down on fares, the new lines and the exponential growth in patronage must have had something to do with the Government. We have done things that have encouraged that growth. We heard essentially the same line from Gavin Brown, who said that it is really all down to the franchise holders. He offered some recognition of some improvements for which the Government is responsible, but he said that it is basically down to the franchise holders. The Labour Party made a number of points; I will return to Ken Macintosh’s point. I am not talking just now about the not-for-dividend model proposal, but the publicly owned model proposal. The only way we can get that is if Scotland becomes independent. I know that there are people in the Labour Party who prefer the idea of 100 years of Tory rule to the idea of Scotland making its own decisions. On the specific proposal that Ken Macintosh made, I have tried to address that issue before, but I will look into it further because he has asked me to do it. The specific point that I have tried to make to him is that we have always said that we will look favourably on proposals that relate to not-for-profit or mutual-based models. There are, however, practical strictures—one of which is that the bidder has to show evidence of experience of running railways, which makes things difficult. Also, we are not allowed to favour one form of bid over another and, equally, we cannot accept only one kind of bid. Those are the issues. I have listened to what Ken Macintosh said and will look further into the matter. Richard Baker in summing up referred to capital works. I do not think that he has the basic understanding of how capital projects are funded.

I am making a point just now. I do not think that Richard Baker understands that with resource accounting and budgeting there is not just a shelf full of money that we can pull down with no cost. The money has to be paid for; it has to be paid back with interest rates. If Richard Baker wants to propose further spending, he can do that when it comes to the budgets.

Labour has never done that in previous discussions, but it has the chance to do it. Throughout the period for which we have had control, there has been continuous improvement and major step-change projects. I realise that I did not come back to Jenny Marra, but I will write to her on the point that she raised.

I believe that this Government has transformed Scotland’s rail system to deliver integrated services that are affordable and responsive to Scottish passengers’ needs. In that light, I ask Parliament to support the motion.

The Scottish Government welcomes all types of bids for the next ScotRail rail passenger franchise, including those from a mutual, co-operative or not-for-dividend organisation. To ensure an open and transparent procurement process, no single bid or bid type can be given greater encouragement than any other.

There are substantial aspects of the bidding process that will consider community benefit clauses within the franchise process. The increased amount reflects the commitment of the Scottish Government to growing rail services. A record 83 million passengers are using rail this year. On the substantive point, the Railways Act 1993 prevents the Scottish Government from encouraging a public sector bid. That is a Railways Act that the Labour Party never changed during the 13 years when it had the opportunity to do so. If Ken Macintosh, like others in the Labour Party, prefers 100 years of Tory rule to the chance to change those things in Scotland, that will remain the way things are for the foreseeable future. He should decide what he wants. If he wants a public railway bid, the only way he can ensure that is in an independent Scotland.

The legislation that I have mentioned specifically prohibits public sector bids, not not-for-profit bids. The member is right to say that financial backing would be required, as with the current franchise. The Government could not provide that financial backing. If that was to happen, it would only be in the event of the franchise failing and its becoming the operator of last resort, with the Government taking over the process. Any bid from any organisation would have to have financial backing; the Scottish Government could not provide that.

In the current financial year, the proportion of the transport budget that is spent on cycling and walking infrastructure will be 0.7 per cent. In addition, as part of our trunk roads programme, upgrading of cycling and walking facilities is included in each contract. The transport budget is not the only contributor to infrastructure. As part of the local government settlement, £5.6 million will be allocated to local authorities for cycling, walking and safer streets projects. Funding is also available from the climate challenge fund for community cycling projects.

We will shortly produce the cycling action plan for Scotland, which I know the member has an interest in. That will contain our plans—not the definitive last word on our plans—to ensure that we achieve those targets and to ensure that we try to increase the number of people cycling not just for recreation, which there has been a real increase in, but for commuting to work and for other purposes. We are committed to those things and I am pleased that my colleague Paul Wheelhouse was able to be there on Sunday to meet the demonstrators.

I thank the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s convener, Maureen Watt, and the committee for their consideration of the bill, and I thank the Subordinate Legislation Committee and the Finance Committee for their earlier consideration of it. The Forth Road Bridge Bill provides for the regime for the management and maintenance of the Forth road bridge by a body other than the Forth Estuary Transport Authority. The bill provides for a single contract to manage and maintain both Forth road bridges and deliver value for money and operational efficiencies, with projected savings over the alternatives of about £1.2 million per annum. The bill also provides for a transfer to the Scottish ministers of FETA’s land and assets for use by the bridge operating company and of its liabilities. There will be no compulsory redundancies for the 72 staff employed by FETA, because they will be transferred under the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 2006 to the new operating company. FETA’s existing byelaws will be revoked and replaced as necessary by road traffic regulation orders. The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee published its stage 1 report on 18 March, and my considered response to the issues that it raised was made during the stage 1 debate and contained in my reply of 24 April to the committee convener. At stage 2, Elaine Murray moved an amendment on the Forth bridges forum, which was subsequently withdrawn. We welcome further debate on the bill today. The bridge has served the local area and the nation well over the past 49 years and has carried more than half a billion vehicles since opening in 1964, which is well beyond what was envisaged when it was designed and built. It will obviously be 50 years old next year. I suspect that every member in the chamber has used the bridge. It is not something that is quickly forgotten, particularly because, at one time, it had the longest suspension bridge span outside the USA. The bill will dissolve FETA, whose staff have dedicated large parts of their working lives to the bridge and built up an extensive knowledge of its workings. By transferring the FETA staff and their experience to a single operating company that will look after both bridges and the connecting roads, we are not only protecting jobs but ensuring that the wealth of knowledge is retained. I am reminded of a programme that I saw recently from the American television channel PBS about the Brooklyn bridge and the extent to which the construction and maintenance of a bridge as significant as that can form a large part of people’s lives. I was privileged to be at an event recently to which the veterans who built the Forth road bridge came along, and we heard about their stories and experience. I welcome the news that the recent inspection carried out by FETA on the anchorages has provided very positive findings. Anything that offers confidence that the bridge is on a more secure footing will be well received by the people who rely on it. The efforts of the FETA workforce on that should be recognised, as should the work to prevent further deterioration in the cables from corrosion. The findings also confirm the Forth road bridge’s future as part of a twin-bridge strategy under which the bridge will be used as a dedicated public transport crossing. I look forward to using the bridge in the pedal for peace event, which I will undertake with Provost Jim Leishman of Fife Council this Saturday. The bill will pave the way for a single operating company to look after the trunk road from Halbeath in the north to Kirkliston in the south, and it will include the Forth road bridge and the new Forth crossing motorway. The bridge operating company contract will combine the best practice from FETA’s operations and work services manuals with Transport Scotland’s new fourth generation of operating company contracts to ensure that existing service levels are maintained, if not improved. As I mentioned at stage 1, the Scottish Government’s approach to contracting for network maintenance has delivered continual improvement and significant efficiency savings, which were estimated to be worth about £18.6 million in 2012-13. The Highways Agency in England recently highlighted how Scotland’s approach can generate cost savings without compromising service delivery. We have given assurances that the important role that FETA has in the community will be captured in the contract or via the Forth bridges forum. As the bill has progressed through the Parliament, we have engaged with and continued to listen to people who will be affected. We acted promptly when worries were expressed about pensions, for example. We were quick to put fears to rest by committing to the continuation of FETA’s current arrangements. Ministers will act as a guarantor for FETA pensions. When concern was expressed about the continued availability of the crossing to pedestrians and cyclists during severe weather, we gave a commitment that arrangements that FETA put in place would be written into the operating contract, to ensure that the public do not experience a diminution in service post the dissolution of FETA. The construction of the bridge’s neighbour, the Forth replacement crossing, continues to progress on budget and is employing about 1,200 people and benefiting 334 Scottish firms. The crossing is on time for completion by December 2016. We have committed funds to improve the cycle link between Fife and Edinburgh—in particular the part between the existing bridge and Edinburgh. The people of Scotland are having their say on the new crossing’s name. Other countries, particularly Canada, are paying attention to how we are engaging individuals and communities in the biggest infrastructure project in a generation. The response from the public, in voting for their favourite name, has been tremendous. More than 27,500 people have had their say and, with 15 days left before voting closes on 7 June, the public still have the opportunity to influence and be part of an historic process, by logging on to www.namethebridge.co.uk. Bus lanes that are built as part of the Forth replacement crossing managed motorway project on the M90 and the M9 will prioritise public transport between Halbeath and Edinburgh. We have recognised the importance of public transport and the need to make it more attractive to the public. The public transport corridor will continue to encourage modal shift from the car to public transport and will contribute to cross-Forth travel becoming more sustainable. The bill is an important step in achieving that. When the new crossing opens in 2016, commuters will be able to exploit public transport options at Ferrytoll and the new Halbeath park and ride. They will be able to travel along the bus lanes and across the existing Forth road bridge to Edinburgh and West Lothian, which will take as much as 30 minutes off the peak journey times from the time when the considerable investment began. Given that 75 per cent of all southbound bridge traffic passes within a mile of Halbeath, I was pleased to announce last year that the Scottish Government would provide up to £10 million to Fife Council for the park-and-ride facility. I was there at the start of the construction project, which is well under way; I look forward to it being delivered later this year. The Forth bridges forum has been set up to facilitate a strategic and collaborative approach to the management and operation of the bridges. It is led by Transport Scotland and attended by senior officials from the bodies that are currently responsible for the bridges—Network Rail for the Forth bridge, FETA for the Forth road bridge and Transport Scotland for the new Forth crossing—and from the City of Edinburgh Council, Fife Council, West Lothian Council, Historic Scotland and VisitScotland. Collectively, the forum not only supports the bridge operators with planned activity but takes forward action to promote the three bridges as a tourist destination. I hope that members agree that Scotland will have a valuable and unique asset in three iconic structures—feats of cutting-edge engineering of their times, spanning three centuries—which will become an international tourist destination. A good example of how well the forum’s arrangements are working is its sub-group, the Forth bridge world heritage nomination steering group. That group has invited participation from the local community, which is central to everything that the forum is doing, and has just launched a 12-week consultation exercise to help to inform the application for world heritage status for the Forth bridge. Provision for the Forth road bridge to be adopted into the trunk road network will allow for the most cost-effective management of the bridge and support the transport measures that we think will facilitate the shift from the car to more sustainable forms of transport. As I said, through a number of provisions and our listening to the people who are most affected by the bill—local communities and the workforce at FETA—we will protect existing staff, with a commitment of no compulsory redundancies. Through TUPE, we will ensure that the expertise that we have in FETA is retained. For those reasons, I hope that members will support the bill at decision time. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Forth Road Bridge Bill be passed.

Is it possible, now or subsequently, to let us know exactly which councillors made those comments? We received no suggestions along those lines from any of the councils. We have to consult councils, rather than individual councillors.

In relation to Helen Eadie’s point about the Halbeath park and ride, I point out—as I did in my opening speech—that Transport Scotland and the Government have followed through by providing £10 million to get that work done. The project was talked about for a long time but the work will now be done as a result of the Government money that is going into it.

Alex Johnstone perhaps hinted at this, but I remind him that the deal when the bridge was constructed was that the tolls would go when the capital costs of the bridge had been paid. Those were paid off in 1994, which is when the tolls should have been removed.

I thank all members for their contributions to what has been a generally very positive debate—apart from the one gratuitously controversial statement by Alex Johnstone. I apologise for getting Alex’s name wrong three times yesterday. I seem to have infected Helen Eadie with the same disease, so I apologise for that. I will make sure that I try to correct the record. On the name of the bridge, I have been scrupulous in ensuring that I do not express any preference. I was not involved in selection of the shortlist. I fear that Alex Johnstone has done irreparable damage to his preferred option with his comments today. Let us hope that that is not the case. I also thank Elaine Murray for lodging her amendment at stage 2. I hope that she will agree with me—and with the view of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee—that the make-up of the Forth bridges forum is appropriate for the type of activity that will undertake and that it will ultimately benefit the local community. On the points that Elaine Murray made about having contacted local councillors, we have to take the views of the councils, rather than individual councillors, as I am sure she understands. It is worth saying that neither Perth and Kinross Council nor West Lothian Council even responded to the call for evidence on the bill. We have to take the express views of the committee into account. We have made clear our reasons for the constitution and membership of the forum. I hope that members will welcome confirmation that the agendas and minutes of future forum meetings will be made available online. Elaine Murray raised that issue, which I know has been a concern. We do not believe that councillors need to be part of the forum for them to ask questions of ministers about management and maintenance of the crossing. It is worth pointing out that currently about 10 per cent of all correspondence that we receive on the subject comes from councillors, which I think proves that keeping the current proposals for ministerial responsibility for membership—to which Alex Johnstone referred—rather than making provision in the bill or subsequently in regulations, is sufficient. Although the bill has been unamended since its introduction, we have been listening to people’s views. A number of members have acknowledged the various points that we have listened to and agreed with—not least of which were the concerns of FETA staff. During the passage of the Forth Crossing Act 2011, it was recognised that arrangements for future maintenance and operation of the bridge must be in place before the new Forth crossing opens. Subsequent analysis of the options has provided a clear way forward. Although the decision to dissolve FETA has not met with universal approval, retention of jobs, a guarantee in respect of staff pensions, a cost-effective regime—which Annabelle Ewing was right to say is very important—and the twin-bridges management and maintenance strategy emerged as the clear priorities. I am glad that so many stakeholders, as well as Parliament, are agreed on those outcomes, and I anticipate that once the new Forth crossing opens, we will agree on encouraging modal shift from cars to public transport across the Forth estuary, which the bill will also facilitate. In reply to comments on privatisation, I point out that the previous Administration took the same decision with an earlier iteration of the trunk roads maintenance contract. It is the case that, should they want the contract to stay in the public sector, councils could collaborate and put forward their own bid for it; it would not even have to be the councils that were nearest to the bridge that did that. Councils have been able to do that in relation to the trunk roads contracts ever since the decision was taken in the mid-1990s to take responsibility for trunk roads away from councils and it is still possible. Councils would have to apply to be on the tender list. In the past, councils have applied for earlier versions of operating company contracts. FETA could not do that, but the councils could get together and do that if they wanted to. To return to democratic accountability, elected local authority representatives are in a different category from local groups and local people, whom we have asked to be involved in the Forth bridges forum, in that they have a mandate of their own. That is where the potential for confusion would come in. I feel as strongly about that issue as I do about the requests that we are receiving for ministers to be involved in a council road project—the third Don crossing in Aberdeen. That is not the role of ministers. It is a local authority scheme, and it is right that Aberdeen City Council takes the project forward and deals with the concerns that have been expressed. In the same way, it is right—as Alex Johnstone said—given that the new Forth crossing is being funded by central Government, that there is a clear line of accountability right through to the minister, who cannot hide from the scrutiny that Parliament can bring to bear. I hope that that assures those who are concerned about the issue that there will be accountability. As I have said, councillors can raise issues, and I am sure that they will continue to do so. The only person who has raised the issue of democratic accountability outwith Parliament is Councillor Hinds of the City of Edinburgh Council. Elaine Murray’s stage 2 amendment would have allowed scrutiny only of the Forth road bridge, which I do not think was the intention and which is probably another reason why it was withdrawn. I have tried to respond to the various points that have been made, including the concerns that staff have raised. The pensions guarantee that we have provided is not a straightforward or inexpensive thing to do; the Scottish Government has made a substantial commitment, which we did because we listened to the concerns of staff members. Margaret McCulloch asked about TUPE and the level of protection that will be provided. As a former shop steward, I know that concerns have been expressed about how effective TUPE can be, but following engagement with the United Kingdom Government, the Scottish Trades Union Congress has said that it is generally satisfied with the TUPE provisions, which prohibit gratuitous compulsory redundancies. Under TUPE, obligations are passed on to the contractor. As I have mentioned, perhaps the most important issue is that of pensions, on which we have given a guarantee. On Alex Johnstone’s point about tolls, I welcomed the abolition of tolls in my maiden speech in Parliament. I am aware that Helen Eadie was ahead of her time in asking for a new crossing, and ahead of her time—and, I am sure, out of step with her colleagues—in asking for bridge tolls to be abolished. I can only imagine how she jumped for joy when the Scottish National Party was elected, which led in due course to both those things being guaranteed. That had not happened previously, despite the fact that—as I said in my intervention on Alex Johnstone—the tolls on the original Forth road bridge should have been abolished in 1994, when the capital costs were paid off. It is extremely important that, when Governments make such commitments on tax or charges, they follow them through. The tolls should have been abolished in 1994, and I am pleased that it was the SNP Administration that finally—with support from others, as has been mentioned—abolished them. I mentioned at stage 1 that, at one point, it was proposed that the toll on the Forth bridge should go up to £4, which was a similar level to the Skye bridge toll. I was pleased to be involved in the campaign to abolish the Skye bridge toll, even although I still bear a conviction for refusing to pay. I think that I have covered most of what members said in their speeches, which were very positive. It was interesting to hear from Richard Lyle about the early development of the bridge. I was but a babe in arms in the days of the ferry. Although I crossed the Forth by ferry, I do not remember having done so because I was too young. Since then—as all other members have done—I have used the bridge on many occasions. I look forward to continuing our effective engagement. Members’ comments reflect the fact that there has been effective engagement with stakeholders, members and the people who will be most directly affected. Commencement of the bill is scheduled to not happen until June 2015, and there is still substantial work to be done not only on the arrangements for the TUPE transfer of staff, but on the operating company contract, in order to ensure that it meets the commitments that have been made during the progress of the bill. Commitments have also been made to other stakeholders. I put on the record an offer to provide regular updates to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, including details of how the contract is developing, community engagement and the FETA staff transfer. The bridges over the Forth play a key part in keeping Scotland moving. I am grateful for the opportunity to be part of safeguarding the future of that vital link in Scotland’s infrastructure, and am pleased to commend to members the motion “That the Parliament agrees that the Forth Road Bridge Bill be passed.”

The Scottish Government recognises, of course, the important contribution that Aberdeen and the north-east make to our wider economy and that an effective transport network is vital to economic growth. It is a shame that we did not have that decades ago, when we should have had it. The AWPR and Balmedie to Tipperty project, improvements to the Haudagain roundabout and the new Inveramsay bridge on the A96 form a core part of our commitment to improving transport in the north-east, along with the proposals to dual the A96 between Aberdeen and Inverness by 2030. We have stated on a number of occasions our commitment to funding the design and construction of the road improvement, which will include associated land and compensation costs for the delivery of the Haudagain scheme. The resolution of the legal issues surrounding the AWPR has allowed us to progress without delay the procurement of a design consultant for the Haudagain improvement. Work has commenced on the design of the improvement with the appointment of Jacobs UK Ltd as consultant. The design work is necessary, and it will ensure that construction of that much-needed project can begin immediately after the AWPR and Balmedie to Tipperty project is completed in 2018. It is worth reminding Richard Baker that both the north east of Scotland transport partnership—Nestrans—and the council have explicitly said on a number of occasions that the benefits of the Haudagain project will be realised only after the AWPR and the third Don crossing are complete. That has been repeated a number of times.

Perhaps Richard Baker has forgotten that there has been a protracted legal challenge on the AWPR. Nestrans and the council that he has lauded have said a number of times that the Haudagain improvement will produce benefits only when the AWPR and the third Don crossing are complete. The simple fact is that Richard Baker did not answer that point; it would have been good if he had come back on it. Labour has had a conversion to the idea of supporting the third Don crossing, of course, which in itself is welcome.

No. I want to make some progress. The funding of the regeneration proposal for the Middlefield area is a matter for Aberdeen City Council, but Transport Scotland and our consultants will work closely with the council to ensure that the programming of both projects is in tandem. As is the case with all our schemes, landowners, including the local authority, will be compensated for any land or property that is required to enable the construction of the road improvement. We have said that we will look at opportunities for opening parts of the AWPR and Balmedie to Tipperty project as early as possible to maximise early benefit to the people in the north-east in advance of the full scheme opening in spring 2018. The airport has already been mentioned. That is one area that we have looked at to see whether there is a possibility of bringing forward that work. That has been discussed with the consultants and the council. Whether the Balmedie to Tipperty project can be brought forward has also been considered. As I have said, the Haudagain improvement will work only following the predicted reduction in traffic volumes when the AWPR and the third Don crossing are operational. That and the associated disruption during construction is why the project cannot commence now, and that has been made clear a number of times. There is very little in Richard Baker’s motion that calls for any action at all. If we want immediate construction action now, of course, it will have to be done in advance of any public inquiry or paying compensation to landowners. It seems to me that there is an incredible lack of knowledge about how the projects have progressed.

I will do so in just a second. The forthcoming by-election and Labour’s need for a fig leaf to hide every major construction project that it has delayed explain the motion better. The M74 was never completed, and excuses were made for that. The Borders rail line was not completed, and the Forth road project was known about for years, but Labour did nothing about that. An SNP Administration has been required to take forward those projects, as we will do with the Haudagain roundabout. I give way to Lewis Macdonald.

I think that I have just said what is being done. We have employed design consultants to work on the design at this early stage in order that we can be ready to go immediately. We can of course revisit all the arguments. For example, I have had a letter from somebody in the Aberdeen City Council administration asking whether we would reconsider the whole AWPR and put in a tunnel instead. There seems to be no end to the reasons that the Labour Party and its allies will produce to delay the projects rather than get on with them. What was most interesting was the reaction of Aberdeen City Council when we said that we would give it the cap that it had asked for on its contribution: the council wanted to continue the argument over the contribution, which was first agreed with the Labour Administration back in 2003, then agreed with us in March. However, the council wants to go back and argue about the question of its cap. The difference is clear between Aberdeen City Council, which wants to continue to argue about that point rather than get on with the scheme, and Aberdeenshire Council, which said, “A deal is a deal. Let’s get on with the project.” Would that Aberdeen City Council would take a leaf out of Aberdeenshire Council’s book. The simple fact is that there are too many projects in the north-east, which obviously needs the projects, not least, as Richard Baker said, because of the economic activity in Aberdeen. However, the north-east should have had those projects years ago. There was a lack of investment in Scotland’s transport infrastructure for decades when the Labour Party was in control and did nothing and when the Conservatives were in control for even longer. That was the situation at Scottish Office level, devolved Administration level and council level. Members should not forget that Haudagain and the AWPR started as a council project and that the previous Scottish Executive said that it would get involved in it. The fact that we are contributing 81.5 per cent of the costs—there is of course a substantial cost to the taxpayer of providing the local authority’s money in the first place—means that we are committed to the scheme and bringing it forward. I do not think that anybody, apart from Richard Baker, questions the fact that we had to observe the legal challenge that was made and try to see that through first. We had no control over that. If the scheme had been started many years ago, perhaps it would not have been started from where we are now. However, it was not started many years ago. The Labour Party talked about it, just as it talked about the Borders railway and the M74 but did not complete them. The difference between the Labour Party and the SNP is that we will get on and complete the projects in a way that the Labour Party never did. I move amendment S4M-06657.1, to leave out from first “notes” to end and insert: “welcomes the end of the legal challenge against the Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route (AWPR) and the progress that is being made to construct this vital route, with a swift move to procurement and the undertaking of essential preparatory works; commends the Scottish Government for confirming that it will pay for the Haudagain improvements, including the necessary compulsory purchase and compensation for those properties required to construct the improvements; recognises that attempting to re-engineer this junction prior to the opening of the AWPR would result in traffic chaos, severely constraining the economy of Aberdeen and the north east during construction; notes that all potential solutions identified by Aberdeen City Council require the delivery of a third Don crossing, something that has been opposed by Labour councillors and MSPs; further recognises that, in order to undertake the works at Haudagain, existing households will be relocated and the Scottish Government is working closely with Aberdeen City Council to ensure the relocation of vital services, such as the Middlefield Community Project and the Middlefield Healthy Hoose, to appropriate accommodation, and believes that this needs to be done sensitively and with compassion in a realistic timescale and with appropriate consultation.”

Will the member give way?

If the member had listened to what I said, he would have heard me say that we have started on the design work, which is the necessary first step. Over and above that, we have given a commitment that we will fund all the compensation that must be provided in relation to the land assembly. A start has been made. However, is it not wise to wait until we are ready to go ahead with the project before doing so?

What about 2011?

I want to pick up on Nanette Milne’s final points, because they are instructive in this debate. She perfectly exposed the Labour Party’s failures in relation to infrastructure in the north-east over many years, and also the hypocrisy around some of the schemes that have been mentioned. It struck me before Stewart Stevenson mentioned it that the trams and the projects that we are discussing have something in common. The price that we are paying for the trams—the best part of three quarters of a billion pounds—is roughly equivalent to the price of the Balmedie to Tipperty/AWPR scheme. Alex Johnstone mentioned that the issue of money is—obviously—very important. To me, spending that level of finance on a tram project for Edinburgh is very much second best to the option of investing in the north-east, which I would much prefer to have done. It was also interesting to hear Mr Johnstone talk about Henry McLeish and shovel-ready projects, and the 10-year hiatus under the Labour Party during which there was not the required investment in roads. We all remember that period. He asked me quite seriously to make sure that the project is as shovel ready as possible by 2018. I think that that was the point that he made. Of course, if we were able to do it earlier than that, that would be great as well, but I think that his point was that we should go through the various processes, legal and otherwise, that we have to go through as quickly as possible to ensure that the project is shovel ready as quickly as possible. I am happy to give Mr Johnstone that commitment. We are trying to do that. We started it off with the design process, but we realise that there are many other processes that have to be followed through. In particular, we need to consider the rights of the people who live in Middlefield. Kevin Stewart made that point. They really should have their interests taken into account. The idea of just bulldozing it now, before doing that, is nonsensical. It is important that we follow the processes through. However, I take the point that we want to ensure that the project is shovel ready at the point when we are able to do it.

I want to make one other point first. The point has been made to me by Nestrans, the local authorities and the experts in Transport Scotland that we will cause substantial disruption if we do it now and we will not get the benefits unless we do the AWPR and the third Don crossing first.

No, the commitment that I made to Alex Johnstone just now is that we will do all that we can to make the project happen as quickly as possible. I went on to say that I agree with Transport Scotland, Nestrans and local authorities that it cannot be done and should not be done until the AWPR is completed. In a perfect world, if the AWPR was completed and it could be done two years early, that would be fantastic, but we have to take the advice of experts on the project. The speech by Christian Allard was excellent—he managed to strike a much better tone than most of the rest of us have done during the debate. It was an excellent maiden speech and he is very welcome to the Parliament. It is worth saying a few words about the motion. It is a shambles of a motion. Richard Baker must really regret having put the motion together. In fact, his colleagues on the Labour back benches behind him—although they will not say it just now, of course—must think that Richard has dropped them in it once again. The motion totally exposes the lack of activity from the Labour Party over many years. It has obviously been dreamed up because a by-election is taking place. There is no other rationale for it. [Interruption.]

I read a comment from Richard Baker that Mark McDonald had never raised the issue. Mark McDonald raised the issue with me all the time. I had a number of conversations with him about it. When has Richard Baker raised the issue as a debate before? He has raised it because there is a by-election, which shows how flimsy, nonsensical and unserious the debate is.

I have just finished saying—I think that I have said it three times in the debate—that we will go through the various legal procedures and other procedures and—

I have just said two or three times that we will try to ensure that all the procedures are done before 2018. I cannot help it if the Labour Party does not listen. I cannot help it if Jenny Marra does not listen to me say in my opening speech that we will bear the costs that are associated with the scheme and then goes on to demand that I make clear what I have just said it a few minutes before. I cannot speak for what the Labour Party does not want to hear.

I was just going to come to how the Labour Party seems to face two ways on so many issues these days. This is a perfect example of that. It is like somebody who is about to cross the road who looks left, looks right and then decides to stay exactly where they are rather than go across the road and get the job done. That has been borne out, for example, by the M74 and M90 projects, which have been completed under this Administration, and by the delays that there have been over the Borders railway. Also, even though we knew for years that the Forth road bridge was going to reach its capacity in 1994, nothing was done by the Labour Party. It delayed committing any finances to the Forth crossing project until it was thrown out of office. The same was true of the Conservative Party. We knew that those projects had to be undertaken. The AWPR should have been taken forward many years ago, and in the various excuses—the need for a cap, which I was happy to agree with; the proposal that we look again at the contribution of the councils, which I am not happy to agree with; and the challenges that we have had from the Labour Party about the legal challenges and how they could have been dealt with—we see that there is always a reason for not making progress. It is not so much the Haudagain as, “Haud me back again”—finding a reason not to do something, rather than cracking on and doing it, which is what this Administration will do.

Would Elaine Murray submit a planning application before she had done the design work to work out exactly what she was going to do? Most people would not. That is the way that roads projects tend to work.

Will the member give way?

I do, but it is on the member’s previous point. I just want to clarify something about RET. Is it the Labour Party’s position that RET should be applied to all commercial hauliers across Scotland and, if so, does that mean that it has now reversed its previous opposition to RET?

We welcome the opportunity to discuss the commercial vehicles study. We commissioned it because we were determined to provide additional clarity for businesses and the local economies in the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree. We wanted to assess the socioeconomic impact on those communities of the removal of RET for commercial vehicles. The report was first published on Transport Scotland’s website on 26 April. It is worth remembering that the decision to remove RET for commercial vehicles was partly a result of the cuts that Westminster imposed on us. It was a very difficult decision. Interestingly, this morning I was in Wales, where I listened to a report in which Carwyn Jones said that the Welsh Government had further difficult decisions to take because of cuts that it had experienced and cuts that it expected. Such realism is not evident among Labour members in this place, given their continued demands for more spending in virtually every area of Government. We have done everything possible to make additional funding available for a transitional scheme. Over the past two years, we have provided £4.5 million for that. We have also introduced additional concessions and made a change that means that small commercial vehicles are now eligible for RET fares. As the report said—and as Angus MacDonald pointed out—it is hard to assess the impact of the removal of RET against the background of the general economic situation in a recession. Between 2008 and 2012, there was a 16 per cent increase in haulage costs, which was primarily a result of increases in other costs, such as the 17 per cent increase in fuel costs, which account for a third of all haulage costs. In the ferries plan that we published at the end of last year, which Richard Baker mentioned, we committed to use the study to inform the terms of reference for an overarching freight fares policy. Anyone who looked at the freight fares policy—and, indeed, the passenger fares policy—that the Parliament applied prior to 2007 would not be able to work out a rationale for why certain fares applied in certain circumstances while different fares applied in others. There was no objective rationale. We will try to provide such a rationale through the freight fares policy. The need for that was confirmed in the report. Businesses in the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree stressed the need for a clearly defined long-term fares strategy. To take that forward, we have established a working group that will include broad representation from key stakeholders. The aim is to deliver a commercial vehicles fares structure for all Scotland’s islands that is fair, transparent and straightforward and which delivers the best value for taxpayers at a time of severe cuts to the Scottish Government’s budget. That is a stricture that any Government would have to adhere to.

I have just mentioned that we have established a working group that will include broad representation from key stakeholders. In looking at the freight fares policy, it will take the report into account. I have forgotten the second part of the member’s question, but we would not have commissioned the report if we did not want to give it further consideration. The aim must be a fair vehicle fare structure for the whole country. That said, it is vital that we do not lose sight of RET’s benefits, especially for passengers, cars and small commercial vehicles and coaches, and the major impact that there clearly is on tourism in the islands. In addition, we plan to improve from this winter the level of winter services offered to Barra, Lochboisdale, Coll and Tiree. I will turn to the second point in the complex and multifaceted motion that Richard Baker has laid before Parliament: the MV Hamnavoe. The ship is obviously an important element of the lifeline ferry service to Orkney, but with regard to the breakdown of the starboard main engine—I have forgotten what Richard Baker called it, but it was fiasco, debacle or some such term—I have to say that no one can foresee these things. They happen from time to time; strangely enough, they have happened in the past under a Labour-Liberal Administration. When it happened this time, it was through no fault of the ferry operator, Serco NorthLink, whose technical staff ensure that all vessels are maintained to a very high standard, well above and beyond the required legal minimum. Like any responsible transport provider, Serco undertakes regular contingency planning exercises to make appropriate provision for disruption. I know that the current situation is not ideal and I understand that the Hamnavoe is the preferred vessel for the people in Orkney. However, they are also able to get to Orkney with Pentland Ferries, John O’ Groats Ferries and the Aberdeen service, and the freighter MV Helliar has been set aside to help with passengers and freight. As the people in Orkney whom I met last week were very keen to point out, Orkney is not closed for business and capacity is being met through the different provisions that have been put in place. It was simply not possible to source an additional vessel. Last week, I heard a suggestion from the Labour benches that we should have a separate vessel on standby in any event, but the cost of that on top of the contract would be enormous and run to millions of pounds. I do not think it right to spend taxpayers’ money in that way, which is why we have not done it.

This will be my second and last intervention.

I would have to check but I think that our estimated cost for the route runs into tens of millions of pounds. We cannot continue to spend money that we do not have; we need to have some realism on this issue. As for the idea of commissioning another boat for another service that would then be used as a standby, does the member think that the people of Lochboisdale and Mallaig would be happy for the boat to be taken away and used somewhere else? I do not think so. As the member well knows, we do not have the money for such a project. I simply remind her of what Liam Byrne, the last Labour Chief Secretary to the Treasury, said: “There is no money left.” That is the Labour Party’s legacy. Provisions have been made. I have mentioned the three to four return sailings a day for passengers and vehicles on Pentland Ferries services; two return sailings a day on the service operated by John O’ Groats Ferries; Serco NorthLink’s own Aberdeen to Kirkwall sailings; and the two return sailings a day on the Helliar, which Serco has brought into the Scrabster to Stromness route. This is not what Serco wants; it wants the Hamnavoe back. The latest news is that we expect it to be back in service tomorrow, depending on today’s sea trials, but provision has been made in that respect and I have looked closely at the breakdown of Serco’s response. On Richard Baker’s point about penalties, I think that I made clear in a previous topical question time that every time a sailing does not take place the penalty is around £7,000. Of course, the situation is complicated by the fact that the Helliar is undertaking some of the sailings so we have to work out how penalties will apply. However, Serco will face penalties for not providing the service. I do not have much time left so I will address in my summing up the third issue raised by Richard Baker: the TSSA situation. I have made it clear to CalMac and in public statements that the matter is really between employer and trade unions, and I have insisted that discussions take place and that the trade unions are fully consulted. The parties are in the midst of those discussions and it is only right that they take their course, but I am interested in the outcome. I move amendment S4M-06658.2, to leave out from first “believes” to end and insert: “welcomes the implementation of road equivalent tariff (RET) to Islay, Colonsay and Gigha in October 2012 and the decisions to roll out RET to Arran in October 2014 and to all the Clyde and Hebrides routes in the current parliamentary session; further welcomes the planned investment of £333.1 million between 2012-13 and 2014-15 in Scotland’s ferry services, including an additional £2.5 million in 2012-13, and £2 million in 2013-14, to support hauliers to the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree, where fare increases have also been capped and small commercial vehicles benefit from the same fares as ordinary motorists, all against a backdrop of falling budgets from the UK Government; also welcomes the firm commitment to providing a high-quality ferry service across the Pentland Firth as part of the overall Northern Isles ferry service and the effective contingency arrangements that are in place following the mechanical failure that has affected the MV Hamnavoe; further welcomes the commitment of all parties to learn lessons from this incident to provide good, clear and effective communication with ferry users, and notes that, while the ongoing dispute with some of Caledonian MacBrayne’s port staff is a matter between the employer and the unions, it supports both parties in seeking an early resolution to avoid any impact on ferry services on Clyde and Hebrides routes.”

Will the member answer the question that Richard Baker would not answer? Given what she just said, is it the Labour Party’s position that commercial hauliers throughout Scotland should be subject to RET? Is Labour making that commitment now?

I want to be helpful and to pass on some additional information. The member may know that the TSSA has responded to the CalMac proposals with its own counterproposals, which are currently being considered by CalMac, and constructive dialogue is going on just now.

I begin with the point that has just been made about Pentland Ferries. We very much appreciate the efforts of Andrew Banks, not just in relation to the business that he has taken on and the additional sailings, but in relation to the way in which he has managed his dry-docking arrangements to accommodate the additional passengers who want to use his service. However, like everyone else, he could have bid for the services that we put out to tender. He might well have considered doing that. We arrived at an open tender process in relation to NorthLink Ferries. The position is that we either subsidise and have that tender or we do not. I am not sure which option Alex Johnstone is saying that he prefers. As for the points that Liam McArthur made, I have met him every time I have been asked to, given as much information as I can and provided answers to all the questions that he has asked. I have gone out of my way to ensure that he has as much information as possible. It is a disappointment, although it is perhaps inevitable, that that is usually followed by some very political statements. I was more than happy to go to Orkney again to listen to the representations that people wanted the Scrabster to Stromness route to be written into the contract and that they wanted the 90-minute crossing. I was delighted to go again and talk to the council, the stakeholders and the tourism group. However, one bit of feedback that I got was that the constant politicising of these things by Liam McArthur is starting to annoy quite a number of people in Orkney. Perhaps he will want to address that. We heard some more of that cynicism in some of the comments that he made today, which is regrettable. On the substantive point made by the Labour Party, I have now tried to find out from two Labour spokespeople whether Labour is committed to having a commercial RET for hauliers in the Western Isles or across Scotland. Of course, we know that, as was pointed out earlier, that would not apply in some cases, because it might increase fares for passengers, for example in Shetland. However, the Labour Party has not said whether it is committed to that. People in the Shetland Isles, the northern isles and the Western Isles will notice that, having been given the opportunity to say that that is what it would do, Labour has not said that. I think that I know why it has not done so. Labour has also not said that it would definitely guarantee a new ferry for Lochboisdale because, of course, that would cost between £20 million and £40 million, with about £3 million to £4 million every year in additional subsidy. People in the Western Isles can draw their own conclusions about why the Labour Party has made the point that it has made yet made no commitment to such a ferry. It suggests that Labour members are playing politics with the interests of people in the Western Isles and elsewhere.

If the member wants to make an explicit commitment and say that Labour would bring in RET across the country for commercial hauliers and buy a Mallaig to Lochboisdale ferry, perhaps she will take the chance to say so now.

Again, there was no answer from Rhoda Grant as to whether she will commit herself to what I described. If the Labour Party is not committed to it, what is it making a fuss about? That is the big question. The motion is disparate. To go back to the Hamnavoe, I was asked what the contract says about unscheduled unavailability. The contract with Serco explicitly covers what will happen in the event of vessel failure. It is obliged to respond to that efficiently and effectively by making best use of its existing maritime expertise and industry contacts. That is a fairly standard provision in such contracts. We have seen the efforts that Serco has made to get the Hamnavoe back as quickly as possible. As I mentioned when I said that I would try to update the Parliament, we have the chance that the Hamnavoe will come back into service tomorrow, which is a day earlier than was originally intended, because a great deal of work has been done. There is no question but that the failure was substantial. Playing with words such as “debacle” does no credit to the members who have done that.

No. I cannot, as I need to finish what I have to say. A crank shaft had a major fault. I have seen it; it had a substantial fault right through it. That was fairly unusual and impossible to predict. Serco dealt with it very well and got the vessel down to Rosyth to be repaired as quickly as possible. As Alex Johnstone said, the service has continued to run; I mentioned the various services that continue to run to Orkney. The situation is not ideal and we want to have the Hamnavoe back. People describe it as the Rolls-Royce service, despite some of the comments that have been made in the chamber today. It is described as an excellent service and people want to have it back as quickly as possible. I hope that the MV Hamnavoe will be back tomorrow, but people have not been prevented from getting across to Orkney and businesses in Orkney—especially hoteliers—are keen to say that people should come to Orkney. There are a number of ways of getting across to Orkney by boat, and people should still come. After tomorrow, I hope that they can go across using the MV Hamnavoe. The third element of Richard Baker’s motion relates to the TSSA. If an employer wants to make changes, it is absolutely right that it consults its workforce and the recognised trade unions. That is what has happened in this case. From what I understand, this is not about CalMac picking on a series of employees to reduce costs in that way. Of course, CalMac has one eye on the next contract and wants to ensure that it is in as good a position as possible to win that contract, but that should not be done at the expense of individual members. I have said to CalMac and I have said publicly that I expect the trade unions to respond to the proposals that have been made—as they have now done by responding with their own proposals, which CalMac is considering. That dialogue should and must take place. I have asked for that to happen. We have all said that we want that issue to come to a satisfactory resolution. We have not had much mention of it today, but Kenneth Gibson mentioned the £45 million new vessel that will operate between Ullapool and Stornoway. That is a massive investment. The current ferry budgets are at a record high, although members would not think it from some of the speeches around the chamber. There is a record amount of investment and of course tomorrow the new Ardrossan to Campbeltown service will run, for the first time in 75 years.

The condition of Scotland’s roads has been raised in general discussions between ministers and local authorities. In addition, a strategic action group has been set up to oversee the implementation of 30 initiatives flowing from the national roads maintenance review. Those initiatives are aimed at ensuring that all road authorities in Scotland efficiently manage and maintain our roads. I jointly chair the group with Councillor Stephen Hagan, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities spokesperson for regeneration and sustainable development. The next meeting is scheduled for Wednesday 26 June 2013.

I take John Scott’s point about the financial constraints on our councils, but he really must ponder why they have those financial constraints. We have had one quarter—about 26 per cent—of our capital budget constrained, and we have to pass that on to local authorities. Our revenue budget is also being constrained. We are giving a larger proportion of our budget to local authorities than previous Administrations have done. The member really must accept some responsibility for the fact that we are living in these constrained times because we have to rely on money from the UK Government. Despite that, I believe that the national roads maintenance review produced a number of positive actions that allow much more effective joint working between local authorities, and between local authorities and the Scottish Government. It is a huge job and there has been a backlog for a number of years. A great deal of work is going into ensuring that the money that we spend on roads goes even further. Perhaps John Scott can talk to his colleagues down south to get them to try to improve the budget situation that he says councils are in.

A number of station platforms along the Edinburgh to Glasgow route, including those at Croy, will be extended to accommodate longer trains, which will deliver significant improvements in capacity and journey times for Croy passengers. There will be no diminution in the frequency of services to Croy station.

It is probably best to deal with that with the member. I can go through the exact programme that has been agreed as part of the project. There is no question but that the project involves elements of disruption, which is inevitable with a project of this scale. I am happy to meet the member to go through exactly how that will be dealt with. The various elements of the project are on schedule or ahead of schedule. The commitment that we have given is that there must be electrification on the Cumbernauld side in time for the Commonwealth games. That remains the intention, and that remains on track. There have already been a number of other improvements as part of the Edinburgh to Glasgow project. Things are moving along. There will be some disruption, as we have always acknowledged, but provisions have been put in place to deal with Croy, and I am happy to go through them with the member if he wishes to meet me to discuss them.

The Scottish Government is committed to improving bus services and the workings of the current regulatory framework. We will study the detail of the proposed bill from that perspective.

I am of course happy to meet the member. There are a number of different views about what the regulatory framework for bus services should be. We are involved in a discussion with a number of bus stakeholders through the bus stakeholder group, the basis for which is the series of proposals that were made by Strathclyde partnership for transport around some elements of regulation and other improvements. I would treat seriously any proposal that comes forward, but any proposal should be serious. If it is to involve substantial extra costs, those should be identified, as far as it is possible to do so, as part of the process. If it is possible to identify where those resources come from, that would make it a more serious proposal. I repeat that I have no problem at all with meeting the member to discuss his proposed bill.

When the First Minister met Sir Howard Davies, the chair of the Airports Commission, in October 2012, he noted the reduction in Scotland’s access to London airports, in particular Heathrow, in recent years, and the constraints that that places on the Scottish economy. The Scottish Government will continue to make that point as the work of the commission progresses, including at the Scottish stakeholder event that we are facilitating for the commission on 5 June.

I acknowledge the work that Chic Brodie and Colin Keir have done on aviation. Our strategy on air passenger duty and the improvement of Scotland’s international air connectivity is well documented, as is our advocacy of the need to secure Scotland’s access to the airports in the south-east of England. We want to have policies that are geared for the reality of the needs of aviation in Scotland, rather than in the congested south-east of England. Until we have control of all the policy and regulatory levers relating to aviation, we will have to continue to advocate changes reflecting our ambitions to the UK Government strategy.

Substantial work has been done and continues to be done on this area. It is not straightforward. Some of the fundamentals on which the strategy will have to rely, such as air passenger duty and European regulations, change over time, and that will have to be taken into account. However, I give the undertaking that, as the work progresses—substantial progress has been made already—we will keep John Scott and other members informed.

Anything that increases the costs for people visiting Scotland can be expected to have a detrimental impact on our tourism industry. The World Economic Forum’s “Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Report 2013” shows that the United Kingdom has among the highest aviation taxes and charges in the world, ranked 139th out of 140. We continue to call for the devolution of air passenger duty as soon as possible so that we can develop a regime that makes Scotland more competitive.

I agree with that proposition. Of course, if the power were devolved, we could do something about the issue in the meantime. We have consistently called for that; indeed, the Calman commission called for that. A report by York Aviation suggests that £210 million a year is lost to the Scottish tourism economy because of those charges. Any action that can be taken to alleviate that cost would benefit the Scottish economy.

The point has been made previously to Patrick Harvie that, if we can improve air services—in relation to the bottleneck of Heathrow, for example—we can reduce the number of flights that are required. For example, if people can take long-haul flights directly from Scotland, that eliminates the need for an additional flight from Scotland to London. There are benefits from improving our aviation industry and that is what we will continue to do. Of course, we have responsibilities relating to climate change. We want the industry to increase its efforts to ensure that what it does has the least impact on the environment, whether that is through the efficiency of aircraft or the new fuels that can be used. However, we also have a responsibility to improve the Scottish economy, and the devolution of APD would allow us to do that.

The Scottish Government recently put the contract in place to provide the lifeline ferry service between Scrabster and Stromness and we remain firmly committed to the route. Serco NorthLink is engaging with the European charter market to source another vessel that can be brought to this lifeline route while MV Hamnavoe is being repaired. I am monitoring the situation and I am satisfied that every effort is being made to source an alternative vessel. Indeed, I have requested that Caledonian Maritime Assets Ltd assists in that. While that process continues, Serco NorthLink has put in place immediate contingency plans to ensure that all booked traffic and passengers are moved to either the Serco NorthLink service between Aberdeen and Kirkwall or the service that is provided by Pentland Ferries. Serco NorthLink plan to introduce a freighter to the route in the next few days, to ensure that freight can continue to travel on the Scrabster to Stromness route. The freighter will also be able to carry cars, but it will have a limited foot passenger-carrying capacity. As the contract that the Scottish ministers have with Serco NorthLink imposes penalties on the operator whenever it does not deliver ferry services to schedule, it is fully incentivised to find an alternative means of meeting its contractual requirements. For each return sailing missed, the cost to Serco NorthLink will be £7,732 in penalties. In addition, the operator will suffer a loss of revenue and be liable for the direct and indirect financial consequences of the repair, which in this case are likely to be substantial. I am slightly concerned that, in some media interviews this morning, Liam McArthur may have given the impression that the temporary loss of the Hamnavoe is preventing people and goods from reaching Orkney. As I think he knows, that is not the case. With the contingency arrangements now in place, Orkney is very much open for business, although we are seized of the need to restore the lifeline service between Scrabster and Stromness as soon as possible.

It is worth remembering that this was a catastrophic failure of a crankshaft or at least a vibration dampener on the starboard side. What happened was unforeseen, although it will be examined closely because it is important that we and Serco know whether it was the manufacturer’s fault. As Liam McArthur knows, the Hamnavoe has served the people of Orkney and Caithness for many years. The fact that it has been catastrophically damaged by a mechanical malfunction has provided some consternation for people in those places, as he rightly says. The explicit provisions of the contract are that Serco NorthLink has to deal with vessel failure by responding to it in an efficient and effective way. It is also obliged to make best use of its existing maritime expertise and industry contacts, not least to access a replacement vessel. As I said, we are helping with that by providing the expertise of CMAL. There is no complacency here. People are working very hard 24 hours a day, round the clock, to repair the damage as soon as possible and they are working hard to procure an additional vessel. It is also true that contingencies have been put in place to make sure that people can travel, on Pentland Ferries and, if necessary, on the other route that is provided by Serco NorthLink.

I have outlined the penalties that apply to Serco. As was the case under previous Administrations, there is no provision for the compensation that I think Liam McArthur is hinting at. He has raised with me the question whether additional costs have been incurred by his constituents, which I have undertaken to look into with Serco NorthLink. I am happy to do that and get back to Liam McArthur in due course. The same arrangements are in place for a loss of service as always have been. A loss of service happened previously with MV Clansman, as the member may recall. The same provisions applied then as do now.

I am happy to confirm to the member that discussions have taken place between Serco NorthLink and the harbour authorities. Modification will be required, not least in relation to the original freighter that is being brought in to provide a freight service. I understand that that is not straightforward process, but the authorities in Scrabster and Serco NorthLink are working on that. The procurement of an additional vessel will, obviously, take into account the particular mooring and other requirements of that vessel to ensure that it is suitable, if at all possible without any need to make further modifications.

What applies now that did not apply in 2010 is that we have two contracts with two different providers. Such a suggestion would have to be dealt with in the context of one contract. If we required Serco NorthLink to have an additional vessel, the overheads would be substantial, and those costs would have to be found from either additional subsidy—and the subsidy levels are already at record levels for ferry services in Scotland—or additional cost to the passenger. Neither of those options is acceptable. It is necessary for the operator to provide a replacement vessel as quickly as possible, rather than have a six-year overhead of an additional vessel that could not be used on any other routes on the Serco NorthLink contract because it has guaranteed the vessels that are being used for Shetland separately. That is not a realistic option to undertake for this particular contract.

The level of subsidy for that service was looked at as part of the tendering process. We had a substantial consultation in which we talked to all the stakeholders involved and we were agreed on the level of subsidies that we would provide to that service. My officials have spoken to Serco NorthLink as recently as the past hour to ensure that the booking of passengers on to the Pentland Ferries service is carried out as easily as possible and that the necessary capacity will be provided. Therefore, there is substantial collaboration between Pentland Ferries and Serco NorthLink. If the member is aware of additional booking difficulties, I am more than happy to look into that to ensure that the problem is remedied as soon as possible.

In response to Tavish Scott’s latter question, I have confirmed that we do not intend to take vessels from the Shetland routes on to the service, which is something that we made clear when we let the contract. If an additional vessel can be procured to replace the Hamnavoe in the meantime, the idea would be to have that in place until the Hamnavoe comes back into service.

I understand that they do. In addition, the new freighter, which is in hot layup, as it is called, and which will come in if the modifications that I mentioned can be made, will start to alleviate such pressure as still exists. As I understand it, feed and other necessary freight are getting through, but we want the new freighter to come on and provide additional capacity. That might happen as soon as tomorrow.

I am pleased to make this statement setting out the Scottish Government’s strategy for our canals. Our five canals are some of the most famous and historic in Britain, having been built between 1768 and 1822 as transport routes. Each canal is unique, with its own characteristics. When we look at our canals today it is easy to forget the poor condition that they were in and the uncertain future that they faced only 20 years ago. The Caledonian canal was facing closure, with bulging and leaking lock walls. A 10-year, £20 million, lock stabilisation project secured its future. The Forth and Clyde and Union canals became derelict following closure in the 1960s, and there were calls for them to be filled in. However, they reopened in 2001 as part of the £78 million millennium link project, which was the largest-ever canal restoration project in Britain. The iconic Falkirk wheel was constructed to reconnect the two canals. In 2011, we protected that investment and subsequent investments by placing a statutory obligation on British Waterways to maintain the canals in a suitable condition for use by cruising craft. As scheduled monuments, the canals are now not only recognised as part of Scotland’s rich heritage but safeguarded for generations to come. They are no longer shunned by their communities; they are well-loved resources. Partnership working, especially between Scottish Canals and local authorities, has been critical in recognising and realising the additional benefit that our canals can offer. I commend the partnerships that have been formed, which demonstrate that wider benefits to canal-side communities can be secured, in addition to benefits for the canal itself. The Scottish ministers gained responsibility for Scotland’s canals in 2001. British Waterways continued as a cross-border body, receiving policy direction and funding from the Scottish Government for its Scottish activities. More than £150 million in grant in aid since 2001 has allowed it to meet statutory duties and progress new initiatives. That direct investment has acted as a stimulus for other public and private sector investment. In January, we allocated £4.6 million to Scottish Canals for shovel-ready infrastructure projects in addition to previously announced annual grant in aid of £10 million. In 2010, the United Kingdom Government decided to transfer the canals in England and Wales to a waterways charity. British Waterways’ chair suggested that our canals might also be transferred. However, there was no appetite for such a change among Scottish stakeholders and we were not persuaded that it would be in Scotland’s best interests, so we decided to retain our canals in the public sector. We worked closely with the UK Government and British Waterways to ensure that both Governments’ decisions were implemented smoothly, with Scottish interests protected and preparatory work undertaken to allow British Waterways Scotland to operate on a self-standing basis. Issues such as changes in legislation, the cost of change, the fair split of assets, liabilities and pensions were addressed. We adopted a business-like approach that culminated in the successful separation of the two bodies last July. The British Waterways body continues to exist, although now as a Scottish public body that is known as Scottish Canals. That significant milestone means that we now have a board that is appointed by Scottish ministers and that the policies and activities of Scottish Canals are determined solely by Scottish considerations. That stands us in good stead for moving forward. The management of that successful change is emblematic of what can be achieved. It demonstrates that, although challenging, with good will and hard work it is perfectly feasible for Scottish and UK ministers to work jointly to separate out functions where desired, in this case after almost 50 years of cross-border operation. Perhaps that is a case study for the future. A year ago, I advised the incoming board that I expected Scottish Canals to contribute strongly to the Scottish Government’s primary purpose. I recognised that a priority for the board was to take stock of assets and liabilities, inherited projects, policies and, of course, risks. The board has been heavily occupied with that, but it is now ready to launch its vision and values for the organisation. Scotland’s first canal policy document was published in 2002 and explored the potential contribution of the canals, setting out a long-term vision at a time when restoration was under way. It identified that policy decisions on regeneration, planning and development, public access, integrated transport, environment and tourism could have a significant impact on the canals’ sustainable development. Partnership working, especially with the public sector, was seen as key. There was a need to increase awareness of the canals and promote voluntary sector and community involvement. That policy document stood the test of time well. Given the successful transition to Scottish Canals, this is a good time to restate our aspirations. Our new policy is set at a strategic level and will take the canals forward for the next five to 10 years. Our canals are important assets that we wish to see utilised to enhance the future quality of life for Scotland’s inhabitants and help create a more successful, sustainable country. We look to build on the successful start that has been made on revitalising our canals and gaining wider public benefits from them. We encourage their full and sustainable development in a way that impacts positively. That can be done by continuing to develop the role that canals, both urban and rural, can play in delivering wider public benefits and by working in strong partnerships to secure those benefits. I have encouraged Scottish Canals and its partners, whether public sector, private sector or third sector, to continue to build on relationships and to identify and exploit new contributions from canals in the delivery of the Scottish Government’s purpose. We expect Scottish Canals to continue to lead in development of the canals, taking full account of the role and legitimate interests of the Scottish Government. Scottish Canals will continue to receive Government grant and is encouraged to develop earned income streams. The strategy for achieving our aims is based on the following seven principles, the first of which is valuing the heritage of our canals. The canals must be preserved in good condition to ensure that the integrity and appearance of these historic structures are maintained. Development should not damage or detract from their original design. Secondly, the fulfilling of statutory and regulatory obligations is a fundamental responsibility, with proper resources being applied to ensure safe navigation for leisure and freight as appropriate. Other regulations ensure that the natural environment is protected and used wisely. The third principle is risk management and safety. Inherent risk is associated with water-based infrastructure assets. Scottish Canals should apply the highest possible standards of care to the management of all canal operations to ensure that risks to the public are properly managed. Equally, the public should use the canals responsibly. The fourth principle concerns increasing awareness of the canals’ potential contribution. We would like to see further growth in the number of boats navigating our canals. We place great value on the cross-cutting opportunities that the canal corridors present. Scottish Canals should, therefore, continue to build on the foundations that have been laid, maintaining a balanced portfolio of projects across a range of important areas such as navigation, tourism, regeneration and housing, freight and renewables. It should spread activity across the canals and utilise its resources wisely over time, balancing both risk and reward in line with the Government’s objectives. The fifth principle is around delivering a high-quality experience. Scottish Canals should offer high-quality services and adopt an open and honest approach to engaging with customers and stakeholders. The significant increase in the use of the canal network for recreational purposes, although welcome, can lead to tensions. There is no hierarchy of use in the canal corridors, with fair and open access to all who exercise permitted types of use. Sixthly, we ask Scottish Canals to work through partnership and collaboration. Extensive partnership and collaborative working should continue at both national and local level to maintain the momentum that has been built up. Finally, we encourage the effective monitoring and measuring of the outcomes that have been achieved, so that the benefit that is gained from initiatives can be assessed and demonstrated. That will inform future decisions. I invite members to read our new policy document, “Making the most of Scotland’s canals”, which is available on the Transport Scotland website and in the Scottish Parliament information centre. I encourage members to attend this evening’s reception with Scottish Canals in the garden lobby, which is being hosted by my colleague Stuart McMillan. It has been demonstrated that Scotland’s canals are a great national asset and their revival offers real opportunities not only for recreation and regeneration, but for the wider economy as a whole.

I thank the member for those questions. Much of that has been covered in the statement. I have mentioned a number of the additional funding partners. Scottish Canals works with additional partners, including some of the stakeholders who are most interested in the canal network, to encourage further funding. The £10 million that was allocated was grant in aid and has been bolstered by a further £4.6 million—£3.3 million for this year and the remainder for the previous year. In relation to the strategy, events have overtaken that previous proposal in the structural changes that I have mentioned. However, if the member would like more information on any parts of the strategy, I would be more than happy to get that from officials and pass it on to her. The strategy that is proposed today by Scottish Canals covers the most important aspects, such as funding, use of the canals and the future strategy. The additional £4.6 million that I have mentioned was shovel-ready funding that we managed to get to Scottish Canals fairly quickly. If we can access further funding, it will be directed towards Scottish Canals and, as I said in my statement, the priority will be those things that also increase regeneration, particularly with regard to housing opportunities at the canal side. The funding situation is stable and has survived well, given the very constrained resources that we have. I am happy to provide any other information that the member wants that is not covered in the strategy.

I thank Alex Johnstone for his congratulations on achieving the independent status of Scottish Canals. Of course, it is not true to say that there is any element of privatisation. Local authorities have earned sources of income; all that we are asking is that Scottish Canals does that, too. It will do that not least through the fees to be paid by people navigating the canal structure, which has always been the case. The sustainability of capital funding is an important point, not least because our capital budget has been cut by around a third, which puts pressures on all aspects of Government. However, we will continue to encourage Scottish Canals to work in partnership with other agencies. For example, the projects in Glasgow involve working with private sector agencies and local authorities. We will encourage that as best we can. Obviously, the more funding that we encourage—there would be substantial gains for Scottish Canals, canal users and those who might want to invest along the canal side in particular—the more benefit we will see. Of course, the less that the Government has to commit to that the better, because that will allow us to invest those resources elsewhere. However, we will not leave the canals to return to the situation that they were in 20 years ago. We intend to invest in our canals to ensure a continuation of the progress that has been achieved, while bringing in other sources of funding, as we should do.

The policy that I have set out demonstrates the wish to see further growth in the number of boats navigating our canals, and it encourages canals, boaters and other parties to work together to exploit the opportunities to achieve that. Two examples that may be applicable in different forms to the Caledonian canal relate to what is happening at the Forth and Clyde canal, where overcoming the narrow tidal access offers an opportunity to encourage more transits across the canals. There is an increasing appetite to use the canals, so we want to ensure that access to canals, including the Caledonian canal, is made as easy as possible for people. We are also looking at other opportunities for people who live by the canal side, in which there is a great level of interest. By increasing the opportunities, we will also see increased use of our canals, including the Caledonian canal.

I do not think that we have a fixed view on what the balance should be, although we obviously want to maximise the funds that are generated from the earned income streams. They can come from a number of sources, whether revenue or capital. I have mentioned housing. If we can develop housing opportunities and can get others to contribute to that investment, perhaps through other arms of Government or through social or private providers, that is a route by which increased income can be generated for Scottish Canals. We are also seeing the development of water-based and shore-based activities, not least in the member’s constituency—I know that she has lodged two motions on the developments in her area. She will know full well the different uses to which canals are being put. Whether for canoeing or boating, there is great interest in the use of canals. If Scottish Canals can continue to maximise that interest, in some cases that will mean that a revenue will accrue to it, which will increase its income and perhaps reduce its dependency on Government funding or add to those funds, such that we can do even more on the canals.

That is a very good point. In relation to active travel—walking and cycling—we have found that small capital projects tend to have a disproportionate benefit in local areas. Their small nature means that more people tend to be employed. We want such projects to be encouraged. We are already working to exploit the potential for small capital projects in the canal system. Examples of that include regeneration initiatives, the development of rural housing—which I have mentioned—holiday cottages and camping pods, which were the subject of a recent announcement, and the exploration of small-scale hydro schemes. Our canals are extremely important for tourism, whether in the form of heritage boating, paddling, walking or cycling, or through visitor attractions such as the Falkirk wheel, which I mentioned, and Neptune’s staircase. The scope for canals to strengthen Scotland’s tourism offering is considerable. To come back to Linda Fabiani’s point, the policy document makes it clear that Scottish Canals will work in partnership to take advantage of opportunities to maximise the number of small capital projects that it is involved in.

Yes. Having looked at the initiative recently, I think that it is also the case—although I could be proved wrong—that houseboats do not attract council tax, which is another way in which they are more affordable. As the member mentioned, Scottish Canals is planning to have houseboats at Kirkintilloch marina. In January, I allocated around £4.6 million to Scottish Canals for shovel-ready projects, which included support for the living on water initiative. Kirkintilloch is one of the locations that Scottish Canals is exploring. The initiative is still at an early stage, but I can see the potential for it to contribute to the meeting of the affordable housing targets, as living on a boat can be an extremely affordable option, especially in urban areas.

First of all, I agree with the member’s description of Neptune’s staircase, which is a real wonder and something else to which I intend to return and have a closer look this summer. As for canal users operating the locks themselves, I have to say that I had a fairly traumatic experience using the locks on the Crinan canal and novice users in particular need to take care to ensure that no long-term damage is caused to the canal, if I can put it that way. The decision whether locks can be operated outwith the working hours of Scottish Canals staff is best taken by those staff, who are, after all, the experts in this area and will have a fair idea of the clientele using the locks. Nevertheless, it is a fair point and I will look into it further and get back to Tavish Scott.

I have laid out the more general assistance that we have offered such as the £4.6 million allocation to Scottish Canals for shovel-ready projects, including a project to refurbish the disused railway bridge at Bowling in order to create a new pedestrian and cycle link and provide commercial space in the arches. Residential moorings are also proposed as part of the recently launched living on the water initiative, which was also supported by that funding. As I have said, Scottish Canals is working with the local authority and community on a master plan for a mixed-use development. That master plan, which will happen across Scotland but is particularly relevant to Bowling, embraces the marine economy and local housing demand and taps into the huge attraction felt by people to live by the water. The maritime leisure industry has clear potential and given that our canals also promote vital connections to our sailing waters—that is especially true with regard to the Crinan canal—I expect Scottish Canals to play a full part in such developments, not least in the development at Bowling to which the member referred.

The member quite rightly identifies the Forth and Clyde canal as one where some really exciting developments have taken place over the past decade or so. I remember the day when the Falkirk wheel was opened, but some exciting developments are happening just now at Grangemouth at the other end of the canal from the member’s area. Voluntary organisations that are based on the canal system can make a real difference to people’s lives. Indeed, a number of them have come together to form the lowland canals volunteer group to co-ordinate activity and maximise opportunities and I would encourage anyone with an interest to get involved with it. Scottish Canals and the Scottish Waterways Trust are also fully aware of the potential of volunteering on the canal system. Progress is being made in that regard and, as I have said, I encourage all those with an interest to come along and get involved.

I am grateful to Jamie Hepburn for securing a members’ business debate on the future of Scotland’s Crown post offices, and I am pleased to have been given the chance to speak about an important issue for my constituency. It would be true to say that my constituents are bewildered and bemused by what is happening in the Post Office. This is not the first time that post offices in my constituency have been under threat. In 2008, the then Government presided over the closure of a number of post offices in the local area, including those at the University of Stirling, at Fairyburn in Alloa and at Kinnesswood in Kinross-shire. I can perhaps give some encouragement to my colleagues by noting that the Post Office was forced to abandon plans to close the Crook of Devon post office when I and the local community argued successfully that that would be completely unacceptable. The support for the closure programme under the previous Government in 2005 and 2008 gave the green light for post office closures then and set the stage for the UK coalition Government’s support for the current proposals. It has been mentioned already that the Crown post office offers a full range of services provided at high standards. The staff in Alloa are well trained and have 100 years of experience between them—that is not quite the 280 years that Linda Fabiani mentioned but is, nevertheless, a huge amount of experience. That experience could be lost if the plans to close the post office and find what is described as a retail partner do not work. As members of the Crown network, those staff receive training every week. They attend workshops and are kept abreast of the latest changes to products and procedures through various avenues. That experience and training is an important part of the service that the staff provide—as members have said with regard to post offices in their areas, the Alloa post office regularly has queues and is very well regarded. I have received feedback that customers go to AIIoa post office instead of Stirling, which has been franchised and is now upstairs at the back of WH Smith. People go to Alloa instead because of the level of service that they get there and the post office’s accessibility. Crown post offices such as AIIoa provide a dedicated specialist service to communities that will not be easily replicated by a counter or two in a bigger shop. In any event, when I met representatives of the Post Office, they could come up with no suggestions of anyone in Alloa who could possibly take on the franchise. AIIoa Crown post office is a valuable asset and an essential part of the local economy, and it is well used by local people and businesses. In response to Mary Scanlon’s point, I say that I put as much business as possible its way, as it is more or less right across the road from my office. Currently, AIIoa post office is located in Drysdale Street in AIIoa—for those who do not know AIIoa, that is right in the heart of the town centre—and it is readily accessible for those who wish to use the service. If the plans go ahead and the Crown post office is franchised, there is a real possibility—perhaps an inevitability—that that vital service will be removed from the town centre. The only organisations that can take on the service might well be supermarkets, which are not in the town centre. The post office brings people into the town centre, and there is a concern among local businesses about the potential knock-on effect that closure could have on their business and livelihoods. Since the plans were announced, I have met representatives of CWU and Post Office Ltd, and I have written to the chief executive, Paula Vennels. I remain unconvinced about the argument for franchising AIIoa Crown post office. Claims that it costs £1.43 to generate every £1 of income at AIIoa are disputed by the CWU, and even if that is the case I have yet to receive evidence that suggests that any serious steps have been taken to turn that around. Assurances that there will be no reduction in services cannot be guaranteed. Margaret McCulloch and others raised a number of issues about post offices that have been franchised, including accessibility, the range of services that are available, the quality of service and the increased length of queues. Of course, there is evidence of so-called retail partners taking on a franchise and then choosing to withdraw from the franchise at a later date, which has meant that communities have lost the service completely. I do not want that to happen in AIIoa. I have written to the UK postal affairs minister, Jo Swinson, asking her to meet me at my office in AIIoa to discuss the issue further and to see for herself the local situation but, unfortunately, she has not afforded me the same courtesy that I often extend to ministers of the UK Government who have a constituency interest in an issue. In 2008, I pledged to stand against any future moves to diminish post office services further in my constituency and I stand by that today. The UK Government claims to be investing £1.34 billion to ensure that the post office network is sustainable for the future, with £70 million being spent on modernising Crown branches. I would like to see some of that investment in my constituency, in AIIoa Crown post office. The petition that I launched in partnership with AIIoa town centre business improvement district has attracted more than 2,500 signatures and clearly demonstrates that my constituents want to retain their Crown post office and the excellent services that it provides.

The Scottish Government continues to support the bus route network with £50 million of subsidy per year, by monitoring bus service delivery to promote reliability and by launching a new bus investment fund this year to encourage innovative projects.

The services are delivered by private sector entities, and it is for them to take such decisions. However, as I mentioned, we provide about £50 million of subsidy per year to help to sustain bus services. Through the local authority grant, we also provide money to local authorities, which alone—unlike the Scottish Government—can support individual bus routes. I suggest that the member speak to his local authority in relation to that. The member should also recognise the £190 million-plus that we put into the concessionary travel scheme, which helps to sustain bus services. We will continue to support the concessionary scheme and oppose the abstention of his colleagues who failed to support the concessionary scheme when a motion on it was moved in committee. The Government’s support for the concessionary scheme will remain solid, and I hope that his colleagues will feel able to express their complete support for the scheme rather than the abstention that we have seen so far.

If the scheme was part of the Labour Party’s cuts commission, that would have a serious effect on bus services. We understand that some passengers would not travel without the concessionary scheme. About 30 per cent of concessionary journeys are generated by the scheme, and some bus routes—particularly those with high proportions of generated concessionary passengers—would probably prove to be commercially unviable without it. I do not understand why the Labour Party would want to undermine the concessionary scheme. We will continue to support it despite that opposition.

The retendering of the franchise to operate rail passenger services in Scotland is proceeding according to the arrangements laid out before the Parliament on 6 December 2012. It will begin in summer 2013 for a handover on 31 March 2015 at the end of financial year 2014-15.

The retendering process for the ScotRail franchise will require bidders to demonstrate the adaptations that they will make to timetables to accommodate variations in demand, such as the example that Bob Doris has mentioned and those that result from seasonal variations in passenger numbers due to public holidays and special events such as the Christmas and new year period. I am sure that those who are interested in bidding for the franchise will listen closely to any representations that Bob Doris might make to them.

Richard Baker’s question betrays an appalling lack of knowledge about the bidding process. The idea that we could second civil servants to help with a particular bid in a competitive process is just nonsensical. Of course it is possible for a mutual or public sector-related organisation to be involved in the bidding process. We have asked the Westminster Government specifically whether we could have a public sector bid, but we have been told that that is not possible—the question has been asked a number of times in the past. As we have made plain before, if people can demonstrate experience of running railways, which is a prerequisite laid down by the United Kingdom Government, it is possible for them to make a bid. However, the idea that we could second civil servants to help with such a bid is a non-starter.

The Government recognises the importance of efficient and effective transport links to deliver sustainable economic growth. Since 2007, we have invested more than £1.2 billion in improving the trunk road network in the south-west of Scotland. Those enhancements have improved journey time reliability and safety and delivered further overtaking opportunities, which obviously alleviate frustration. We have also delivered incremental improvements to rail services from Dumfries, which have provided enhanced commuting opportunities, improved connections and reduced journey times.

On the one hand, as I have mentioned, we will require bidders for the next ScotRail franchise to outline their fleet and deployment strategies to deliver both new and specified services across the network. I will expect bidders to demonstrate how they will improve the comfort and suitability of the trains that operate on longer-distance routes. Road safety is, of course, of paramount importance to the Government. The accident rate for the section of the A701 between Beattock and Dumfries is lower than the national average. In 2011, for example, we invested a further £75,000 in the route to improve safety at Amisfield on the A701. That investment included the installation of vehicle-activated chevrons around a challenging bend. Obviously, we keep such issues under review and will continue to invest in that part of the country to achieve improvements in road safety and accessibility.

As I have said on a number of occasions, the stations fund will start in April next year, although it is possible for people to put together bids at the present time. On the member’s question about the process and support that will be required for such bids, there should be support from the local authority or regional transport partnership, which should be involved at the early stages to ensure that the bid is the preferred and most efficient option for the area. There is no reason why the regional transport partnership and the council cannot get together at this stage to work with local people on putting together a bid. However, as I said, the actual disbursal of funds will take place from April next year.

The Scottish Government provides substantial funding for rail and bus services in Scotland, including subsidies to make public transport an attractive alternative to the private car. In the coming year we will offer £187 million in national concessionary travel reimbursement to ensure free bus travel to people over 60 or with disabilities and £50 million in bus service operators grant, which helps to keep fares lower than they would otherwise be. Within our £5 billion package of improvements for the rail network, we support almost 75 per cent of the cost of a rail ticket through Government subsidies.

Part of the answer lies in the response that I gave previously to Richard Baker, which is that we are prohibited from doing that. We have asked the UK Government about that. It is of course something of an anomaly that a state-owned organisation in Germany can bid for the public rail services in Scotland and yet we cannot currently have a public sector bid in Scotland. It is also very surprising to me that I was not contacted by the UK Government on the question of the east coast mainline. For my part, I was very surprised that it should see that as a priority, given the state of the franchising process for other franchises. I will take up that matter with the UK Government.

CalMac Ferries Ltd has undertaken a number of trials of several wi-fi delivery methods, including satellite, point-to-point wireless and 3G. CalMac hopes to tender and introduce a new service model during 2013 and has started the formal procurement process for the introduction of wi-fi on all its ferries that serve the Clyde and the Inner and Outer Hebrides.

First, I point to the difference in scale between CalMac and NorthLink Ferries and the number of routes that they serve. However, I agree with the member and am convinced of the benefits of wi-fi to ferry users who want to make the best use of their business and leisure time on board CalMac ferries. As I have said, CalMac is in the process of preparing a full business case. I am keeping in touch with CalMac on the issue, but I can also tell the member that Castlebay school on Barra was one of the instigators. Pupils wrote to CalMac with a petition and CalMac has done an awful lot of work to ensure that MV Lord of the Isles and other vessels are converted to wi-fi as quickly as possible. Progress is being made and CalMac intends to implement systems this year.

Throughout last week, the Scottish Government was on alert due to the risk of severe weather. As the forecast deteriorated on Friday, we fully activated our resilience arrangements and held our first emergency meeting with partners that afternoon. Those arrangements were maintained throughout the weekend, with two meetings each day on Saturday and Sunday, and are still in place, with meetings yesterday and today. Multi-agency response team—MART—partners were activated 24 hours a day from midnight on Thursday, with mutual aid working well across the roads and utilities sectors. The MART partners continue to work with the local authority and utility partners to support the restoration of services on Arran and the Kintyre peninsula. Our priority has been to support the front-line agencies in their efforts to maintain communication links, to restore critical services and to provide support to vulnerable people affected by the unseasonable conditions. Having chaired resilience meetings over the weekend and having seen the extent of the challenges faced on Arran when I visited the island yesterday, I would like to pay tribute to the staff in local government, the national health service, the emergency services, Transport Scotland and the utility providers who have worked incredibly hard to restore infrastructure and reopen transport links. I would also like to highlight the work of volunteers and staff in search and rescue agencies, four-by-four volunteers and especially those ordinary people in the worst-affected communities who have got out and about to help neighbours. Although extensive progress has been made, the people of Kintyre and Arran remain at the forefront of our minds. As a result, the Deputy First Minister is visiting Kintyre today to offer our support to the staff, volunteers and residents working to bring normality back to the peninsula. I chaired the latest resilience meeting around an hour ago and can report that all power has now been restored to properties in Dumfries and Galloway. I was also informed by Scottish and Southern Energy, which paid tribute to the partnership working, support and co-ordination that it has had from councils, transport organisations and emergency services, that it is confident of having power restored to all customers in Arran, Kintyre and Islay by the end of Thursday, providing no further significant damage to the network is found. At present, there are 2,700 properties without power, which should reduce to fewer than 2,000 tonight. All those efforts come at a very real cost, both physical and financial. In recognition of that, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has been in discussion with Argyll and Bute, North Ayrshire and Dumfries and Galloway councils, and the Bellwin scheme has been triggered. Meantime, we will of course not rest until services have been fully restored to all those affected.

Business plans for infrastructure investment are of course a matter for Scottish and Southern Energy Power Distribution, which owns and operates the network on Arran and the Kintyre peninsula within the regulatory framework that Ofgem sets. Around £6 million of investment for a range of maintenance and refurbishment activities in the Argyll area is already planned for 2013, which will underpin supplies to Arran as well as the SSEPD network. SSEPD is also developing business plans for its electricity distribution networks for the next price control period, which is from 1 April 2015 to 31 March 2023. The Government encourages SSE and Ofgem to consider whether appropriate infrastructure investment in the near future and in the next price control period can further improve the resilience of electricity supply for the communities affected.

As Kenneth Gibson will know from my visit, because he was also there yesterday, it certainly brought home to me the incredible community spirit that we have on the island. For its part, the Scottish Government has invested considerable effort in supporting community resilience work across Scotland. Cases like this show the importance of that work and that it is bearing fruit in our communities.

I am well aware of the co-ordinated activity that is being brought to bear to ensure that the people in the communities that Jamie McGrigor mentioned are being looked after. There are tremendous challenges. Obviously, Jamie McGrigor will know of the level of snowfall that has taken place, which has meant real problems on the roads. There have been efforts from people other than those whom he mentioned, such as council and Transport Scotland staff, who have used snowblowers and every available facility, and have put on exceptional services from Kennacraig to Campbeltown, for example. Indeed, one passenger asked what the fare was—there was no fare, because normally there is not that service. I understand the point that Jamie McGrigor makes and I am certainly willing to join him in saying that there has been a huge amount of effort. I acknowledge the communities’ effort that he mentioned in Kintyre and Southend, and across at Campbeltown and Machrihanish, as well.

Yes; that is happening. As I mentioned, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has triggered the Bellwin scheme and well understands the situation’s urgency for many of the councils and communities concerned. On receipt of detailed claims for additional funding, the Government will recompense in full Dumfries and Galloway Council, North Ayrshire Council and Argyll and Bute Council for eligible expenditure, over and above the small amount that those councils were expected to include as a matter of course in their annual budgets to deal with unforeseen emergencies—around 0.2 per cent of their total net revenue budgets.

Neil Bibby is aware that those roads are not trunk roads; they are local roads that are dealt with by the local authority. I was out on The String road yesterday, and I have seen the level of effort there. If the member has seen the levels of snow, which dwarf vans and some of the plant that is seeking to clear the snow, he will have some idea of the conditions faced by the agencies that are trying to clear the snow from the road. They have cleared right round the ring road, and they have cleared The String road, which is vitally important. It now remains to get into other areas, but I assure Neil Bibby that there has been no lack of resource or effort from all the agencies that have been involved in clearing the roads in Arran.

Yes. I confirm that I have discussed that very issue with Richard Lochhead. We jointly approached the UK Government to seek a derogation for drivers who had been stuck in snow, to give them extra hours to deliver vital food for livestock at this time of year. Further discussions are taking place today. Richard Lochhead is leading on them and he is also looking to see whether it is possible to have helicopters take food to the areas that are still affected. A great deal of effort is going on in that area and the cabinet secretary is fully involved in that process.

I welcome the opportunity to open the debate on the general principles of the Forth Road Bridge Bill. I thank the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee for its work in leading on the bill and the Finance Committee for its work and the assistance that it has provided. The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee received a number of submissions and held several evidence sessions on the bill. I am grateful to all those who contributed to that process. A number of important issues were raised, and the debate provides an opportunity to hear those views expressed and to reiterate the benefits that the proposed arrangements offer; it also provides an opportunity to go through the committee’s report. I am pleased to note that the committee acknowledges that the bill will support the Scottish Government objective of implementing a twin-bridge maintenance strategy and that it supports the bill’s principles. I also note that the committee has welcomed the approach that ministers and officials are taking, while recognising that work is needed to make the commitments a reality. The bill’s provisions pave the way for another important stage in the evolution of the motorway and trunk road network. Trunking the road across the Forth road bridge and the adjacent routes will allow for this important structure, and its well respected staff, to become full partners in the trunk road and motorway network and the successful operating company approach of managing the road and bridge network efficiently and effectively. It will provide for the most cost-effective solution for this vital crossing and will complement the new Forth crossing under construction. The committee commented favourably on the Scottish Government’s decision to contract a single bridge operating company to manage and maintain both bridges. Why was that ministers’ preferred option? First, Scotland’s motorway and trunk road network performs well and is well regarded, with our recent 4G contracts—the framework in which the new bridge contractor will operate—providing a sophisticated approach to asset management. Long-term contracting to network maintenance has delivered continual improvement and significant efficiency savings—£18 million was saved in 2011-12. A recent review by the Highways Agency in England highlighted how Scotland’s approach can generate cost savings without compromising service delivery, my publicly stated intention in the bill. Of course, standards must be maintained. Although remedial action will be taken against an operator if necessary, delivery is based on inclusive team working by the client—Scottish ministers and Transport Scotland—the private operators and PAG plus, the performance audit group. A virtuous circle of improvement via a system of incentives, obligations and shared best practice contributes to efficiencies, with regular inspections providing a no surprises regime that enhances delivery and prevents, rather than simply corrects, faults. The existing road bridge and Forth Estuary Transport Authority staff will join that environment. Secondly, as the committee has acknowledged, state aid considerations and the possibility of challenge meant that ministers were correct not to take the risk of allowing FETA to bid for the contract to manage and maintain the new bridge.

I have just made the point that the committee acknowledged the legal situation that ministers were in and the possibility of challenge, and that ministers were correct not to take the risk of allowing FETA to bid for the contract. It was not possible to demonstrate that delegating the functions to FETA would have realised value for money, and we must also bear it in mind that FETA was not set up for that purpose. A competitive procurement exercise was clearly the right approach for all concerned and meets the risks that I have mentioned. Members will also know that operating contracts have been the preferred choice of previous Administrations. Section 2 of the bill makes comprehensive provision for the transfer of FETA’s liabilities. I repeat that Scottish ministers will meet the liabilities for which FETA is responsible. The committee report describes concerns that some of FETA’s liabilities may remain with the City of Edinburgh Council. Officials will work to an agreed timeline with FETA and the City of Edinburgh Council to ensure that FETA’s liabilities are properly accounted for in the transfer. I have provided assurances on that matter. In addition, future budgets explicitly allow for the associated claims and costs and, as mentioned in committee, amounts in such cases often prove less than initially forecast. The council has estimated less than £100,000 for part 1 compensation claims. The committee recommended that a formal communication be issued to the council on that issue before the passage of the bill. I have done that today by assuring the council that section 2 will transfer all FETA’s property and liabilities to the Scottish Government. A cessation payment will apply to pension liabilities. We are obliging the new contractor to apply for admitted body status. It will also be expected to cover the costs of employees. As the committee noted, that will apply to successor operating companies, too. Legacy costs need to be covered and, since FETA will no longer exist, it falls to Scottish ministers to act as guarantor. We will do that. Various respondees to the committee have welcomed that outcome, and the committee commended Transport Scotland for the outcome achieved on admitted body status. Rightly, that has provided the reassurance to FETA staff that they fully deserved. There was much recognition of employees’ concerns about their pensions. There were also concerns about health and safety. During the recent event with veterans of the construction of the Forth bridge, I met a former employee. South Queensferry resident, Alan Macdonald, who is now 77 but was a supervisor who worked for the bridge designers, described a discovery in the project’s south anchorage tunnel, which was one of many unexpected challenges during construction. As the Edinburgh Evening News reported, Mr Macdonald said: “I saw bubbling coming up through the water in the bottom of the shaft. We collected a sample and took it back to the office. In our naivety we thought it’d be a good idea to see if it was flammable. We dropped a match in this glass jar and we just about blew up the whole office.” I spoke to another person, who talked about handling explosives and being told not to get the material on their face, because it would blind them. The material was accessed from a small hut at the bottom of the hill, next to the river. Things have obviously moved on tremendously in health and safety, which is a key consideration in our moving forward in the way that I am describing. We understand that the bill impacts on individuals. It was essential that FETA staff should receive assurances about their future. The Scottish Government acknowledges and greatly values the skills, knowledge and professionalism of FETA staff. I have assured all FETA staff that their jobs will be protected, through the process that is provided for in the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations. The committee’s report reflects the reassurance that has been provided to FETA staff in the bill and through the arrangements that the Scottish ministers have made on their behalf. The bill provides protection for FETA staff’s terms and conditions, through the application of TUPE. On section 4, the committee commented on the impact that the dissolution of FETA might have on local accountability and local councils’ ability to influence regional transport matters. We recognise that stakeholders hold strong views on the issue, which we welcome; the committee’s endorsement of the Scottish ministers’ approach as striking the right balance is also welcome. The Roads Scotland Act 1984 and Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 create clear lines of responsibility for local roads and for trunk roads. The new Forth crossing, of course, will be a trunk road and motorway, responsibility for which properly will lie with the Scottish ministers. There is no other section of the motorway network in Scotland in relation to which councillors are in a position of authority. The committee agreed with our judgment that the Forth bridges forum, which has council officer representation, is the most suitable vehicle for ensuring that local stakeholders’ interests remain at the core of the management and maintenance of the Forth bridges. The Scottish ministers will, of course, be able to receive representations from the public and councillors about those strategic routes. The approach will be no different from the approach that is taken elsewhere in respect of the trunk road network. Transport Scotland and the winning contractor will build on the relationships that FETA has established. Regular and meaningful engagement with community councils and residents will take place—and indeed has already begun. That will be stipulated in the Forth bridges operating company contract. Such arrangements are a condition of existing operating company contracts elsewhere on the trunk road network; again, we build on existing practice. The committee shares our view that an important facet of FETA’s work, which was highlighted by the chief bridgemaster, is the added value that is brought by contact with operators of similar structures elsewhere in the world. That will be evident later this year, when members of the International Cable Supported Bridge Operators Association arrive in Edinburgh. Transport Scotland is represented on a number of key national and international bodies, and I confirm that, to maintain the immensely valuable contact that I have described, the role of membership of appropriate national and international bridge bodies will pass to Transport Scotland rather than to a bridge operating company. Such an outcome fits well with the principles of the national roads maintenance review. I thank the people who contributed on the issue and I look forward to hearing members’ opinions. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Forth Road Bridge Bill.

How would Richard Baker’s party, which never did this when it was part of an Administration, have directed the business to a Scottish company? How would it have achieved that?

I thank all members for their contributions to the debate. We will consider their comments fully and respond to the committee’s points in writing. I will try to answer some of the questions now. I am pretty sure that I will not be able to get through all of them, but I will be happy to answer in writing any further questions that members put to the Government or officials. A number of people made points about consultation. I will put the record straight: we have consulted those who are most directly affected. The trade unions that have been mentioned, in particular UCATT and Unison, were contacted prior to the original announcements and invited to all FETA staff meetings that were arranged between Transport Scotland, Scottish Government human resources and Barry Colford, the bridgemaster. Three trade unions in particular engaged through transition officials: UCATT, Unison and Unite. Transport Scotland arranged face-to-face meetings at that time for officials from all three unions and FETA, although not all trade union officials attended. There has been substantial contact, but I will take on board some of the points that have been made. Elaine Murray made a number of points on which I am happy to provide some reassurance. I also want to address the point about representation, which a number of members raised. Helen Eadie pointed out that the original bridge was funded largely through loans that were raised by councils. It was quite right that those councils were the direct point of accountability. However, it is also the case that a commitment was given to stop the tolls once the capital costs were paid off. As I understand it, they were paid off in the mid-1990s, yet the tolls continued to be charged for many years and were the source of some of FETA’s funding. Just as it was right that councils were accountable for the money that they raised, it is right that Scottish ministers are responsible for the money that is being spent on the new bridge. Of course, the maintenance of the existing bridge is funded directly through Scottish ministers, so it is right that that should be the level of accountability. As I said, the bridges will be fully integrated into Scotland’s motorway and trunk road network. The Forth road bridge, the staff who currently maintain it and—I underline this point—their pensions and Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations terms are going to be safeguarded in the process.

I have considered and reconsidered the matter as representations have been made. We should think again about the points that have been made by the City of Edinburgh Council, which remains the only council to have made representations on having further representation on the forum. I have not had the same representations from Fife Council, West Lothian Council or Perth and Kinross Council. In fact, the City of Edinburgh Council was unable to say what the level of representation should be or whether any of the other councils supported its position. It has made representations about obligations in respect of previous work on the A9000, said that we should take on those responsibilities, and pointed out that the Government is taking on responsibilities. Therefore, we should take on the accountability as well, not the councils. It wanted to hand over responsibility to the Government, and I have said that we will take that on. That responsibility should be reflected in the democratic arrangements, which is what we intend. It seems to me that the point that Alex Johnstone made in relation to the international bridge organisations is absolutely right and that the people who will get most benefit from that will work directly on the bridge. I will check that further, but it seems absurd not to have those people directly involved in that process. Dave Stewart made a number of points. He mentioned that we should not just make assumptions about the legal position. We do not do that. We do not pluck such things out of the air. We have advice, we have considered the issue, and the position has been given. Dave Stewart also raised the question whether there should an unsuccessful bidder premium. There will be no unsuccessful bidder premium. I think that he also made a point about maximising the use of the existing bridge. We will certainly do that, and I am happy to provide more information on that in writing. I simply disagree with some of the points that Helen Eadie made. The first speech that I made in the Parliament was on abolishing the existing tolls. Alex Johnstone mentioned the idea of increasing tolls to £4 and recoiled in horror. Perhaps he should have recoiled in horror at the Skye bridge tolls, which were sky high. I am very proud to say that, to this day, I have still not paid the fine from my conviction for refusing to pay those tolls. That shows that, given the opportunity, it can seem very easy to draw on an income stream and it is very hard to refuse that, as people should have done in the 1990s to keep faith with the Government’s promise that the tolls would stop being applied once the capital costs of the Forth bridge were paid. I am sure that, even now, had it not been for the actions of the Scottish Government, we would still be paying the tolls for the Skye bridge and would be a long way from seeing its capital costs paid off. The committee’s report explains that there are various community engagement requirements and that they are in the process of being put in place or are being developed. It expressed views on membership of the forum. In my view, the preferred outcome will be achieved without the loss of democratic accountability. It is true that the next generation of trunk road operating company contracts that are currently being rolled out has been designed to positively seek value for money. I think that Alex Johnstone made that point. Alex Johnstone asked what the cost would be if we did not have the new bridge. The cost would certainly run into billions of pounds to the Scottish economy. I think that that cost would be around £600,000 a day if the existing bridge was out of commission, so it is absolutely right that we continue with the new bridge. One or two members have mentioned that. It is not the case that the work that is being done on the cables on the existing bridge obviates the need for the new bridge. The case for the new bridge was not predicated solely on the problems with the cables. The current bridge reached its design capacity many years ago and is currently taking more traffic than it was designed to take. The case for the new bridge is therefore made. I made a point about the existing contract for the bridge, which was to a consortium that involves Scottish companies. Beyond that, of course, there is the chance to have commercial arrangements for subcontracts. Richard Baker’s assertion that it should have been broken up into different contracts fills me with horror. We have ensured that an original budget of between £1.7 billion and £2.3 billion has now been reduced to around £1.4 billion to £1.7 billion. The project is on time.

I am sorry, but I do not have much time left. We do not have a cost or time overrun, and junction 1a has been completed on time. That seems to me to have been the most effective and efficient way of arranging the contract, and it is perhaps a shame that previous Administrations did not take the same approach. Operating company contracts were, of course, let by the Labour Party as well. It is as if the process is new and that it is not the case that previous trunk road contracts were let in the way that we decided. That was how it was done before, going back to the 1990s, and the process was carried on by the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Governments. We are continuing that process. We have a very well-developed network of operating companies that can take on such work, but we accept that those who have worked on the Forth road bridge for many years have particular expertise. That is why we are defending their rights under TUPE and why we have asked that it be an obligation for the new contractor to have admitted body status in the Lothian Pension Fund. To answer the point that Alex Johnstone raised, that obligation is taken on by the Government, which acts as the guarantor. TUPE obligations will, of course, continue when subsequent contracts are let. I am pleased that there is general support for the bill in those regards. I will seek to answer the other questions that members have raised, and I hope that that support continues right through stage 2 and until the bill is passed.

The Scottish Government has no plans for future air services from Skye.

I accept that the study to which David Stewart refers raises a number of interesting questions. Previous studies have given figures of up to £48 million for the cost of upgrading the airstrip. It is true to say that the study mentions the fact that such services might be included within the air discount scheme, but that would depend on much higher levels of demand than the study shows. It would also have the effect of substantially reducing the subsidy to the service. We will consider the matter, if we are approached by Highland Council. That has not yet happened. However, we must recognise that any discussion would take place against the current background of financial constraint and an understanding that the Scottish Government is not prepared to take on new funding commitments at this time.

I know of no approach from Highland Council, although I will meet the council’s leader soon. I will check whether that is still the case or whether something has been received in recent days. As I said, I am more than happy to discuss the issues but, to take the project forward, the council will be required to find the subsidy level that we require to sustain such a service. In the meantime, I am more than happy to discuss the subject.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way at that point?

On his point about the cautious nature of the OBR estimates, did the member see Robert Chote on television last night? When asked why the OBR had got every single major prediction wrong, he said that it had underestimated oil prices. Those are the words of the OBR’s chairman, Robert Chote—that it had underestimated oil prices.

In December 1962, the Polaris sales agreement between the United States and United Kingdom Governments was announced. As a result of that agreement, which was forged in the cold war and amended in 1982 for Trident, nuclear weapons have been based on the Clyde for 45 years. The Scottish Government has called this debate because before us is an opportunity to break away from that cold war mentality and to bring new momentum to the cause of nuclear disarmament. In my view, it is the responsibility of every member in the chamber to play a positive role in supporting that aim.

If the member will let me get started, I am sure that I will take his intervention later. Some will say that we should not be holding this debate and that such matters are for Westminster. I find that argument extremely odd, given the fact that Scotland hosts all the UK’s nuclear weapons. Scotland is uniquely placed to debate the issue; although, as a country, we are consistent in our opposition to nuclear weapons and although the values of peace and social justice are part of our national identity, the UK’s entire nuclear fleet is, as I have said, armed in and operates from Scottish waters. I therefore make no apology for saying that although powers over this might currently sit elsewhere, we can ensure that Scotland’s democratic voice on the most vital of issues is heard. I will seek to set out the Government’s case for withdrawing Trident and try to make clear our commitment to nuclear disarmament and to our vision of a Scotland free of the presence and threat of nuclear weapons.

Yes.

For the benefit of Mr Rennie’s education, I point out that the Scottish National Party’s whole raison d’être is self-determination. It is for individual countries to take their own view on nuclear weapons but we believe that we can set a lead by eliminating such weapons from our country. That is our role. We will get the chance later to hear from Bill Kidd, who I believe was the only UK parliamentarian to attend earlier this month a major international conference in Oslo on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons. He and others will wish to make their own points, but I feel that in debating these issues we must never lose sight of the truly devastating consequences of the use of nuclear weapons. We must be absolutely clear that these are weapons of mass destruction; they are indiscriminate and kill and destroy without grace or favour; and they devastate not just all military targets in their path but all civilians including children, all schools and hospitals, and all livestock and crops. On this point, at least, I agree with the former UK Secretary of State for Defence Des Browne who, writing in The Telegraph on 5 February, said that “large-scale use of nuclear weapons ... would be suicidal” and that “even a small-scale nuclear exchange ... would affect at least a billion people and usher in colder temperatures than at any time in the past millennium.” I also highlight the February 2013 report from the Scottish Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament entitled “If Britain fired Trident—The humanitarian consequences of a nuclear attack by a Trident submarine on Moscow”, which sets out in horrifying detail the devastating humanitarian consequences of a nuclear attack on a large urban area—precisely the type of attack that Trident is designed to deliver. I note in passing that the Conservative amendment seeks to delete any reference in the motion to the devastating impact of nuclear weapons. It is clear that a nuclear attack would have catastrophic humanitarian consequences. There is also an economic case to make in this argument. I have talked about the human cost of nuclear weapons, which is clearly far and away the most important factor, but there is also an unacceptable financial cost. The UK Government keeps the accounting on Trident confidential, but estimates suggest that running costs amount to around £2 billion per annum, with Scotland’s share estimated at around £163 million per annum or almost £500,000 each and every day. Furthermore, the UK Government’s plan to replace the current Trident fleet is projected to cost around £20 billion to build, with costs running to more than £100 billion over its lifetime. Although it is not due to decide on the plan until 2016, the Ministry of Defence estimates that it will spend around £3 billion for and in advance of that decision. Frankly, it is staggering that the UK Government is preparing to spend massive sums on nuclear weapons while at the same time cutting conventional defence forces and slashing social welfare budgets. That is not just the view of the Scottish Government. On 22 January this year, Professor Malcolm Chalmers of the Royal United Services Institute said: “sharp increases in spending on Trident renewal in the early 2020s seem set to mean further years of austerity for conventional equipment plans.”

The point that the finance secretary has made is that around £2 billion is currently spent on defence in Scotland and we pay around £3.3 billion, so we could much more effectively finance conventional defence. Former UK military leaders agree. Field Marshal Lord Bramall, General Lord Ramsbotham, General Sir Hugh Beach and Major-General Patrick Cordingley, writing in The Times in April last year, said: “It may well be that money spent on new nuclear weapons will be money that is not available to support our frontline troops, or for crucial counterterrorism work; money not available for buying helicopters, armoured vehicles, frigates or even for paying for more manpower.” We have seen that in spades with the recent basing review announced by the coalition Government. Even more clearly, in March 2012 the liberal think tank Centreforum said: “Replacing Trident is nonsensical. There is no current or medium-term threat to the UK which justifies the huge costs involved.” It is clear that the continuation of Trident comes at the cost of conventional defence jobs and cuts elsewhere. Of course, there are those who will still say that the benefits of nuclear weapons to our national security are a price worth paying. I do not accept that argument and I never have. The presence of nuclear weapons has not prevented conflicts between nuclear and non-nuclear states. Indeed, recent developments in North Korea suggest that the risk of further countries developing nuclear weapons and potentially using them remains very much alive. Also, at no point have I seen—nor would I expect to see—a conceivable scenario in which the UK would use its nuclear weapons. I would be interested to hear whether, during the debate, any of the Opposition parties can come up with a scenario in which we would use nuclear weapons.

I understand that Annabel Goldie will not take my word for it that nuclear weapons provide no deterrent whatever, but I have just quoted a number of senior military people and I will quote some other figures—on her side in fact. Michael Portillo, a Conservative ex-Secretary of State for Defence, is a good example. He believes that nuclear weapons serve no purpose whatever. Perhaps the member will take their word for it that the weapons serve no strategic purpose whatever, least of all deterrence.

None whatever. General Sir Mike Jackson has recently said that there is no possibility that the UK would be able to retake the Falkland Islands. It no longer has the conventional power to do that, not least because of the money that it spends on nuclear weapons instead. The argument that Trident secures a seat at the top table does not convince either. Economic strength and the capacity to provide aid and conventional support for international peacekeeping and humanitarian operations are far more powerful and positive levers. Scotland has consistently opposed nuclear weapons. A majority of public opinion, our churches, the Scottish Trades Union Congress and wider civic society oppose Trident. Of particular importance to the Scottish Government is therefore the basing of Trident at Her Majesty’s naval base Clyde. Our opposition there is twofold. First, we are opposed to the possession of nuclear weapons wherever they are held. Secondly, but just as important, we object to nuclear weapons being based here against the will of the majority of the Scottish people. We also object strenuously to the UK Government’s Trident replacement plans, which, if approved by the UK Government in 2016, will see nuclear weapons based on the Clyde beyond the middle of this century. Going further, we have made clear our intention to advocate that a written constitution for an independent Scotland should include a constitutional ban on nuclear weapons ever being based here in future. We are also absolutely committed to pursuing the safe and speedy withdrawal of Trident following independence. It is for those reasons that we ask the Parliament, through this debate, to call on the United Kingdom Government to acknowledge Scotland’s opposition to Trident and to develop options for its withdrawal.

I could happily spend the rest of the speech giving the member evidence on that, but most recently a poll carried out last week showed that 80 per cent of people in Scotland—both from the yes and the no independence campaigns—are against Trident. It is the duty of any Government to protect the best interests of its people, and there are those who claim that our commitment to remove Trident from Scotland is simply nimbyism. However, the wellbeing of all people in Scotland is in Scotland's interest, and that is why I believe that the Scottish Government should play a part in supporting disarmament around the globe. How much more moral authority do we have in convincing others to get rid of their weapons if we have done it first? It is our vision for an independent Scotland to advocate for nuclear disarmament as an equal partner in the international community, and to add our voice and efforts to the growing number of nations calling for action on the reduction of such weapons. It is worth bearing in mind the fact that the UK Government is signed up to the non-proliferation treaty and United Nations charters that call for everyone to work towards disarmament in relation to nuclear weapons. We also believe—[Interruption.] The Conservatives say, “Yes,” but they have given a cast-iron commitment to continue with Trident. The two things are not compatible. We also believe that, under the current constitutional arrangements and recognising clear public opinion on the matter, which I have just cited in response to Jenny Marra, the Scottish Parliament has an obligation and an opportunity to make its position clear. The international community has signalled its commitment to nuclear disarmament through mechanisms such as the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. However, to take the NPT further, we believe that a positive and fitting step would be to place on record our support for the five-point plan on nuclear disarmament of UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. That plan calls on all NPT parties, and in particular the nuclear weapon states, to undertake negotiations on effective measures leading to nuclear disarmament. It calls on the permanent members of the UN Security Council to commence discussions on security issues and the nuclear disarmament process, and for all parties to pursue new efforts to bring the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty into force.

I cannot. I have taken a number of interventions and I would like to try and finish in the short time that is left. Nuclear weapon states should also provide greater transparency and accountability in the pursuit of nuclear disarmament, and all parties are called upon to pursue complementary measures for the elimination of other types of WMDs and new efforts to combat WMD terrorism. In conclusion, the Scottish Government believes that Trident nuclear weapons are unsustainable morally, economically and strategically; that their replacement and continued basing at Her Majesty's naval base Clyde would be contrary to the clearly held view of the Scottish people; and that the Parliament has a clear and positive role to play in support of global nuclear disarmament. I have one further point in response to Jenny Marra. The Parliament has voted against Trident; that was the express view of the Parliament in 2007 and subsequently. The Parliament has a clear and positive role to play in support of these ends. For those reasons, I am happy to support the motion in the Government’s name and I advocate the removal of Trident from our shores on behalf of the people of Scotland. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the devastating humanitarian impacts of nuclear weapons; endorses the Secretary-General of the United Nations’s five-point plan for nuclear disarmament; calls on the UK Government to acknowledge the opposition of the Scottish Parliament to nuclear weapons and to the presence of Trident in Scotland, and further calls on the UK Government to explore options for the removal of Trident ahead of the so-called main gate decision in 2016.

Does the member not believe that the real hypocrisy lies in saying that we are responsible enough to have nuclear weapons and other countries are not? Will she also acknowledge the fact that we have not said that we want to shelter under anybody’s nuclear umbrella? We want the world to be rid of nuclear weapons—that is an entirely consistent position.

Will the member give way?

Does Ken Macintosh recognise that it is perfectly legitimate to ask whether, if people intend to spend £100 billion on something, they have some idea of the circumstances in which they would use it? On the question of equivocation and uncertainty, can Ken Macintosh say whether he supports the replacement of the Trident nuclear missiles and whether his party leader, who is absent today, supports the establishment of a new version of Trident?

Does the member accept that only three members of NATO have nuclear weapons and that all the rest of them do not? It is perfectly possible to be a member of NATO and not have nuclear weapons. The vast majority of members of NATO are in that position.

Will the member give way?

Will Annabel Goldie give way?

Annabel Goldie said: “Who desires peace, let him prepare for war.” What is the logical extension of that argument? If every country builds for war and uses nuclear weapons as part of that construction, where does that lead us?

Will Dr Simpson give way?

We have heard quite a wide range of views during the debate, and I will try to respond to as many points as I can. There were quite thoughtful contributions from Claudia Beamish and Annabel Goldie, but for me the stand-out speeches were from Bill Kidd and, especially, Marco Biagi, who gave an excellent speech in support of his views. Before I address the points that were made during the debate, I would like to reflect briefly on what has become the inescapable consensus; that nuclear weapons are the single most destructive force in the world today and that we would all, without exception, welcome their abolition. That alone should compel us to do all that we can to support the conditions for their removal, whatever our views may be on the length and nature of that journey. To those who question our competence in debating the issue, I say simply—as I said when first I spoke—that the vast majority of people in Scotland vehemently oppose nuclear weapons. The vast majority of—in fact, all the nuclear weapons in the UK, are in Scotland. Of course it is competent and right that this chamber discuss that. Jackie Baillie in particular derided the use of Parliament’s time in debating the issue, although she discussed everything apart from Trident, which is under debate. In my time in local government I went to many meetings with Labour councillors at various councils across the country at which we discussed nuclear-free zones, issues to do with Palestine and all sorts of matters for which councils have no responsibility but which they felt were very important. That debate was not opposed by the Labour Party at that time. It would be well for the Labour Party to look back—

On Malcolm Chisholm’s point about the wording of the motion, I would like to know what he and the Labour Party find so offensive about acknowledging the devastating humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons, about endorsing the United Nations secretary general’s five-point plan or about acknowledging the opposition of the Scottish Parliament to nuclear weapons. What is so objectionable about those points? The Labour Party should survey the wreckage of its 2011 election campaign and ponder where its blind hatred of the SNP has taken it. First, we heard people who were for many years involved with CND—an honourable cause—being denigrated as delusional. That was from Michael McMahon. We have heard people being described as “naive” or “cynical” because they oppose nuclear weapons. Michael McMahon still thinks that that is the case. Labour might like to ponder the fact that it denigrates—

No, I will not take an intervention. Labour might want to ponder the fact that it denigrates people who have supported it. What about the Labour MP Joan Ruddock, long-time member and leader of CND? Was she delusional as well? That is how the Labour Party has got itself into the position that it is in now. Stewart Stevenson made a telling contribution when he talked about the real costs of Trident—what we are paying for Trident currently and what we are being asked to pay in terms of the equipment that is being foregone by troops on the ground; he mentioned helicopters and boots in particular. When the Prime Minister dropped by my street one day, I challenged him on that very issue of helicopters and equipment. He did not really give me an answer and it ended up in a bit of a rammie, if I can call it that. The simple fact is that the Labour Party is all over the place on the issue—as, I think, Kenny Gibson said. It will be interesting to see what it does in a few minutes, when we come to the vote. Will there be another abstemious action by the Labour Party, in which it will not vote? In the same way, it abstained from supporting the Tories in the vote on workfare in the House of Commons yesterday—the Tories’ dirty little helpers. It is also very telling that none of the Opposition spokespeople—Ken Macintosh, and Ruth Davidson, who was asked—could come up with a scenario in which they would use the £100 billion-worth of weapons that they want to procure for this country and site in Scotland. On the matter of Labour deriding its own history, Jim Murphy derided those who said they were against nuclear weapons and had supported CND in the past as “flirting with surrealism”. That is what he said about people who genuinely believed in the Labour Party and in unilateral nuclear disarmament. We heard more “flirting with surrealism” this afternoon, when Richard Simpson decided to compare nuclear weapons with not putters, but drivers in a golf bag. That was surreal—I have no idea what he was talking about. His suggestion—that we would restrict ourselves to using only putters, rather than using the drivers or the woods that he equates with nuclear weapons—was “flirting with surrealism”. We have set out the reasons why we believe the motion should be agreed to by Parliament. I cannot for the life of me think why any part of the motion—despite what Malcolm Chisholm said—might prove to be impossible for the Labour Party to support. Malcolm Chisholm might quibble with the timing of the debate, but it is only the SNP that has previously brought the issue to Parliament, in 2007 and 2008. His party has had the chance to do that at any time, if its members had felt as strongly about the subject as they say they do, but it has not done so. Today, Labour members have denied that we should ever debate the subject, so how can we be criticised for the timing? There is no reason why the Labour Party and those who genuinely wish nuclear weapons to be taken away from Scotland cannot easily support our motion. An interesting question about the Labour Party’s position is this: Where is it showing leadership? Its leader is not even here. She is meant to be in charge of all the Labour MSPs and all the Labour MPs in Scotland, and she is meant to speak for the Labour Party, but she is not even here. I am willing to take an intervention from any Labour member who can tell me what Johann Lamont’s position is on the replacement of Trident. It is our priority, as good global citizens, to support and promote global nuclear disarmament. That is the right thing to do. Ken Macintosh rose— I will give way to Ken Macintosh—if he can tell me what the views of his leader are on the replacement of Trident. Over to you, Ken.

The SNP chooses what it wants to use its time for, and likewise the Labour Party chooses. The Labour Party could have chosen to discuss Trident at any time, but it has not done so. That speaks volumes. We await the outcome of the Trident alternatives review, which is being led by the Chief Secretary to the Treasury. We hope that the review explores options that do not rely on the continued use of HMNB Clyde as the UK’s nuclear deterrent base. On the subject of the base, the most distasteful part of the entire debate has been the moral bankruptcy of Jackie Baillie. She said that it is worth protecting jobs at Faslane only if we spend hundreds of billions of pounds on nuclear weapons. There is no moral case for that. It is reprehensible to try to equate the two things. We ask for Parliament’s support on the motion, although we have always realised that there would be convinced opposition to it. The Conservatives have possibly held a consistent position, as has been mentioned, but there is no consistency in the Labour Party position. Labour members have the chance to remedy that, however, by supporting the motion. I conclude with a point that was made by President Barack Obama.

I refer to the words of Barack Obama, who made a very famous speech, of course. It is worth bearing in mind that he is President of the country that has the biggest nuclear arsenal in the world, and even he seems to realise the dangers. He said: “So long as any state has nuclear weapons, others will want them.” I was trying to make this point before: it is very hard for one state to have the moral authority to tell another state that it cannot have nuclear weapons because it is not responsible, but for that state to say that it is responsible. We cannot do that—that is moral hypocrisy. President Obama said: “So long as any state has nuclear weapons, others will want them. So long as any such weapons remain, it defies credibility that they will not one day be used, by accident, miscalculation or design.” Rob Gibson made some telling points about some of the accidents that we have suffered here in Scotland involving nuclear submarines around our shores. President Obama went on to say about nuclear weapons: “any such use would be catastrophic. It is sheer luck that the world has escaped such catastrophe until now.” That is not entirely true, of course: as we know, two nuclear explosions happened in Japan already. It is also worth pointing out—to rebut the point that we should not discuss such issues—that this Parliament has debated the effects of nuclear weapon tests on our citizens. We debated that with all-party support, I think. If we can discuss testing of nuclear weapons, why cannot we discuss Trident, too? The Scottish Government believes that the moral, economic, strategic and democratic case for withdrawal of Trident nuclear weapons is clear, and that the time is now right to bring new momentum to the pursuit of nuclear disarmament. I call on the Scottish Parliament—on all those who have a conscience in relation to this—to send a clear, strong and positive message to the UK Government and the international community by supporting the motion.

This is a very important debate for two primary reasons, both of which are alluded to in the First Minister’s motion, which I second. I also give notice that the Scottish Government will accept Willie Rennie’s amendment. The first reason is, as many members have said, to remember those who died or were injured, traumatised or dispossessed. Like many members, I know a number of people who were involved in the Iraq war; indeed, yesterday, I was visited at my surgery by someone who received a traumatic brain injury—a TBI—and who struggles daily to ensure that the war does not define the rest of his life. Drew Smith raised the issue of veteran support. The Government has introduced concessionary travel for veterans. It is the first Government to do that. I think that, if Drew Smith asked Poppyscotland about the comparative records of the Scottish Government and the UK Government, he would find that it would be very complimentary about what the Scottish Government has done. To go back to Willie Rennie’s point, the Scottish Government has given substantial moneys—for example, £640,000 to Veterans First Point, £1.2 million for specialist care to Combat Stress, and a further £0.5 million for outreach care. We have a lot to be proud of in what we have done for veterans in the Government. To underline my first point, we should remember all of those who died in the war.

Let me say only that I have discussed that matter with SPT. We should remember all the service personnel from the UK, the US and Iraq who died, all the civilians who died, and those who were injured and the families of those who were injured, as they number in their hundreds of thousands. As I said, there are two reasons to discuss the invasion of Iraq. First, we should remember those people, and secondly we should learn the lessons. We should learn the lesson that we have to be absolutely clear and honest about the basis for war when we ask people to accept the case for war. It has been said already that going to war is the gravest decision that a Government can take. If anybody doubts that, they should listen to the words of King Croesus, who said: “No one would be foolish enough to choose war over peace—in peace sons bury their fathers, but in war fathers bury their sons.” They should listen to the words of Dwight Eisenhower, who said: “I hate war as only a soldier who has lived it can, only as one who has seen its brutality, its futility, its stupidity.” What, then, was the case for war? What was Tony Blair’s basis for it? There were three essential elements: weapons of mass destruction, the 45-minute threat, and, of course, the associated threat of al-Qa’ida working with Saddam Hussein. We know that weapons of mass destruction were not there—that was a false prospectus—and that the 45-minute threat was absurd. If that applied to anything, it applied to Saddam’s plans to launch a strike on his own troops if they chose to desert; it did not apply to a threat to the national interests of this country. We also know that the al-Qa’ida threat that was raised was false. Al-Qa’ida and Saddam Hussein were the bitterest of enemies and were not working in collusion. Therefore, the basis for war against Iraq was “a lie”—those are not my words; they are the words of Joschka Fischer on the “Panorama” programme last night. He was the German foreign secretary who knew something of how thin the intelligence that was provided to the UK and US Governments was. The second lesson has to be that the basis for going to war cannot be changed after having gone to war. We have seen some of that today. Tony Blair was very clear in the House of Commons when he said that he had never said that it was about regime change. It is not permitted under the UN charter to invade another country to effect regime change. He said that it was for weapons of mass destruction. We know that, if we change the basis on which we go to war after the event, we will lose the credibility and moral authority in having gone into it in the first place. That is a crucial lesson for those who supported the decision. It might interest members to know that a senior Labour member of this Parliament said in a previous debate: “I do not particularly care that we did not find weapons of mass destruction.”—[Official Report, 2 June 2004; c 8751-52.] What does he think that means to the people who were told that they were going to war to find weapons of mass destruction? He does not even care about the fact that that was essentially a lie. The entire speech of John Lamont was based on the idea of regime change. That was not the view of the Conservatives in the House of Commons when they voted to support Tony Blair. It is interesting to ask: exactly what is the Tory position? Referring to the stance of the Labour Party in particular, some of the members who have spoken today have talked about everything apart from the Iraq war. That tells me that the Labour Party is not willing to learn the lessons—particularly that we have to be honest with people before making the gravest decision of all. [Interruption.] Well, it is clearly the case that the Labour Party was not honest with people. Even those hundreds of thousands of people who were against the war would have liked weapons of mass destruction to have been found and to find that the Government had not been lying to them, but that was not the case—the Government had been lying to them, and so they lost faith in the integrity of government.

If I can make a bit more progress just now, I will see whether I have time left at the end. There is also an absence of any contrition from the Labour Party today, which I believe is a certain sign that Labour is not fit to be in a position to take such life-and-death decisions. I return to the point about consistency. I understand from what Johann Lamont said that she would have opposed the second Gulf war if she had voted in London, but she supported it here. She did not support the first Gulf war, even though it was backed by a United Nations mandate and was the result of a country invading another country. She did not support the idea that the decision that was made was about weapons of mass destruction. It is hard to see the logic, or indeed any principle, in those positions. They cannot be reconciled with each other.

The record will show exactly what integrity and consistency there was in the justifications that Johann Lamont has given. If the reasons that are given for war are falsehoods and if, as was conceded by Richard Dearlove of the UK security services, “the intelligence and facts were being fixed around the policy”— not the other way round—there can be no chance of there having been a legal basis for the war. As Willie Rennie pointed out, the other way of having a legal basis for the war was through the UN, but the UN was scorned and ignored at the time. Vitriol was poured on the French, the Chinese and others. Ultimately, the UN was bypassed. In the UK, the false facts comprised a false prospectus for war, and many people who supported it have recognised that and have expressed regret for having supported Tony Blair. Alistair Darling, Jack McConnell, Ed Miliband and Jack Straw have all expressed regrets, none of which we have heard from those in the Labour Party who supported him and who are here today. The issue of independence has been mentioned. I had not intended to mention it, but Johann Lamont mentioned it a number of times. Interestingly, Johann Lamont mentioned it 10 years ago when we debated the situation in the Parliament. She said: “I wonder how much more irrelevant it can be to have a party that is based entirely on the desire to seek further division within our country.”—[Official Report, 13 March 2003; c 16447.] That debate was about Iraq. She was the one who introduced the issue last time. It is interesting to ponder whether the politicians in the Parliament today would support the same position. It is also interesting to ponder the actions of the Conservative Party. Last week, it was reminiscent of the 1980s, with a UK Government minister coming up to Scotland on a flight, delivering a statement to tell us that we were unfit to look after our own defence, and getting on a flight back down south again. “Join the Navy and see the Clyde”— I think that was the quote from Philip Hammond. Lewis Macdonald rose— I can think of many mothers and fathers who would like their kids to have seen the Clyde rather than the Euphrates and the—

That goes to the heart of what the armed forces in any country are for. They are not to be used as an extension of foreign policy, certainly not in the interests of another country. They should be used to defend the vital interests of the country that they serve. It is interesting to ponder what approach we would take if we were independent and if this Parliament had the responsibility. I would go for the views of somebody other than Tony Blair: “Nae mair will our bonnie callants merch tae war whan our braggarts crousely craw”— I repeat—whan our braggarts crousely craw— “nor wee weans frae pitheid an clachan murn the ships sailin doun the Broomielaw”. That is a far better way to look at defence. It may be idealistic, in the same way that Fiona McLeod mentioned the fact that she is a pacifist, but that approach—the essential nature of what we are asking people to do; the price that we are asking them to pay—should be weighed in the balance in a way that it patently was not when the issue was discussed at Westminster all those years ago. Those sentiments provide an excellent route map for the Parliament to decide on these matters in the future—much more so than what was discussed, as I say, 10 years ago. For those reasons, I am proud to support the motion in the name of the First Minister.

In the House of Commons yesterday, the Secretary of State for Defence, Philip Hammond, made a statement on the basing of military forces, including in Scotland. The implications of that statement are serious and are of direct relevance to the current responsibilities of the Scottish Parliament. The military’s presence in our nation has highly significant social and economic impacts. That statement was, as the Deputy First Minister said yesterday, a betrayal of Scotland and her communities. I will set out why that is the case and what the Scottish Government intends to do to continue to hold the UK Government to account for its decisions. The Scottish Government fully recognises and values the vital part that the armed forces and those who serve in them play in the life of our nation. That contribution cannot be sustained in isolation—it must be supported by wider society. The Scottish Government’s successful approach to ensuring that that happens was set out in the paper, “Our Commitments: Scottish Government Support for the Armed Forces Community in Scotland”, which I launched at Edinburgh castle last September. Yesterday’s announcement came a long time—more than 18 months—after the then Secretary of State for Defence, Liam Fox, made his initial announcement about military basing. The Scottish Government had worked hard to support the UK Government in the process that led up to that announcement. That included forging a cross-party consensus and submissions from all the main parties in the Scottish Parliament. When it came, Liam Fox’s announcement included some severe disappointments, including—importantly—that Royal Air Force operations would cease at Leuchars. Given that it came on top of the previous announcement that the RAF would be leaving Kinloss, it was a particularly heavy blow. At a stroke, the number of air bases in Scotland was cut from three to one. That disappointment was somewhat mitigated by Liam Fox’s commitment that, as part of the rebasing of Army personnel from Germany, up to 7,000 additional troops would be coming here to Scotland. That commitment was made in the full knowledge that the United Kingdom’s regular Army would be reduced to 82,000 by 2020. Suggestions otherwise are a reinvention of history. Philip Hammond’s betrayal of that promise is a disgrace. Following Liam Fox’s announcement, we committed to working positively with the Ministry of Defence, local authorities and other partners to make the changes work as best they could for service personnel, their families and communities around Scotland. Officials from the Scottish Government have engaged fully with the MOD and its Defence Infrastructure Organisation at every available opportunity. At ministerial level, since July 2011 various ministers—including the First Minister, the Deputy First Minister and me—have underscored that commitment by raising issues connected with the basing review, both in writing and through meetings, a total of 18 times with UK ministers. We have also been supportive of the local communities involved by meeting those affected in the aftermath of the announcement and, through officials, keeping closely in touch with local authorities. The time that it has taken to work through that process has led to a great deal of uncertainty and anxiety in the communities that are affected around Scotland, but now, at last, the announcement has come. Again, it is deeply disappointing, given the work that we have put in to trying to make the process work for Scotland. In place of the commitment that Army numbers would rise significantly as troops were rebased from Germany—Liam Fox talked of a figure of up to 7,000—we now have a commitment that the total number of armed forces personnel will rise by only around 600 from the baseline at July 2011. That suggests that numbers—if the time commitments are delivered—will be just over 12,500 by 2020. That ignores the fact that Scotland has already seen disproportionate cuts in our defence footprint, which has shrunk by more than a third since 2000. By comparison, across the UK as a whole, it has reduced by about a fifth. The increase that Philip Hammond announced yesterday will serve to reverse only a small part of the reduction in the military footprint that we have seen in Scotland under successive UK Governments. Liam Fox’s announcement included the news that Scotland would become home to one of five multirole brigades, but Philip Hammond has downgraded the military commitment to Scotland. Now Scotland will be home not to one of five multirole brigades but to one of seven army hubs. We need clarity from him and from the MOD on what the roles and functions will be of the elements that will be located here. Philip Hammond also made no mention of his predecessor’s commitment to exploring the possibility of an additional training estate in Scotland, a proposal that we actively worked to support and which he has ditched. I have mentioned the overall military footprint and the impact of the announcement nationally in Scotland. However, where these changes will really impact is at the local level. Although I welcome the UK Government’s complete about-turn on the basing of the Royal Marines at RM Condor in Arbroath, around much of the country there is little else to be genuinely pleased about. Although it has finally been confirmed that Army units will be based at Leuchars to replace the RAF, the numbers, though not yet confirmed, will not reach the 1,300 that Liam Fox promised. Moreover, Liam Fox talked about an Army headquarters at Leuchars, but that was absent from Philip Hammond’s statement and questions remain about what, if anything, that will amount to. There will also be disappointment in Fife at the confirmation that no Army units will be based at the current Royal Navy facility at Caledonia in Rosyth. As for Edinburgh, we have confirmation that Dreghorn will remain but Craigiehall and at least part of Redford barracks will close; we also know that the Kirknewton site on the outskirts of Edinburgh will not be developed. The MOD must work immediately and closely with us and the City of Edinburgh Council to ensure that the situation is handled properly, including setting out again the numbers associated with the units that it has said will be based in the different locations. Similar questions arise in other areas. Clarity is needed on the partial disposal of the Army site at Forthside in Stirling with the relocation of the headquarters of 51st brigade. We have also been led to believe that there will be a further small increase in the numbers at Kinloss—although it will still not bring the Army presence there, welcome though that is, to anywhere near the previous levels of RAF personnel. I have already set out some of the unanswered questions that remain around this announcement. That so many remain is partly because of the remarkable—indeed, someone described it today as “bizarre”—fact that UK ministers have made no contact with the Scottish ministers in connection with the announcement, even though an MOD minister, Mark Francois, found time yesterday to stroll on Edinburgh castle esplanade while briefing the media. We also understand that, although local authorities have received some written communication, it does not set out the numbers associated with the Army units that have been allocated to different locations. That is a shocking omission at this stage. We also have no detail on timing and numbers in relation to changes for the other services beyond the Army. That detail is required not just by us but by local authorities, and the situation is quite frankly unacceptable. Of course, it does not need to be this way. I believe that this Parliament is more than capable of taking decisions about defence in the best interests of our people and our communities. Given the many years of draconian cuts to Scotland’s defence footprint by both Labour and Tory Governments, how can anyone disagree with that simple, democratic proposition? Scotland already contributes a great deal to defence spending and, like other nations of similar size, could afford conventional forces of its own. The Scottish National Party has made it clear that, with independence, Scottish defence forces would have 15,000 regular personnel and be supported by a £2.5 billion defence and security budget. Such a defence settlement is designed to meet Scotland’s needs and priorities. By way of comparison, I note that, in 2010, Finland spent £2.3 billion on defence and Denmark £2.8 billion. No one would seriously suggest for a minute that those countries do not take their defence seriously. In stark contrast to the UK’s approach, we would not spend money on Trident—those weapons of mass destruction on our shores, which cost Scotland £163 million each and every year. In conclusion, we will continue to support local authorities, communities and other partners, and I am writing to them to offer our on-going support. Indeed, I have just spoken to senior Army personnel to convince them that we will continue to provide that support in future. However, the UK Government must now confirm the numbers associated with each of the units that it has said will be located in different parts of the country. Alongside that, we have since September been pressing the UK Government for baseline information to enable us and local partners to understand the economic impact of the changes. We will continue to demand the immediate release of that information to allow us to work with local authorities, communities and other partners on an impact study that will help us to plan fully for, as well as to mitigate, the economic consequences of these UK Government decisions. Once again, Scotland has been let down by a UK Government and its ill-thought-through and poorly handled decisions. At least some members will remember debates when it was a Labour UK Government whose proposals—at that time on regimental amalgamation—were doing damage to Scotland’s military heritage. Labour Governments, as well as the current Westminster Government, have presided over a long-term decline in Scotland’s military footprint. Democracy is about having the ability to choose. I believe that the people of Scotland will choose to reverse that decline and vote yes in next year’s referendum.

For clarity, my statement was about the UK Government’s statement. I tried to deal with some of the complications and implications of that. [Interruption.]

Mark Griffin’s first point was about clarity. Things are starting to become quite clear. He asked questions to try to provide a human shield for the Conservative cuts that are taking place, as Jim Murphy did on the radio on this morning. As I said, things are becoming clear. The Labour Party will commit billions of pounds towards nuclear weapons rather than towards the equipment and troop numbers that our defence forces need. That is providing clarity. The member may not remember this, but in the 1980s Paul Weller said that it is the kidney machines that pay for rockets and guns. In 2013, Labour’s and the Tories’ bedroom tax will pay for nuclear bombs. That is the clarity that we are now seeing from the Labour Party. [Interruption.]

As I said in my statement, we are committed to providing £2.5 billion-worth of expenditure towards Scottish defence forces. That amount is commensurate with amounts in other countries of our size. What is the Labour Party’s commitment? Will it continue with the Conservative cuts or reverse any of them?

On Alex Johnstone’s final point, I have already set out the level of finance that the SNP would contribute towards defence, which is commensurate with that of other countries of our size. I have therefore answered that point. Alex Johnstone started off by saying that he welcomed the UK Government’s announcement. It would be interesting to listen to what squaddies are saying in barrack rooms around the country about yesterday’s announcement, as they get shuffled around Scotland from barracks to barracks. It is not just us who criticise the announcement. Newspapers that are not noted for their support for this Government almost universally talk about a betrayal of troops in Scotland. One particular leader is headed “Armed Farces”, which might give members a clue as to what that newspaper thinks about the announcement. It goes on to state about Philip Hammond’s announcement: “an extra few hundred who will play musical chairs around our barracks ... It’s hard to escape the conclusion he was simply plucking numbers out of the air to stave off the flak.” It ends by saying: “But a lie is a lie is a lie and there is no defence.” That is what other people think about the Conservative Party’s statement yesterday, so there is obviously not the same welcome for it elsewhere that Alex Johnstone would like me to have for it. I do not welcome it, because it is a betrayal of many promises that were made by his own former defence minister, Liam Fox. What we have to do now is to see how we can mitigate the impact of what has been announced on various communities across the country. The SNP Government will do that.

Rod Campbell is right to point out that the reaction to the announcement that is of most importance is that from those in our local communities who are affected by it. Nobody in Leuchars is going to be duped by what has been announced by the UK Government. I visited RAF Leuchars recently to find out about some of the issues that its personnel face and some of the transitional issues that they will face in moving from an RAF base to a largely army base. There is a lot that the Scottish Government can do to try to help that process take place, but there is no question but that there is a feeling of betrayal. I have been involved in these things for many years now, with accusations from parties on both sides of this chamber, indistinguishable as they are, that Scotland under the SNP would have a reduced number of air bases. The number of air bases has now been reduced from three to one in the space of a year, and we have a challenge to mitigate the impact of that. I am sure that we can work with the community in Rod Campbell’s constituency to ensure that we mitigate the impact as best we can. However, it would have been much better had the UK Government decision not been made.

I am sure that the public will note that in the question just asked there was not one word of condemnation of the Conservative-Liberal Government’s announcement. Far from getting it on the cheap, I think that Scotland is currently being taken very cheaply by the UK Government. We commit around £3.3 billion just now to the UK’s defence expenditure and we get in return about £2.5 billion. What could we do with that extra £800 million a year, which amounts to around £7 billion over the past 10 years? What could we do with that to mitigate things such as the bedroom tax or to improve our forces’ equipment? Alex Johnstone said earlier that the SNP does not want to commit troops to combat. We do not want to commit troops to illegal wars like Iraq, as Graeme Pearson’s party did; we want to have a Scottish defence force that is properly funded and equipped.

That is a good point. A number of military sources—think tanks and so on—say that it is unsustainable for the UK to have the number of troops that it currently has, as well as the 1 per cent increase in the equipment budget to which the Government was committed and nuclear weapons. That is just not sustainable. There is fantasy in defence policy in the UK today. In relation to Colin Keir’s area, it is bizarre that the Royal Scots are to be moved to Belfast. As it says in today’s Evening News: “Part of the strength and uniqueness of these proud and famous fighting Scots regiments came from their link with the local community.” The Royal Scots is the oldest regiment in the British Army and its traditional geographical recruiting base is Edinburgh and the Lothians. Such is the nature of the thinking behind the announcement, if there is thinking. I am sure that we could organise things far better to maintain the link between our communities and our armed forces, which is vital in a modern democracy.

It is true that I did not mention that, because it was not mentioned in the statement by the UK Government to which I was responding in my statement. If we are talking about the Royal Navy, it is worth noting that there are no combat-ready units of the Royal Navy in Scotland and that two carriers are going to be constructed with no provision for aeroplanes to go on them. There is something seriously wrong at the heart of UK defence policy. I do believe that we could cope much better with such questions in Scotland, democratically.

Yes, indeed. Much more could be made of Barry Buddon. Barry Buddon relies very much on the local marines and others undertaking training in relation to live firing and certain vehicles. It is a matter of some satisfaction that the previous proposal, which was to take the sole remaining units of Royal Marines out of Scotland, has been reversed in another about-turn. That is emblematic of the decision that has been made. There has been discussion about the UK Government making a right turn; it strikes me that this was not a right turn but an about-turn—and one that was so badly executed that had Philip Hammond done it on a parade ground he would have been marched off and given extra duties.

It might be that Duncan McNeil has been reading and believing too closely the document that Jim Wallace recently produced, which suggested that we would start with nothing on independence. That is not the case. We have a share in the UK forces, to which we have contributed over many years. Before Duncan McNeil writes that off, it is worth bearing in mind that Scotland has traditionally contributed between 10 and 14 per cent of the personnel of the UK armed forces, which is a substantial contribution. We are not starting from year zero; we start with a huge amount of experience and our share of the resources of the UK military defence establishment. What we can do is improve on that. Currently we are paying a surcharge. We pay around £700 million a year more than we get back. We could do far more if we were independent.

I share those and a number of other concerns that arise from the fact that there is so little detail on what has been proposed. It should have been the case that yesterday’s announcement was also accompanied by an announcement on reserved forces across Scotland so that we could have some idea about what impact there would be in relation to them, too. I do not understand why that did not happen. Bruce Crawford is absolutely right—there are uncertainties because we do not have the detail. We were not approached and we did not receive any correspondence from the UK Government or the responsible minister before the announcement was made. Instead, it flew in a senior member of the military today to provide some background. That, of course, is a case of Government sending in the military to do things that it finds uncomfortable. That is the wrong way to go about it, and that is why there is uncertainty in Bruce Crawford’s area, as there will be in many other parts of Scotland.

Dr Simpson’s question is based on the fallacy that Scotland will have no need for vessels, whether for its navy, coastguard or other coastal services. Of course it is the case that we will have to procure vessels—we understand that point perfectly well—but it is also the case that what is available to the UK Government is partly Scotland’s. We have a share in that; that is necessarily the case. That means that we must have a discussion with the UK Government. The discussion that we will have once Scotland is independent will be a far more rational, considered and measured that what we have seen in relation to yesterday’s announcement. As I have mentioned, carriers are being built with no provision for aircraft and billions are being spent on airplanes that are dismantled before they are completed. I am pretty sure that Scotland could do better than that.

That is the background against which the decision was taken and the statement made by the UK Government. We have seen a vast number of redundancies. We are told by the MOD that there will be 5,000 more redundancies across the UK—1,000 may perhaps come from Scotland. Of course, P45s are being delivered to troops on the front line in Afghanistan. Who would have thought that a Conservative Government would have reduced itself to that? It is absolutely the case that Scotland will lose out badly, not least because, as Stewart Stevenson has mentioned, the cuts take money out of local communities. If you reduce a base that was supposed to have 1,500 personnel to 900, you are removing a huge chunk of finance from that local community. As I said at the start of my statement, the decision will have an impact on Scotland socially and economically.

Perhaps Murdo Fraser has seen the comments of the community councils of Garbridge and nearby, which have been very concerned by the UK Government’s statement. Perhaps, like me, he has talked to the families and people in the communities. They do not welcome the statement—they think that it is a major change to Leuchars, a diminution compared with what there was before and a change from an RAF base that has served the UK very well over many years and settled effectively in Scotland. There is no broad welcome. Are all the newspapers wrong? Are all the personnel that we have talked to wrong? People realise that the UK Government’s decision is a complete betrayal of what was first announced by Liam Fox. Murdo Fraser’s attempt to hide that does him no credit at all.

There is very little information. The member may be aware—indeed, he may support the idea—that the UK Government does not engage with the Scottish Government on those issues and it does not provide the information that he is talking about. Interestingly, the process that was followed—in which the UK Government did not allow its ministers even to speak to the Scottish Government, the Welsh Government or local authorities, which means that we do not have that kind of information—is the same process that was followed for the west coast main line. There has been no contact whatsoever. The news came like a bolt out of the blue, and there is no way that we can respond to it as quickly as we would like to—nor can we do all the things that we would like to do to mitigate the effects. A statement was made, as we just heard, that the MOD would buy no vessels that were built in foreign yards. That is simply not true, and the member should check his facts before asking a question like that.

The Scottish Government currently supports three PSO air services from Glasgow to Campbeltown, Tiree and Barra. We have agreed to pilot from this summer a weekend service to Campbeltown, which will be included in the new contract for the service. We generally monitor these services in the normal course of events, but we have no further plans at this time to review the number and range of air services subject to a PSO in the Highlands and Islands.

I am, of course, willing to meet the member but I point out that our practice of not providing air services within local authority areas is exactly the same as that which was followed by the previous Administration. I have already discussed the general issue of PSOs that the member raises with the local MSP, Dr Alasdair Allan, the local MP and others and I am more than happy to discuss it with David Stewart.

I am aware of Highland Council’s endeavours in that area but have not been approached directly by it. Of course, I am more than happy to discuss these issues with the council if it wishes to make representations.

The issue is being taken forward by the Deputy First Minister and I am happy to provide the member with an update on that. We have been looking at the issue seriously, because I think that we can do a great deal of work in this area. In relation to local authority services such as that mentioned by David Stewart—and going back to a point that Margaret Burgess has just made—I must point out that the Government has neither the resources to continually backfill for the things that the Westminster Government does nor the resources to continually backfill for the things that local authorities decide that they no longer want to do. We have to live within our means. That said, I take on board John Scott’s point and will provide the information that he is looking for.

I am grateful to Dave Stewart for having gained the debate, for his comments, and for the contribution that he has made to the issue. He has made the case on the HGV speed limit on a number of occasions, as have Murdo Fraser and Dave Thompson. Fergus Ewing has also been very interested in the issue. I take on board Murdo Fraser’s point about the lack of an alternative view in this debate. Obviously, I am not here to represent the Scottish Green Party, but I think that other viewpoints must be presented. I gently take issue with my colleague Dave Thompson because he reckoned that the issue is a simple one. I do not think that it is that simple; I think that there is more to it than perhaps meets the eye. It is incumbent on Government before taking a decision such as the motion proposes to take into account the complexities and possible consequences of taking action. I agree with much of what members have said on the issue. I do not want that to be forgotten as I go through some of the points that might raise issues in the minds of others. Significant challenges face us in road safety in Scotland, as Anne McTaggart mentioned in passing. It is true that we have had the devolution of powers to the Scottish ministers to set our own national speed limits. Dave Thompson mentioned the 2008 report about which nothing had been done. However, we did not have the required powers at that time. We gained them only recently, and we now have the greater freedom that Dave Thompson and others have mentioned. In the road safety framework that we set for 2020, we set ourselves challenging national road safety targets. We still have them in Scotland, although similar targets have been dispensed with elsewhere in the UK, or at least at Westminster. Our targets were to reduce fatalities by 40 per cent and serious injuries by 55 per cent, based on a 2004 to 2008 average. It is worth saying that the latest confirmed figures for road casualties in Scotland—for 2011—show that the figures are at their lowest level since records began. It is also worth noting that two thirds of fatal and serious accidents involving HGVs are on A roads and that two thirds of accidents and three quarters of fatal accidents involving HGVs are on single carriageway roads. There is no guarantee that a speed limit increase would alleviate the problem of frustration and dangerous overtaking. It is worth bearing in mind that, if the HGV speed limit was raised, overtaking would continue but at a higher speed. It takes longer for a car to overtake an HGV travelling at 50mph than one travelling at 40mph. Members have heard mention of the Transport Research Laboratory report of 2008, which had 14 recommendations for further research. As Dave Thompson said, it also referred to the possibility of considering an experimental trial of a raised speed limit for HGVs. The suggestion was that a trial could be conducted over a three-year period on the A9 between Perth and Inverness. As I said, at the time the Scottish ministers did not have the powers to enact such a speed limit, even if they had wanted to. However, the modelling work done by the TRL on the A9 in 2009 suggests that to gain an optimum reduction in accidents we would have to install average-speed cameras and maintain the current 40mph speed limit. That is a change from the previous approach. The TRL also said that, from a road safety perspective, the best approach could be to leave speed limits as they are or even slow cars down. There is different advice even from the same organisation. National-level modelling suggests that there are economic benefits from increasing the speed limits for trucks—a number of members mentioned that—and decreasing journey times. However, TRL said that the economic benefits are likely to be at least partially offset by greater emissions. A number of members said that they reckon that emissions could be reduced, but TRL reckoned that there would be greater emissions and lower air quality. It also suggested that economic benefits would potentially outweigh the published cost of accidents. The modelling in 2009 did not examine the impact on other road users of road closures, which could be an especially significant issue on the A9 given the lack of alternative routes. I wanted to make the point that there are different points of view on the proposal.

To answer the first point, I confirm that we are keen to see the evidence from the consultation that has been undertaken elsewhere as it is obviously relevant to Scotland as well. It does not follow that we should do the same as is done elsewhere, but the evidence that has been collated will be interesting, and Transport Scotland officials are looking to get it. On the point about the pilot, I have said before in response to a point that Murdo Fraser made and separately in correspondence with Dave Thompson that we are seriously considering the matter. However, the first consideration has to be road safety. Once we get past that point, we can start to think about the costs, which Dave Stewart mentioned. One cost would arise from the establishment of average speed cameras, which we think would be essential to ensure that the change, if it was to happen, was conducted safely. In his speech, Dave Stewart asked that we seriously study the issues. We are doing that, not least in relation to a pilot on the A9. He said that the proposal would lead to a reduction in accidents but, as I said, the evidence on that is not complete. On the example that Murdo Fraser gave, it is worth bearing it in mind that the evidence from New Zealand does not show that increased speed limits led to a reduction in accidents. There was a continuation of a long-term downward trend in casualties per 100 million vehicle kilometres, but there is no evidence that a change to HGV speed limits ensured that that continued. There was a fall in the proportion of fatalities caused by HGVs from 2006. The policy was introduced in 2004, though, and fatalities increased between 2004 and 2005 and between 2005 and 2006. There was also an increase in injuries. The evidence is not conclusive, but it is something that Transport Scotland officials have looked at and they will continue to do that. We have to consider how we maintain safety if we are to increase the speed limit, but I am certainly open-minded on the proposal. The Government is considering it seriously, as we have been asked to do by the members who are present, but we have to do that in the context of considering safety. We have no plans to consider making changes to national speed limits or vehicle speed limits without established evidence. Separate from that, although we have no plans to do that generally, the issue of a pilot, specifically on the A9, is one that we are looking at very seriously. I am more than happy to confirm that we will keep members updated on the progress. 12:58 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

The first phase of the essential resurfacing works covering the northbound carriageway and footway started on 11 February and is programmed to take 17 weeks. The second phase of the works will start on 10 February 2014 and is programmed to take 20 weeks. Regular updates on progress will be publicised.

We are well past the 11th hour. As I described, the work has been on-going for a week, and the traffic chaos to which David Stewart referred has not transpired. The projections that were made and the plans that have been put in place have coped with the additional traffic. There have been delays, but we always said that that would be the case. The provision of a park-and-ride facility at the Tore site was investigated by Transport Scotland along with council officials, but it was deemed that there was insufficient evidence to show the long-term viability of such a project. That is why the suggestion was not proceeded with. The Conon Bridge station to which the member referred has been very successful. Indeed, when I opened the station a couple of weeks ago, almost the entire community turned out to see the new facility, which provides young people such as Niamh—who was one of those who attended—with the prospect of being able to travel to Dingwall for the library or to Inverness for shopping. The station is a great addition to the rail network for the people in that community. My hope is that the shift from road to rail while the Kessock bridge works are on-going will, for many people, become a permanent move, so that we can thereby increase the use of the railways and reduce congestion in future. The plans have been put in place and are working well.

Will Alex Johnstone take an intervention?

The member might be aware, although he does not seem to be, that there was a legal case against the starting of the AWPR. Can he tell us what Labour would have done differently to bring that forward?

Gavin Brown expresses his disappointment with the pace of NPD projects. How does he feel about the west coast main line project that the UK Government has tried to procure for Scotland?

What about the west coast main line?

Through £41 million of access for all investment, 17 inaccessible stations across Scotland will have been made step free by April 2014, and I have recently recommended to the Secretary of State for Transport that we increase that number to 19 by adding Gleneagles and Milliken Park stations to the programme. That dedicated investment is complemented by Scottish Government support for other projects, such as improved access at Edinburgh Waverley and the construction of seven accessible stations to serve the Borders railway. ScotRail will deliver more than £8 million of additional station improvements across Scotland for disabled passengers, such as lower ticket counters and accessible toilets, by the end of its current franchise term in March 2015. Those station investments are supported by a commitment that the ScotRail train fleet will be compliant with European vehicle accessibility standards by 2020.

For station improvements, a local group or other promoter will be required to prepare a proposal that demonstrates the anticipated benefits of the scheme and any available source of third-party funding, whether that is a regional transport partnership or, in some cases, a private developer. Once a proposal is put together, the group should then discuss that with Transport Scotland officials. More information on the process to access the Scottish stations fund is available on Transport Scotland’s website. I should say that another opportunity exists in future tranches of the access for all fund, to which stations can bid.

We have listened to representations from Kezia Dugdale and others on Waverley station, most notably in relation to access for taxis. If the member wants to write to me again to raise the issue, I will be happy to consider it once more.

The seven new stations that I mentioned will comply with modern railway accessibility standards. There will be step-free access to all platforms from the station entrances. ScotRail will implement existing arrangements whereby, for example, wheelchair users are assisted on to trains by staff deploying a boarding ramp to bridge the gap between the train and platform, where that is necessary. Rolling stock tends to be of different heights in relation to the platform. I expect that Network Rail, in constructing the new railway and stations, will have regard to the latest requirements on accessibility for all, including those who are visually impaired.

I am happy to confirm that Network Rail is progressing the plans for Dyce station. It is going through the same process as Dunblane, in my constituency, and Newton, Rosyth and Shotts stations. The work will be completed by April 2014.

Our transport vision is for an accessible Scotland with safe, integrated and reliable transport that supports sustainable economic growth. We are promoting integration between different services and modes of transport. An example of that is that the next rail franchise process will include an obligation on bidders to come forward with ways to properly integrate the different transport modes. In addition, our long-term ticketing vision is for all journeys on Scotland’s bus, rail, ferry, subway and tram networks to be accessed using some form of smart ticketing or payment. Combined with those measures, Transport Scotland provides or supports five travel information services that provide key travel information, before and during the trip, to people travelling by car, public transport or heavy goods vehicle.

I will be delighted to go to Paisley to meet Mr Adam. The purpose of our transport system is to connect people to jobs, education services, recreation opportunities and various other places. Local authorities are well placed to understand the need for bus services in their area and to work with transport operators to develop interchanges between transport services and modes, as is happening in Paisley. As part of the work that has been carried out with the bus stakeholder group, the Scottish Government is considering the use of additional investment to help with the development of local initiatives that are aimed at improving bus services and integration.

I refer Malcolm Chisholm to today’s editorial column in the Evening News, which is headed, “Leaders: ‘Trams decision is victory for common sense’”, and says: “We should also acknowledge the role of the new city council administration and the Scottish Government who have got their heads together to ensure this impasse will be overcome.” Working with the council, we have reached the right destination. That should be applauded.

As is noted in “Scottish Ferry Services: Ferries Plan (2013-2022)”, which was published on 19 December 2012, our intention is to take the work forward this year. Following publication of the ferries plan, I met Orkney Islands Council and agreed with the council that we will seek to conclude our consideration of its internal ferry services as quickly as possible.

Perhaps it will reassure Liam McArthur to know that I said to Orkney Islands Council that we will not wait on discussions with other councils to progress what we are doing with Orkney Islands Council. We must go through a proper process. Orkney Islands Council was grateful, for example, for the routes and services strategy that we used for the ferries plan and are applying to its internal ferry services. There are important considerations about financial recompense for the Government taking on some services, should that happen, but there is not and never has been an intention to delay progress unduly. We are working with council officials and councillors to ensure that we make progress as quickly as possible.

I am struggling to see the connection between that question and Liam McArthur’s. We consult hauliers as a matter of routine. We have done so in relation to the road equivalent tariff. We also have a process whereby we intend to have a unified, comprehensive system of commercial fares across the ferries network, and during the course of work in that regard we will of course talk to hauliers and those who transport livestock.

Earlier today, I announced that we have reached an agreement with the Confederation of Passenger Transport on the reimbursement and funding arrangements for the national concessionary travel scheme over the next two years. The agreement is based on independent research developed in full consultation with the CPT. It is fair, robust and financially sustainable. The reimbursement rate will reduce from 67 per cent of the adult single fare to 60 per cent next year and 58.1 per cent in 2014-15. By way of transition, I have agreed to phase in the reduction and to provide an additional £10 million in this financial year to operators who are participating in the scheme during March 2013. I believe that we have a good agreement that will secure the continuing benefits of the scheme and promote our common interest in successful and affordable bus services.

If the member believes that the scheme that we offer is so bad, she should compare it with some of the schemes—those that still exist—down south. She must acknowledge that an additional £10 million is being put in this year and an additional £5 million will be put in in future. We have one of the most generous schemes in these islands. It protects those people whom the Labour Party has said that it wants to look at. For example, Richard Simpson and Elaine Murray have talked about changing pensioners’ entitlement. We are not doing that. We are keeping the scheme completely as it is. If Sarah Boyack wants to put more money into the scheme, will she say how that squares with Johann Lamont’s demands through her cuts commission that it should be cut? Will Sarah Boyack also say how she reconciles that with her positions on other matters? We will wait to see whether the Labour Party lodges an amendment to the budget to make that happen.

Local authorities across Scotland have discretionary powers to provide local concessionary schemes. The terms and conditions of each scheme are for individual authorities to decide, taking account of local needs and circumstances. Most local authorities provide local travel concessions, but the concessions and the modes of transport involved, which include ferries, rail and taxis, differ from area to area. All councils participate in the national concessionary travel scheme for blind people, which provides free rail and ferry travel throughout Scotland for blind and partially sighted people.

The Scottish Government wants to further encourage commuters to switch to offpeak services to better spread demand and encourage greater use of the train rather than the car for leisure travel. After discussions with Transport Scotland, and successful negotiation with ScotRail, a package of fare measures has been developed to make rail a more attractive and affordable option. For example, the price of offpeak train travel will not increase for the remainder of the current franchise from 2013, provided the retail prices index remains below 3.5 per cent.

I reassure Stuart McMillan that we are looking at services, timetables and fares and, as I have said, we have already negotiated with ScotRail a freeze on fares. Major enhancements to services in Ayrshire and Inverclyde were introduced in December to improve service frequency and increase passenger options for offpeak travel, and ScotRail is reviewing all aspects of those changes, including the timetable from Wemyss Bay. I hope that that reassures Stuart McMillan and his constituents that the matter is being looked at.

The Secretary of State for Transport’s announcement yesterday on the proposed extension of high-speed rail to Manchester and Leeds is supported by analysis that suggests that £3 billion of economic benefits to Scotland will be delivered after that line is completed in 2033. That is based on figures from High Speed Two (HS2) Ltd. However, our ambition is to have a full high-speed connection that links both Glasgow and Edinburgh with London and other cities throughout the United Kingdom. Our analysis is that a full network will deliver economic benefits worth £24 billion to Scotland. The HS2 analysis also shows that other areas of Britain will benefit more from HS2 and will benefit sooner. It shows that the West Midlands and the north-west will both see more than twice the economic benefits that will be delivered to Scotland. That is why we are pressing the UK Government for joint work towards Scotland’s inclusion in a full UK high-speed rail network, and we will work with the UK Government to achieve that.

The last thing that I want to do is act as somebody who can interpret the comments of Michael Fabricant. I will leave that to others who are better qualified than I am. Kenneth Gibson makes a very good point about the benefits and the cost to Scotland. It will be interesting to see, for example, the treatment of consequentials from the expenditure that the UK Government incurs on the project. Kenneth Gibson’s other point about the benefits that will accrue is relevant when we think of previous experience. For example, everyone expected that the bulk of the benefits from the line between Madrid and Seville would accrue to Seville but, in fact, they accrued to an even greater extent to the larger and more populous capital. London and England will also benefit greatly from the high-speed link coming all the way to Scotland, and that is what we are trying to achieve.

I have already commented on consequentials, which we will bear in mind. We would, of course, much rather see a commitment from the UK Government to extending the high-speed rail link right through to Scotland, and I do not believe that the door is closed on that. Very positive statements have been made by the Prime Minister and the Secretary of State for Transport, which were perhaps not borne out by last week’s announcement. We will continue to push the UK Government. We believe that we can work with it to ensure that we get those benefits. That would be the best way to spend the money. We have shown our bona fides in the cabinet secretary’s statement that we will push ahead with the high-speed rail link from Edinburgh to Glasgow. We want the UK Government to come with us so that we can deliver a high-speed rail network that will deliver benefits to the whole of the UK.

Richard Baker mentioned the north of England, but we have said to the UK Government that we are happy to start at this end now. In constructing the Borders railway, we are not starting at one end and going to the other—we are starting at both ends and trying to push ahead as fast as possible. We are trying to work constructively with the UK Government. Although we are not content with its position so far, it certainly moves ahead of the position that the Labour Party took. It had no commitment at all to bringing the high-speed rail link to Scotland. At least we have moved on from that position, and I am confident that we can make further progress.

The matter is under consideration and we will announce our decision shortly.

Of course I am more than happy to listen to Kezia Dugdale and I certainly would not disagree with her view about the trams being very expensive. As well as listening to Kezia Dugdale, I will listen to Strathclyde Partnership for Transport, which has written to me asking, if there is concessionary travel on the trams, whether that will also apply to the tube. I will listen to Lesley Hinds, who has asked for more money for concessionary travel for both buses and trams. I will listen to the other Labour MSPs around Scotland, who have given their views on whether money should be taken away from bus concessionary schemes for the tram scheme in Edinburgh. I will listen to Johann Lamont, who has said that such schemes need to be sustainable and that there is a something-for-nothing culture in Scotland. I will listen to all those points from the Labour Party, but my difficulty will be in trying to make sense out of the contradictory, politically expedient and opportunistic nature of the representations that have been made. [Interruption.]

Marco Biagi raises a very good point. The power could be used not just in the instance that he mentioned but by SPT, which I referred to previously. The City of Edinburgh Council can of course apply a subsidy or support. In terms of Government additional support, all that I will say is that we are looking very closely at how we can maintain and improve the support that we give for bus services. Overwhelmingly, people in Scotland travel on buses. We cannot magic more money. Any money for an additional concessionary scheme, whether for trams or for any other scheme, will need to come from the pot of money that we currently use for buses. We will need to look carefully at the issue and protect the interests of people the length and breadth of Scotland who use bus services.

Obviously, snow has fallen in several areas of Scotland since Friday evening. Although some who have travelled to other parts of the United Kingdom have suffered significant inconvenience, I am pleased to say that the impact in Scotland has been limited, albeit that the impacts have varied from place to place. The north-east of Scotland and the Borders have seen significant impacts. The weather that we have experienced in Scotland has been less severe than it has been elsewhere, but the limited scale of disruption is in no small part down to the work of staff and volunteers from front-line agencies across Scotland, who have helped to keep Scotland running despite the inclement weather. However, we cannot afford to be complacent. To that end, our multi-agency response team has been active in co-ordinating the work to keep transport networks running. Partner agencies, including volunteer four-by-four users, have been working together on the ground, and the Scottish Government’s resilience arrangements have been operational ever since the Met Office announced an amber warning last week.

That is a very good point. I reassure the member that, whether we are talking about winter weather, the extraordinary winds that we had last year or volcanic ash cloud, we intend to learn from each event. We now have a national lessons database, which has been recognised in the UK and beyond as being one of the few national resilience systems that help to ensure that lessons are not just identified but learned from. We are confident in the arrangements that continue to be in place, and the Scottish multi-agency response team has been and is active in providing assistance across the network, as well as in co-ordinating information on the impact of the recent weather. Therefore, it is true to say that, this winter, we are benefiting from lessons that were learned previously, but we will continue to learn lessons from this winter as well.

That is a good point. I live in the same area as Annabelle Ewing and have the same experience as many people do of having to use minor roads before reaching trunk roads. The trunk roads have the advantage that they are used more frequently, so snow tends to get cleared from them more quickly and there is not quite the same volume of snow as there is on smaller roads. Transport Scotland has worked in partnership with the police and the Met Office to develop a severe weather information strategy to warn and inform road users when significant disruption to the road network is expected during extreme weather. The advice and information service will commence when severe weather is forecast. There has been a huge uptake of the internet radio service, which provides real-time traffic and travel information, and there are the variable message signs that we all see on the motorway network. We have a website, smartphone applications, a Twitter service and a dedicated call centre. Also, commercial and other radio stations broadcast the latest information. We are making that information available in as many formats as possible to ensure the maximum information is out and among motorists.

I have mentioned a number of the actions that are being taken, but the member is right to say that there has been an emphasis on the north-east—not unusually. The trunk road network has coped very well, although there is the issue of snow drifting from fields across the carriageway, which has also been the case on some of the minor roads. It is probably true to say that the north-east has had more local road closures than any other part of Scotland. Again, that is not unusual, but it has implications, for example for schools. In Aberdeenshire, around 45 per cent of schools are closed, which is far more than any other area of Scotland. The same rules apply. We do as much as we can. We also offer support to local authorities through the provisions that we have on the trunk road network. If a further resource is required that could help there, we are willing to provide it. I am grateful to the various agencies in Grampian and throughout the north-east, which have coped very well in difficult circumstances.

It is a matter of logic that when there is disruption at an airport, and at Heathrow in particular, it is the short-haul passengers who suffer first because their flights are easier to cancel, to put it bluntly, than long-haul flights. We have tried to work with the authorities down south and with airports in Scotland to ensure that we can make the system as resilient as possible. Heathrow has benefited from actions that have been taken previously by Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Glasgow airports to invest in things that keep the airports and their runways open. There has been a particular issue at Heathrow, which suffers from not having the capacity to absorb longer timescales for flights coming in and out. That has been an issue for Scottish users. However, I assure the member that we will keep in touch on the issue and try to ensure that the interests of those travelling to or from Scotland through Heathrow are looked after.

Since 2011, we have invested over £4 million in Mid Scotland and Fife for cycling and walking infrastructure projects, including the cycling, walking and safer streets grant and Sustrans capital funding. I am happy to write to Ms Baxter with further detail on the issue, including our investment in other measures such as those delivered by Cycling Scotland.

I am happy to look into the matter, but I have to say that we are content with the process. We make direct grants to Cycling Scotland and local authorities can bid for that money. In addition to the moneys that I have already mentioned, we have made available £759,000 that local authorities can bid for as match funding to work in partnership with Sustrans, whose capital budget for the next two years is in the region of £10 million. As I have said, a process has been put in place. I am not aware of any issues in the rest of Scotland with accessing that money, but I am happy to listen to the member’s comments.

Many movements can be and indeed are being made on the cycling infrastructure in the kingdom of Fife. Fife’s cycle path network provides more than 300 miles of signposted cycle routes, with eight different signed routes in the Howe of Fife and north-east Fife that are primarily for leisure but which can also be used for commuting. More specifically, through working in partnership with Sustrans with Scottish Government funding, Fife Council has already delivered the new community link from Tayport to Newport-on-Tay cycleway and a further project is planned to improve the St Andrews cycle network in the town centre. I have a number of other examples of things that can be and have been done and am happy to provide the member with that detail.

The Forth replacement crossing project remains on time and on budget. Following the successful completion of the Fife intelligent transport system contract, which went live on 4 December 2012, we expect the junction 1A contract to be completed within the next month. Following the good work that was done on the foundations last year, this year we will see the towers of the bridge and the approach viaduct piers begin to emerge from the Firth of Forth.

As the member will know, the naming process for the new bridge was launched on 27 November and, to date, we have received more than 4,000 different suggestions. We encourage everybody who has a suggestion to submit it via the namethebridge.co.uk website by 31 January, so that it can be considered by the naming committee. In addition, when providing a name or comment on the website, pupils, parents and teachers from Scottish schools can enter their school in a special prize draw for the chance to win a visit to the construction site and attend the bridge opening ceremony as VIP guests of Transport Scotland.

The A9 safety group, which is chaired by Transport Scotland, last met on 4 October 2012 and discussed a number of issues, including speed limits for heavy goods vehicles on single carriageway sections of the A9 trunk road.

I am looking seriously at the issue. Murdo Fraser has raised in the past, and raises again today, the issue of safety, which must be the primary consideration when looking at this proposal, which has come from not just Mr Fraser, but a number of members. Fergus Ewing, Dave Thompson, Dave Stewart and Iain Gray have expressed interest in the issue, as have the Road Haulage Association and hauliers. The only predictive evidence that we have so far suggests that the measure might have a marginal disbenefit in safety terms. However, that is the case if the measure is carried out on its own; there may be things that could be done to ameliorate that effect. We will continue to look at that in the research and, at the same time, we will continue our dialogue with the RHA and hauliers.

Amey, the trunk road operating company, is responsible for the A75 and the A76 and carries out regular inspections to ensure that road markings remain in good order, in accordance with its contract. Amey maintains and renews road markings and reflective studs routinely on the A75 and A76. During this financial year, approximately £150,000 has been spent and further works are expected; next year we anticipate spend of £250,000. This year, we are investing £3.75 million in road lining across Scotland, including an additional £1 million from our strategic road safety budget specifically to tackle the condition of our white road lines.

I have the commitment to road safety that the member mentions. It is worth pointing out that the other things that we do in relation to road safety have led to the lowest ever recorded levels of casualties and, in particular, fatalities on our roads. The member makes an important point, though. If he is aware of a specific incident, I ask him to contact me and I will get in touch with the performance action group, which independently assesses what the trunk road operating company does and takes further action on it. I am happy to assure the member that more money is being spent in that area.

I am grateful for the opportunity to make a statement setting out the Scottish Government’s on-going commitment to ferry services serving our island and remote rural communities, focusing in particular on the NorthLink services and the possible disruption to those services over the festive season. I am sure that members, particularly the local members who have quite legitimately raised these issues in the chamber and elsewhere, will share my hope that the employer and trade unions involved can work together to avoid the proposed industrial action. I hope that it will be helpful to members if I set out the background to the proposed industrial action and what is being done to try to avert it. Scotland’s ferry services make a significant contribution to the social, cultural and economic wellbeing of our nation. Since 2007, the Government has allocated record sums of money to the ferry services in Scotland. In 2011-12, our support for ferry services totalled £118 million, including spending of £46 million on the northern isles ferry services—and that was as fuel prices continued to rise. Earlier this year, we concluded our latest procurement exercise and secured a new six-year contract for ferry services to the northern isles. As members will be aware, tendering for our supported ferry services is a requirement under European law—indeed, under previous Administrations those services were also tendered. When we have to tender public services, we have an obligation to do so efficiently and effectively and to work within the current rules. That is the best means of ensuring the continuation of high-quality, sustainable ferry services, as well as ensuring best value for public money. Following a lengthy tender process, we were delighted to have attracted four final bids from long-established and experienced maritime service providers—clear evidence of the strength of the procurement exercise. Even an initial challenge from one of the unsuccessful bidders only served to confirm the robust, transparent and fair manner in which the northern isles tender had been carried out. Serco, which now operates on the northern isles routes as Serco NorthLink Ferries, emerged from the tender exercise as the successful bidder. The new contract commenced as planned on 5 July, after a well-managed handover period. The total value of the new northern isles contract represents a Scottish Government investment of more than £243 million over six years. Building on the good work of the previous operator, NorthLink Ferries Ltd, we have been able to secure commitments from Serco to take the northern isles ferry services forward. Passengers will see improvements to the journey experience, with improved ticketing arrangements and improved catering, hospitality and customer care facilities. Following the announcement of Serco’s success in the tender, there were those who were concerned about a new operator running the services. I received representations from the trade unions about the position of their members. However, the contract that we put in place with Serco ensured the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations transfer of all those employees who wished to transfer, with their terms and conditions intact. Almost six months on from the start of the new northern isles contract, passengers and business customers have continued to experience good-quality ferry services, with more improvements to come. The same vessels serve the same routes and the Serco NorthLink staff continue to provide an outstanding service on board and onshore. The on-board facilities are excellent as well and the planned refurbishment of the vessels is now nearing completion, providing more—and more comfortable—seating for passengers who are travelling on the overnight route. Members will be aware, however, that in October the National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers balloted its members among the northern isles crew on strike action over Serco’s planned revision of staffing arrangements. Following a ballot on 7 December, the RMT announced dates for a series of 24-hour strikes. The first day of strike action is due to take place tomorrow, 14 December, with further industrial action on five other days over the next couple of weeks, with the final day of action being 30 December. Members will be aware that the dispute centres around Serco’s plans to reduce staffing levels. In recent years, the three passenger and vehicle vessels that are used on the northern isles routes have been operating at staffing levels that are higher than is required for a large percentage of the year. A number of bidders for the contract, including Serco, indicated during the bidding process that they planned to reduce the permanent staffing complement to a more appropriate level, in line with industry standards. Following a period of consultation with staff and trade unions, it has been possible to put in place a process for moving to the new arrangement in a way that means that there will be no compulsory redundancies. Agreement was reached with unions on the terms under which a number of staff have opted for voluntary redundancy. In the current financial climate, I believe that it is entirely appropriate that we require major public contracts to be operated efficiently and cost effectively. Ensuring value for money for the public purse is a responsibility that the Government takes seriously. That said, it is entirely right that full account is taken of the interests of hard-working staff on our ferry services. Serco NorthLink, along with other ferry operators on our networks, has been able to offer favourable terms and conditions to its staff. It has committed to accepting the terms of a three-year pay deal that was made last year with the previous operator. That deal saw all seafaring staff receive a 4.25 per cent pay rise this year, nearly double the rate of inflation. The resolution of the current dispute is rightly a matter for the RMT union and the ferry operator Serco NorthLink, and I expect both parties to work in partnership to do all that they can to avoid disruption. I have spoken to both parties in an effort to facilitate constructive engagement, and yesterday I discussed the matter with the Scottish Trades Union Congress. Even at this late stage, I urge the RMT and Serco to make every effort to find a solution with a view to minimising the disruption that will be caused by any industrial action, and I am aware that talks are continuing. However, if that should prove not to be possible, Serco has put in place comprehensive contingency arrangements, which include an agreement with another ferry operator to ensure that all Serco’s customers can still travel across the Pentland Firth on any days that are affected by strike action. Serco has also ensured that there will be proactive engagement with passengers who are booked on the Aberdeen-Orkney-Shetland service to help them to reschedule their travel plans, and it has prepared a revised freight schedule that covers the planned strike period. Serco has engaged extensively with all freight and haulage customers, particularly those who are transporting time-sensitive goods, which is an issue that local members have rightly raised. Serco has provided assurances to my officials that the revised freight schedule will fully address the likely demand and meet customers’ needs. It is worth noting that, under the Serco contract, the northern isles are served—in addition to the three passenger and vehicle vessels—by an additional two freight-only vessels. Those freighters are unaffected by the dispute and will continue to operate as normal even if the action goes ahead. At this time of year, the northern isles services are, of course, vulnerable to particularly bad weather. There is a yellow weather warning out for tomorrow, 14 December, which may impact on the northern isles services. NorthLink has been advising customers of the possibility of disruption for that reason. I will say a few words about the context in which I am making my statement. Ferries are an essential part of Scotland’s transport network. The quality of our ferry services impacts on us all and affects island and mainland communities. The Government is fully committed to delivering high-quality sustainable ferry services to our communities, which will stimulate social and economic growth throughout Scotland. In recognition of that, we have carried out the first ever comprehensive review of ferry services in Scotland, the results of which will be published shortly. The ferries plan will provide communities with an update on the progress that we have made in taking forward issues around the level and type of ferry services that communities should receive; who is responsible for providing those services; and how we ensure that all communities can be certain about the future of their ferry service. The ferries plan will include details of the conclusions that we have reached on how we will improve and strengthen the ferry services that are provided to communities. However, that will be only the beginning of the process, and we will continue to review our approach to providing ferry services and continue to reassess the needs of our communities. With regard to the current situation with the northern isles services, it is disappointing that strike action is still possible, particularly given the RMT’s successful campaigning for no compulsory redundancies, which is the issue on which the union balloted its members. I have previously spoken to Serco and to the RMT, and I spoke to the RMT again today. I again urge both parties to find a resolution to the dispute to avoid disruption to the services, particularly given that the proposed strike dates are in the run-up to and during the holiday period.

Some of those statements belong in the realm of fantasy, to be perfectly honest, including the idea that the procurement exercise was “shambolic”, given that the previous procurement exercise for NorthLink Ferries had to be abandoned shortly after its conclusion. As Richard Baker knows, the recent procurement exercise was challenged in the courts and found to have been robust. Richard Baker’s accusation about misleading Parliament is a very serious one. I fully stand by my previous statement to Parliament that I did not see the price of the bid to which he referred, because it did not get to the final stage, as it did not satisfy the criteria. On Richard Baker’s points about what we can do regarding the two parties to the dispute, it is, quite rightly, my role to speak to the parties and to encourage further dialogue. There was a period during the past week when that dialogue was not taking place. I spoke to both parties, and that dialogue has now resumed. It is for those parties to resolve their differences. I recognise the interest of the local communities and local members in ensuring that the dialogue goes on, but it is right that it is for the parties to the dispute to resolve their differences. If Serco’s proposals, which are similar to ones that the previous operator considered, go ahead, they will result in increased employment in local communities. As I said in my statement, it was a mark of the achievement of both Serco and the RMT that they managed to get to a conclusion in which there were no compulsory redundancies. I hope that that constructive process will continue and that we can still avoid the action that is proposed for tomorrow.

I think that what I said in my statement regarding the process of voluntary redundancies and the fact that we have avoided compulsory redundancies addressed many of the points in Mary Scanlon’s question. [Interruption.] I did not catch the last point that she made, but many of her other points have been addressed. It is true to say that the current dispute is between the two parties involved and that they must resolve it. Mary Scanlon talked about the impact on local communities, but I have made that point to both parties in the dispute, and they have recognised it. We will continue to speak to the parties. As I said, I spoke in the past couple of hours to the RMT about the issue and I am seized of its importance. However, it is the two parties who will have to come to a conclusion on the matter. It is worth the RMT side considering that it has achieved a great deal by avoiding compulsory redundancies. I am told by the Serco side that there is further room for discussion and negotiation in that regard. As I said, discussions are going on—perhaps even now—and it is still my hope that we will get a successful conclusion from them.

Yes. Both parties have my contact details and I will, of course, play any part that I can to help avoid the dispute continuing.

Yes, of course. I think that the ferry services are important and that the improved quality of service since the handover will continue. I cannot prevent industrial disputes, but I can try to facilitate their resolution. I have tried to do that for the current dispute and I will continue to do so.

I am aware of those points. It is to Serco’s credit that it has done as much as it can—I think that both local members have been briefed by Serco on that—to try to mitigate any effects. That is something that the company has given serious attention to. If there are further measures that the member believes can usefully be taken, I will be happy to take that up and broker that with Serco. However, I believe that it has done the right thing in what it has done so far to try to mitigate any effects. That might well have been beneficial in any event, even if there was no industrial action, given the bad weather that has been predicted for tomorrow. As I said, however, if there are further things that can be done, I am happy to discuss them with the member.

Yes. That is a good point, and one that I tried to address earlier. I am pleased that, following the period of consultation with staff and trade unions, it has been possible to put in place a process for moving to the new arrangement in a way that means that there will be no compulsory redundancies. As I said, that demonstrates common sense and good will on both sides. I entirely agree that it is a welcome development that Serco is now recruiting locally. I understand that the staffing changes will have an immediate positive impact locally in both Orkney and Shetland as Serco sets about recruiting both a seasonal and a temporary labour pool that can be used to provide core crew succession planning opportunities in the future.

As the member will know, it has long been recognised that there are strong seasonal variations in demand for the services. On many winter sailings across the Pentland Firth, passenger numbers are very low. Serco’s decision to reduce the number of off-peak sailings was based on a detailed analysis of demand and it carried out good local consultation before the decision was made. The change in shift patterns that Serco is introducing will allow the vessels to sail safely and efficiently according to the anticipated passenger complement. It is worth noting that Serco was not the only bidder that recognised the need to introduce variable passenger muster lists, which are really an industry standard and are more in keeping with the position of most other ferry operators.

On Jamie McGrigor’s last point, I have already mentioned that provisions have been put in place as a result of discussions between Serco NorthLink and another operator to ensure that passengers can be served where that is possible. The arrangement has been made by the two operators. It is perfectly possible that other people will blame me for this. That is one of the things that I have to accept. All that I will say is that I believe that the right role for the Government to play is to ensure that the two parties keep on talking, especially when it seems that they are not talking, and to try to encourage both parties to understand the impact on local communities of what is happening. I have done that and I will continue to do it. That is the right role for the Government in the process.

As I have said, many of the changes that are being made by Serco were proposed by other bidders; in fact, some of them had already been—if you like—signed up to by the previous operator and the workforce, and that process has continued. I therefore do not think that this has happened because of the contract. There is no doubt that there are questions whether there was overcapacity on the routes that are being served; indeed, almost everyone seems to acknowledge that there was overcapacity in some respects and that the issue had to be addressed. As I said in response to Jamie McGrigor, it is right that we encourage the parties not to do this. I very much regret the loss that Tavish Scott’s constituents might incur and, again, my response is that we continue to encourage both parties to take action to avoid the strike action, even though it might not now avoid the expense that has been incurred by the family the member has mentioned.

The member makes a fair point that I think underlines Tavish Scott’s comments. The timing of the proposed strike action is extremely unfortunate and is another reason why I have urged both parties to continue the constructive dialogue that I understand is now taking place and to resolve their dispute. If we can achieve that—and I still hope that it can be achieved—others will be prevented from being inconvenienced in the period leading up to the festive holidays.

I answered the member’s question on the management of the process for awarding the contract when I responded to Richard Baker. I remain convinced that the process was robust and stand by it. Richard Baker also suggested that this was privatisation. It would be useful to know the Labour Party’s definition of privatisation, given that it went through exactly the same process for tendering these services that we did, which we have to go through under European law and the result of which we have to abide by. Is the Labour Party saying that it would have overturned the decision at the end of the bidding process and awarded the contract to someone else? It is a fatuous argument from the Labour Party, which should really be focusing on the implications of the current dispute for local people instead of going back to issues that are largely irrelevant to the dispute.

As I have said, I am disappointed rather than surprised in the decision to continue with the strike action, not least given the movement that I understand the employer has made to meet certain continuing concerns. For example, I understand that Serco has made a commitment that staff’s terms and conditions will not be revisited in the forthcoming period. I hope that the RMT will take on board such reassurances to reach a positive conclusion with Serco and thereby avoid tomorrow’s action.

I am grateful for the opportunity to make a further statement on the future of rail franchising in Scotland. Members might recall my statement in October following the west coast mainline franchise debacle. In that statement, I mentioned that the Secretary of State for Transport had initiated both the Laidlaw inquiry to look into the course of events at the Department for Transport that led to technical flaws and ultimately the termination of the process, and the Brown review to look in detail at the implications for the remainder of the rail franchising programme and, in particular, whether changes might be needed to the assessment of risk and to the bidding and evaluation processes. The Laidlaw inquiry reported today. I received a call this morning from Simon Burns MP, Under-Secretary of State for Transport, and was provided with a copy of the report at 11.40 am. The inquiry’s findings make it clear that there was inadequate planning and preparation, a complex organisational structure and a weak governance and quality assurance framework. I expect that in light of the report the DFT will want to revise its internal structure and processes. We in Scotland are clearly in a better place, but we are not complacent and are reviewing the findings to glean where we can make improvements. The Brown review is expected to report at the end of the year and I await its conclusions with interest. Should its findings give us cause to change our procedures, changes will be made. It is obviously imperative that we absorb any lessons that are learned. Speaking of lessons learned, I feel a sense of frustration in having to advise Parliament that, yet again, the United Kingdom Government offered no discussion about or notice of its proposals regarding the west coast mainline franchise. That is a ridiculous state of affairs when we are talking about a key service that directly affects millions of travellers to and from Scotland. I understand that the deal struck between the UK Government and Virgin Rail Group is for a new franchise agreement to run for up to 23 months from 9 December 2012—this coming Sunday—to 9 November 2014, after which the west coast main line will be let under a longer-term franchise. It is reassuring that the previously planned timetable improvements from 10 December, which will at long last deliver regular hourly services between Glasgow and London, are to proceed. However, I await details from the UK Government about any benefits that it has managed to secure for Scotland as a result of the new agreement. In this statement, I intend to set out three things: first, the procurement programme for Scotland’s rail franchises; secondly, the date on which the existing franchise will terminate; and lastly, some proposed benefits of the future franchise that I will now bring forward to the current franchise. As members will be aware, there will be two rail franchises: a 10-year ScotRail franchise with the option of a break after five years; and a separate sleeper franchise for up to 15 years. Although each future franchise is an exciting proposition, I, like many others, recognise that they are distinctly different; that they serve different requirements; that they deliver different outcomes; and that they will be of interest to different bidders. Accordingly, they will need to be evaluated against criteria that are specific to each. For those reasons, I have decided to run not a combined procurement exercise but two quite separate exercises to allow me to secure the best outcomes for each franchise. As well as running two exercises, I want to ensure that we do not overstretch either ourselves or bidders and I therefore intend to phase the procurement of the franchises to allow a smoothing of the peaks of the procurement tasks. That might be another lesson learned from the DFT situation. As a consequence, I intend to commence the procurement programme for the sleeper franchise in the spring of 2013 to allow sufficient time for any outcomes of the Brown review to be incorporated, if necessary. The ScotRail procurement will follow in the summer. Although there is real benefit in the focus of having a separate sleeper franchise, the proof of the proposition will be seen in the quality of the bids received. Prudently, therefore, the timing of our procurement schedule would allow the sleeper franchise to be reincorporated into the ScotRail franchise if we were not satisfied with the quality of bids received. I should say that we have already received a very high level of interest. I hope that members will note that I am seeking to manage risks through a measured, careful approach. That is particularly important when we note that the sleeper franchise is likely to be a contract in excess of £200 million. That is a sizeable sum, but it is dwarfed by a 10-year ScotRail franchise that may be in excess of £2.5 billion. That is the biggest procurement project that the Scottish Government will enter into. Such sums necessitate a cautious, prudent approach. We will not be rushed; we will not be hasty. There will be no risky short cuts to franchising in Scotland: our approach must be measured. On 4 October I advised members that I would not countenance compromising the procurement programme. I was clear that it would take at least 20 months to deliver the programme. Inevitably, starting the procurement exercise in the summer of 2013 for the refranchising of ScotRail has implications for the length of the current franchise. However, the current franchise contract gives me, as minister, discretion to decide the end date of the current franchise within the range of 9 November 2014 to 30 May 2015. ?Accordingly, I have been considering what the best contract end date would be for Scotland’s rail passengers and for the rail staff affected by the change. ?I have looked for a date that will strike a sensible balance; that allows us to maintain our prudent procurement programme while providing a suitable period to take full account of emerging views from the Brown review; and that allows us to conduct a handover at a time that will not cause undue disturbance to passengers or staff. I have therefore decided that it will be sensible to plan for the franchise handover at the end of the 2014-15 financial year on 31 March 2015. I turn briefly to service specifications. I will be in a position to share more details on the precise specification of the future franchises next year. However, I am keen to ensure that service benefits are realised at an early opportunity. I am pleased to announce a number of benefits; I had intended to deliver them in the next franchise, but they will now commence in the current franchise. That underlines this Government’s commitment to a passenger-focused railway. I want to ensure that the rail service is an attractive, affordable option. I am pleased to advise that I have successfully negotiated an early fares cap with First ScotRail. I confirm that peak fares will be capped in January 2014 and 2015 to the retail prices index, which will deliver benefits two years earlier at no additional cost to the franchise subsidy. I want to encourage greater off-peak rail use. I want attractive fares that will encourage commuters, when they can, to switch to off-peak services and better spread the demands on our rail services. I want greater use of the train, rather than the car, for leisure travel. Successful negotiations with First ScotRail have resulted in off-peak fares being frozen after 2013. Provided that the RPI remains below 3.5 per cent each year for the remainder of the franchise, off-peak fares will not increase by a single penny after 2013. Those benefits will be delivered at no extra cost to the subsidy. I realise that for many travellers improved services are as important as lower fares. In 2014, there will be, for example, more frequent services between Glasgow and Ayr, improved services to Oban, additional Sunday services between Aberdeen and the central belt, and improved commuter services serving Aberdeen. I am also in a position to advise today that advance works for Stirling-Alloa-Dunblane electrification have been approved. We are working with Network Rail to prioritise delivery of that project within its 2014 to 2019 programme. I have set out our measured approach to procurement, outlined the process timetable, confirmed the date of the handover from the existing franchise, and provided details of some early benefits. I hope that Parliament notes that although we are ambitious for the future of our rail service, we are cautious in the management of its realisation. Good management is what taxpayers, passengers and those who operate our railways expect of a responsible Government. That is what we intend to deliver.

First, I cannot be held responsible for what appears in the columns of newspapers. I made the statement first of all to Parliament before making it to anyone else. I think that that is the right way to go about things. The terms of the five-year break will be the subject of discussions with the potential bidders. However, we have made that decision already; we have said that we will do that. I concede that there is some information to go with that about exactly what will happen and what the context will be in relation to, for example, the rights of partners on either side to break the agreement. That will become more evident when we go into the franchise detail in the coming months. We do not intend to consult specifically on that matter, other than in the discussions that we will have with potential bidders. We have never dropped the Stirling-Alloa-Dunblane works or other parts of EGIP. We have always said that those will continue in future phases. What has been announced today concerns the advance works that are required, and which are on-going in any event, such as vegetation clearance and—not that I want to be parochial—two bridge heightenings that are taking place in my area. All I am saying is that Network Rail, in discussion with the Scottish Government, has agreed that all those advance works will proceed. Some parts of EGIP will proceed in the first phase, and some will proceed subsequently. Elaine Murray mentioned additional services. I take on board her points. We will make more details available once we get into the greater specification of the franchises. The issue of additional services in particular parts of Scotland can be covered at that stage.

Alex Johnstone could really have picked a better day to ask for a pronouncement that the franchising system has been vindicated. I do not know whether Mr Johnstone saw any of the debate at Westminster earlier, but the criticisms that have been levelled at the UK Government, the DFT and the franchising process itself have never been more pronounced. It is perhaps not the day to say that the process has been vindicated. Alex Johnstone might be aware that I, the cabinet secretary and, previously, Alex Neil have written to UK ministers to say that we believe that the franchising process is one of the most expensive and drawn-out ways of procuring rail services. We have asked for greater discretion to decide our own way forward with regard to how we procure rail services, but we have been refused that discretion. That can come only through constitutional change or a change of mind on the part of the UK Government; that is nowhere in prospect, given that the UK Government has made clear that it wants to try to mend and continue with the franchising process. Mr Johnstone’s first point was about uncertainties. It is worth pointing out that the uncertainties are not all gone. We do not know what the Brown review will come up with. This morning, I had a very frustrating phone call with the under-secretary of state in which I said that we are trying to proceed with the franchise process at the same time as the UK Government is reviewing the whole basis of franchising. The fact that it is doing that without even giving us the courtesy of a call to tell us what was in the report makes the situation very difficult. However, we have taken on board everything that has been evidenced so far in the Laidlaw inquiry and everything that we know about the problems at the DFT to ensure that we meet any challenges that arise. In relation to the Clyde and Hebrides contract, there may well be deep water and we do not expect plain sailing. Nevertheless, we are confident that we can negotiate those waters carefully. We have done that so far in relation to the Clyde and Hebrides services and we will continue to do so. Alex Johnstone’s final point was on the Edinburgh to Glasgow line. The improvements that are expected are a different set of propositions from the amount of money that we are spending on the line. There seems to be a great focus within both Opposition parties on the fact that we should spend more on it. We have said that 80 per cent of what we propose can be delivered for that price, with the rest of it following either in phase 1, or even quicker if that is thought possible in our discussions with Network Rail. It is perhaps best to focus on the massive improvements and the massive investment of £650 million that we will put into improving services not just between Edinburgh and Glasgow, but in associated areas. I think that we have a pretty good track record to build on.

I will be as brief as I can, but there are a number of points to make. We are not pursuing the high-risk long franchise with a complex gross domestic product adjustment that was at the centre of some of the problems that the DFT encountered. We have announced a 10-year franchise with the break option that I mentioned, which provides the opportunity to de-risk the franchise for ourselves and for the parties that bid for it. Crucially, we are allowing 28 months for the franchise process. We have also set up a dedicated commercial unit—something that did not happen down south—and ministers are fully engaged in the key policy and programme decisions. Those things give us more reassurance about our process than we had about what happened down south.

We are willing to engage with the trade unions and have done so regularly. I met them this week. As I have said before, within the current constraints that Westminster lays down for franchising, it is possible for a not-for-profit option to come forward. We cannot create that ourselves; other people must bring that forward. However, we will engage with the trade unions and others on such issues.

As I have said before, a vital part of the next franchise process will be an obligation on bidders to demonstrate links between, for example, bus and rail. Initiatives such as plusbus, rail and sail and smart, integrated ticketing will be central to the next franchise. Some bidders may provide bus services as well as rail services, but some may not. That is why there is an obligation on all those who bid to come forward with ways to properly integrate the different transport modes.

Once again, we are responding to a very late announcement, which in this case concerns possible direct services to Stirling. Nothing could have been done about it in advance of 2014 in any event. The advance works for the electrification of the Stirling-Alloa-Dunblane line are continuing and we have said that the next phase will be delivered in whole between 2014 and 2019. We will keep an eye on any opportunities that arise—such as the one that the member has mentioned, as described in the press today—for direct services to Stirling. The advance work is going on anyway and no time is being lost in relation to that. We will consider the Virgin announcement. The electrification was, in any event, due to be delivered between 2014 and 2019.

I have a great deal of sympathy with the points that Dave Thompson makes. Bidders for the next franchise will be asked to demonstrate how they will improve the comfort and the suitability of longer-distance trains over the life of the franchise.

I can confirm that the provision of £100 million of funding—£50 million from the UK Government and £50 million from the Scottish Government—for the sleeper services has been agreed; that was confirmed some time ago. The initial offer of £50 million included a condition that it was to be spent within a period of five or six months, which was never really credible in the context of the replacement of rolling stock. We have an agreement with the Treasury that that money can be spent over a period of time. In the “Rail 2014” consultation, we did not consult specifically on ending the sleeper service. We always said that we saw a real opportunity to increase patronage levels on it. Our work has been about expanding rail services, which we are demonstrating through today’s announcement.

As the member will be aware, ScotRail has a number of initiatives in that regard, which include the provision of driver training that seeks to improve emissions levels. For example, since the start of the current franchise, ScotRail has been required to operate a driver simulator facility, and an eco driving module has subsequently been implemented. All drivers are assessed on an annual basis. It is difficult to isolate the scheme’s benefits, because it is coupled with other interventions such as coasting boards, but fuel savings of more than 2.5 per cent—the target that ScotRail set—have been identified. The new franchise will include a requirement to monitor and target carbon reduction, which will contribute to meeting the requirements of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009.

I reiterate that the ability to deal with a number of anomalies in the fare structure will be much greater in the new franchise. At the moment, to address anomalies, we have to buy out the relevant part of the existing franchise, which was signed up to in 2004. That is more expensive and complicated than the approach that we intend to take. We want to remove all the anomalies in the new franchise, but work is under way to see what we can do during the current franchise with the arrangements and obligations that we inherited from previous Administrations.

The new franchise will not preclude such improvements, as I mentioned in response to Elaine Murray. In the next few months, we will provide greater specification of what we expect to see in the franchise. The Brown review that has been announced at Westminster might propose greater separation of the specification and the evaluation of franchises, or even an organisational split. We must be aware that things could change as a result of that review, but there is no reason why we cannot look at improving services. As the member knows, we have announced as part of the new franchise a £30 million fund for new or improved stations. The prospect for growing the railway and increasing patronage is substantial.

As Dave Stewart knows, it is true to say that we have inherited in the rail network—and the road network—decades of underinvestment in transport infrastructure. We are trying to remedy that as best we can by improving journey times and improving the infrastructure. We are doing that at the same time as providing a new railway service to the Borders and many of the improvements that I have mentioned, such as EGIP and—potentially—a high-speed rail line between Edinburgh and Glasgow. Doing everything at once is not possible, but we are well aware of the pressing need to do more on the Highland line. I have already responded to some of the points that the member has raised. We intend to improve journey times to the Highlands. Of course, more work on major infrastructure will require more funding, which can be committed only when it becomes available.

I do not recognise the service reduction to which John Scott refers. The changes that we are making to Glasgow to Ayr services are providing a huge number of new seats and new services. What has been announced today, as part of the discussions that we have had with ScotRail about the franchise’s timing, is a further increase—two further services. I am happy to write to the member with all the details of the services as they will stand after the agreement takes effect.

On 28 November 2012, I announced that Scotland TranServ had been awarded the trunk road maintenance contract for the south-west unit. The commencement of service is 1 April 2013.

The formal contract is in place. It is not subject to a legal challenge that could prevent it from going ahead. The suspension has been lifted by the court, so the contract will go ahead. An action to seek compensation may still be taken by one of the bidders, but that will not prevent the contract from going ahead. I can give the assurance that the contract will go ahead. The current provider of those services is bound by contract to provide them right through until April next year, so there should be no threat to the local businesses that Alex Fergusson mentioned.

A great deal of support has been provided and a great deal of joint working has been done to ensure that we have the salt stocks that we require. The Government holds strategic salt reserves in case any council or other body gets into difficulties with stock. Along with councils, we currently hold in stock more salt than we used during the entire winter two years ago, which was an extremely severe winter. Beyond that, regular discussions take place with local authorities and others. A lot of joint working is being done with councils through various processes such as the road maintenance review, and the discussions that have taken place have led to commitments to increase joint working in the future. Therefore, I am confident that the work that is being done will mean that each of the organisations that looks after different parts of the road network—whether we are talking about the local authorities that look after local roads or the trunk road operators that look after the trunk roads—is well placed to cope with what we expect to happen over the winter.

The strategic transport projects review recommended a programme of active management and targeted individual investments on the A1, A7 and A68 to maintain and safely operate the routes. Since 2007, we have completed the A68 Dalkeith bypass and major improvements on the A7 at Auchenrivock. Our trunk road programme contains further planned major improvements for the A68 at Pathhead and Soutra. We have also invested around £30 million since 2007 on maintenance and road safety activities across the three routes. We estimate that, in 2013-14, we will spend up to a further £4 million.

I have already explained the improvements that have taken place, and that about another £4 million is to be spent in 2013-14. In addition, the STPR identified the best solution for the routes as being that we actively manage their safety. Of course, there are demands for upgrading roads. The A1, A7 and A68 were not upgraded under previous Administrations; perhaps that bears some examination. The amount of maintenance that we carry out is commensurate with safety needs. To make further improvements and to implement further projects would, of course, have substantial capital implications. Perhaps, in that context, John Lamont should reflect on the fact that he supported £500 million being spent on the trams project rather than on those projects, and that he therefore bears some responsibility for the capital situation that we are in.

As was stated when the announcement on the Borders railway was made, we expect that the Borders railway will take some traffic off the roads and have significant environmental and safety benefits. As Christine Grahame knows—because she was at the launch—the Borders railway project is hugely supported in the Borders. I very much look forward to the day when the trains start to run on that route and to the benefits that it will bring in terms of congestion and the amount of traffic on the roads.

I am trying to recall whether Jim Hume made that suggestion when the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition was in power here at Holyrood or whether his conversion to it is just recent. He and his party have talked about increasing centralisation. Why would we want to take control of the roads that are properly in the control of local authorities? The A7 is a local authority road. Of course we have an interest in its safety and will continue to discuss that with the council. However, the trunk road network was set by the Conservatives in the mid 1990s. Jim Hume’s party has not challenged it previously, and I see no reason to change it now.

The M8, M73 and M74 motorway improvements non-profit-distributing model contract is in procurement, with construction currently targeted to commence in late 2013.

Michael McMahon might have had this information from Transport Scotland already, but I will give it to him now in any case. The invitation to tender took place in June. The change in bidders from four to two will take place in December. We will announce the preferred bidder in May 2013, and the financial close and award will be in October 2013. The length of time for the procurement and construction process will be comparable to those for the M74 and the M80 projects. I agree with Michael McMahon about the economic benefits that will arise from the improvement in the roads. There will be substantial benefits not only from having faster links but from the construction work and the jobs and local spending that will be created. We intend to keep to our timetable, which is similar to those for previous projects.

Since 2007, the Scottish Government has invested more than £83 million in cycling infrastructure. In the remainder of this spending review period, a further £28.5 million will be allocated to Sustrans, and local authorities will be able to bid for a share of that money on a match-funding basis. In addition, £20 million will be allocated directly to local authorities for cycling, walking and safer streets projects.

As the member knows from previous discussions on this topic, we say that every new major project must include accommodation of active travel options. It is fair to say that the accommodation of segregated cycle tracks will be easier in some of those projects than others. Through the moneys that I mentioned earlier, we have invested in specific cycle networks, which often run alongside main arterial routes. Our recent announcement will improve that infrastructure in various places—not least from Edinburgh to Fife, a connection that was mentioned by several members in the recent debate. If we are spending large amounts of money on the roads projects that we have to take forward, we ensure that there are active travel options to go with them.

I understand that point. I have already mentioned the moneys that we have made available, which local authorities can bid for in order to improve the cycle networks in their areas. It is fair to say that some authorities have done more than others. For example, the City of Edinburgh Council has been effective in what it has done to encourage cycling in the city centre, and my local authority area in Clackmannanshire has an almost complete cycling network. Other areas have not been quite as proactive, but they have the chance to be proactive with the moneys that we have announced, because they can match fund them. On the overriding issue of cycling safety, I refer to the recent announcement, which is accompanied by a commitment to ensure that as many children as possible have on-road training—we want to achieve 100 per cent in that regard. That approach gives children more experience of being on the road and, crucially, reassures parents that their children will have the correct training so that they can allow them to use cycling as an option whenever necessary.

The Scottish Government has a range of work under way with partners to promote active travel and, in particular, to deliver the cycling action plan for Scotland, published in June 2010, with its ambitious vision of 10 per cent of journeys to be by bike by 2020. A refresh of the cycling action plan for Scotland for spring 2013 has recently been announced. Around £30 million is being invested in supporting cycling and walking during the current spending review period. The Scottish Government also funds all local authorities to deliver cycling, walking and safer streets projects through the ring-fenced capital plans, with a £6.06 million allocation this financial year. In addition, a national walking strategy is now under development, and policy to promote travel will continue to be developed following the evaluation of the smarter choices, smarter places demonstration programme.

I responded to a number of the points that have just been raised in my answer to Jim Eadie. In addition, the member will get more detail on the points that she and Jim Eadie raised in their joint letter. I agree with the member on the issue of the perception of safety, which is absolutely crucial to ensuring that more people go out on the roads on their bikes. I have already described what we are doing to help achieve that and what we are trying to do to make things safer. We are not starting from the same position as the Dutch authorities; we are starting from a very different position in relation to the infrastructure that must be put in. However, I think that we have given a strong commitment in that regard, and I am willing to continue the dialogue with Alison Johnstone and Jim Eadie to see how we can do even more in the future.

Can I seek clarification on that point? I welcome the final point in the Labour amendment, which calls for “immediate action” to resolve the anomaly that Richard Baker has just mentioned, but the amendment also mentions the need for further reviews of whether APD should be devolved. Richard Baker will remember that the Labour Government did not “attach priority”—those were the exact words of its response—to such a measure. Will he clarify whether the Labour Party now, as of this moment, supports devolution of APD to Scotland?

I very much welcome what I believe to be Helen Eadie’s sincere support for the devolution of APD, but her reference to the Labour amendment is perhaps a bit misguided, because it would take out my proposal to devolve the tax now, replacing it with a requirement for two reviews—one by Labour’s devolution commission and the other by the UK Government. We need action on the issue now. Does Helen Eadie support that?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am sure that Gavin Brown was just about to reveal what the Tory position is. Can he clarify whether his party’s position is that of its past leader, Annabel Goldie, who supported devolution under the Calman commission; that of its current leader, Ruth Davidson, who appears to support abolition; or perhaps that of its future leader, Alex Johnstone? Can he explain what Alex Johnstone’s position actually is?

The issue has been considered by one devolution commission. Does Elaine Murray think that it should go to another commission and that there should be a further review by the UK Government prior to devolution of APD, or does she support devolution of the tax now?

It has been, as has been mentioned already, a fairly constructive debate with a lot of good ideas and obviously some different points of view. To pick out some things that I took note of, Colin Keir successfully put his finger on the real issue here, which is jobs. That was sometimes forgotten in some of the other discussions—jobs are absolutely essential. Colin Keir was also right to report back on what was an excellent inaugural meeting of the cross-party group on aviation, where we had a high level of representation. Malcolm Chisholm gave a thoughtful speech, as ever. He was right to say that the alleged environmental benefits of the tax are substantially overplayed. In fact, there are very few people—apart, perhaps, from Patrick Harvie—who would actually claim it to be an environmentally friendly tax at this stage. It is very much a tax grab by the—

That is not quite what Patrick Harvie said earlier. He said that he saw APD as a means of restricting further aviation growth. He did not say whether he would support further increases in APD, which is the logical next step of his particular case. He also did not address the point—which several members made—that that works against the environment in a number of ways. For example, the industry is telling us that people are going to Dublin and Schiphol to make long-haul flights that they could make from Scotland, thereby increasing the harm caused to the environment. He never addressed that in his speech. The other key point was made by Brian Adam, who said that this has to happen now. That is the whole point—this has to happen now. People have different views on the York Aviation report, but it points out the impact that the increase in APD is having on the economy now. We are well past the stage of further commissions and reviews; we must see some action taken now. Mary Fee made a thoughtful speech. I did not agree with much of it, but a lot of thought was put into it. Annabelle Ewing made the point that there have been endless commissions but no substantial action has been taken. Kenny Gibson pointed out the confusion that exists in the Conservative ranks. We heard it first from Alex Johnstone and, unfortunately, we did not hear any further clarity from Gavin Brown.

I will make a further point and then take an intervention from the member. Hanzala Malik talked about action that can be taken now, and I understand his point. I have spoken to Glasgow Chamber of Commerce, which has made suggestions about what we can do to replace the route development fund. Like some of what members have suggested, that could be done if enough effort were applied to it. I have taken that approach. Nobody has yet been able to say how we could replicate much of what that fund did, but there are things that can be done, such as marketing, which Hanzala Malik mentioned. We are doing that—that is happening just now—and we will shortly undertake further work with the European Commission to expand that as far as we can. Work is on-going in relation to that.

What we have revealed is the fig leaf behind which the Tories are taking no action at all. They should devolve APD first and let the Parliament decide. The Parliament must make its own decisions. I accept Willie Rennie’s point that there is an opportunity cost. If we spend money on not raising APD, we will have to find it from somewhere else—I accept that. However, the basic point is that this Parliament must have that power in the first place, and Willie Rennie’s party is using that as a fig leaf in not giving us that power. The Conservative position was not only uncomfortable for them but unfortunate, because there was a real chance, at the outset of the debate, to have the Parliament speak with a fairly united voice, reflecting the cross-party group that Colin Keir chaired, at which the whole industry—people who would not normally be in the same room together, such as Ryanair, British Airways and easyJet—said with one voice that action must be taken on this. The Tories have squandered that.

No, I have taken enough so far, and the member would not take any interventions from SNP members—as happens in most debates these days. The Tories must agree their position. Is it Ruth Davidson’s position, that APD should be scrapped? Is it Annabel Goldie’s position, that APD should be devolved? What is the position? There is no clarity on the Conservative position. Is it something to do with the fact that on aeroplanes, unlike on trains, people are not allowed to sit in first class when they have paid for only a second-class ticket? I am not sure. There was a chance for the Conservatives to show support. On the Liberal Democrats’ position, accusing our motion of being timid when they propose no action and have nothing to say in support of their previous position of devolution—by that I mean devolution now, not further excuses for not taking action—is the essence of timidity, but that is the position that Willie Rennie adopted. Given that they have Danny Alexander at the centre of the Treasury, we would have expected a great deal more from the Liberal Democrats than earnest reasons for not taking any action at all.

Despite the fact that Willie Rennie would not take an intervention from me, I will take one from him.

I am certainly not going to stop complaining about lost passengers and lost benefit to the Scottish economy. Our consistent position has been that we believe that APD should be devolved. We have also made it clear that we want the powers not for the sake of it, but to improve the economic lot of people in Scotland. Perhaps they can deduce from that what we intend to do with APD. There was a great deal that I welcome in the speeches from Labour members. However, Richard Baker’s amendment has the unfortunate effect of deleting the reference to devolving APD to Scotland, despite the statements of some Labour members. It mentions a further devolution commission—we have already had a devolution commission—and talks about going back to the UK Government for a further review. Twice in 14 months, the UK Government has stated its intention to review the position. First, the coalition Government said that it would review APD in relation to Scotland. Now, its position is to review it in relation to the rest of the UK. I remind members that the Calman commission, to which the three unionist parties subscribed, made the point that devolution of APD to Scotland was not only a good thing, but would be especially necessary if APD were devolved to Northern Ireland, which has now happened.

The Labour amendment does not say that. It talks about “immediate action to resolve the anomaly” that has been talked about, whereby APD is paid twice. It says that “the Calman Commission on Scottish Devolution recommended that APD should be devolved and that the Scotland Bill Committee found a strong case for devolving APD and that this will inform the work of the Devolution Commission”. It goes on to say that there should be “an immediate wider review of APD by the UK Government”. How many reviews do we need? Jobs are being lost now.

No, I have taken enough interventions already. It is worth saying that in the UK, as several members indicated, the maximum rate of aviation tax for any class is €226. The next highest level that is charged is €42, by Germany. The level that the UK levies is more than five times the second-highest level in Europe. The comparison was made with Ireland, which is often derided by some members. The rate that it charges is €3. Given the amount that the UK levies, on top of the cost of air fares, does anyone seriously believe that we are not bleeding business to Ireland? APD will have an impact on a family of four or five who want to go on a family holiday to somewhere such as Florida; it will make them decide not to make that journey or to make another journey instead. If it results in them taking a staycation, we can get a benefit from that, but we should not pretend that the punitive rates of APD in Scotland are not having an impact. The situation is worse in Scotland than it is in other parts of the UK, for reasons that a number of members have outlined. Regrettably, the York Aviation report has been undermined by thread pulling. We are talking about serious people who are involved in business. Fergus Ewing and I have spoken to each of the airport managers and to most of the airlines. I do not deny that there is an element of self-interest on their part in having APD addressed, but the self-interest of the airlines and the airports coincides with our interest of increasing the economic benefit to the people of Scotland from the use of our airports. The York Aviation report is a serious report that makes a serious case. The point was made to us that the Scottish airports and others could not get a hearing or a rational answer from the Treasury, despite all their efforts, and they were stunned by the appalling lack of access. That was commented on in a meeting that was attended by a number of members, including John Scott. Mention was made of how much access and support they had received not just from the Scottish Government, but from members of other parties who would be willing to support them. There is a chance for us to unite on the issue and to make a positive difference for the people of Scotland. I am very pleased that, despite the fact that I feel unable to accept Richard Baker’s amendment for the reasons that I have mentioned, the Labour group will, I think, support the motion. I urge others to do the same. That way, we can speak with a united voice, which is extremely important.

It is vital to link the key economic centres in Scotland, as it is across the United Kingdom. We have carried out a high-level assessment, which demonstrates that a new high-speed line with journey times of less than 30 minutes could be built by 2024. The Scottish Government will enter talks with our partners in both cities and the rail industry to see how we can work together to realise the vision of an Edinburgh to Glasgow high-speed line that connects to England’s network.

There will be substantial benefits. We are told that there is a substantial economic benefit every time that there is a reduction of even a minute in journey time between Glasgow and Edinburgh. There will be benefits in terms of accessibility and there will be social and environmental benefits from upgrading the link—and of course that will make a fifth option available. There are wider benefits of a high-speed link for the rest of Scotland and the United Kingdom. Also, the announcement shows the Scottish Government’s intent to ensure that high-speed rail comes to Scotland as soon as possible.

I hope to meet the Secretary of State for Transport, Patrick McLoughlin, in the next week. Of course, the intention is to have a high-speed link all the way from London to Scotland. Indeed, if that does not happen, capacity constraints on the west coast main line, which will reach a critical stage by 2024-25, will be such that billions of pounds will again have to be spent on the line in advance of further high-speed rail connections. We will have a conversation about that with the UK Government. In that context, I welcome the comments of the Secretary of State for Transport, who said at the Conservative Party conference that he hopes to have a three-hour rail journey time between London and Scotland. That will form the basis for some of our discussions.

The member does not take account of the fact that we are announcing an initiative that will halve the journey time between Edinburgh and Glasgow. It is true that what we announced yesterday was our intent, just as I imagine happened when the Forth bridge and the Glenfinnan viaduct were proposed, or when the Secretary of State for Transport announced an aim to have a journey time of three hours. We must now make the plans go forward, which includes working out the route. The intention is to use some of the existing network, although there is the possibility of having a largely new line. As far as plans that I have seen are concerned, it is not the intention to use maglev technology, for fairly fundamental reasons. It is the intention to start looking into the issue in some detail. We are right to say that we have the ambition to introduce a high-speed rail link between Edinburgh and Glasgow. Such ambition is important and is the hallmark of this Government.

Given that we recently announced a £650 million package of investment in that very line, the question points to the absurdity of the Conservative position. The Conservative Secretary of State for Transport recently announced an aim to have a three-hour journey time between London and Edinburgh but gave no detail on the study and its costs or the possible costs of new construction. I did not criticise him for that and I note that neither did Alex Johnstone, although he criticises the Scottish Government for its intention to improve the link between Edinburgh and Glasgow. It is right that we state our ambitions. What is not right—and not surprising—is the Conservative Party’s complete lack of ambition on the issue. We have the ambition for Scotland. We have stated our intention and we will get to work on ensuring that it happens.

If Willie Rennie looks at “Fast Track Scotland: Making the Case for High Speed Rail Connections with Scotland”, which we published some time ago, and at the work that has subsequently been done by the Scottish partnership group for high-speed rail, he will see the rationale that has been put together. It is extremely important that we recognise that we have made a statement of our intention. As the cabinet secretary said yesterday, we have work to do on planning for the new link and we must identify the funding for it. However, we have stated our ambition, as we have done on many transport projects. If someone does not have the idea in the first place, they are not going to make those vital changes to the infrastructure for the people of Scotland. It is probably a good thing for Scotland that we have a Government that is willing to take on those big projects, to state that ambition and to follow it through by completing those projects on time and on budget.

I give Mark Griffin my assurance that we intend to see EGIP through. As I said at the time, I reckon that we can achieve around 80 per cent of the benefits that the original £1 billion scheme had proposed. There is every possibility that we can increase that percentage—perhaps not to 100 per cent, but getting towards 100 per cent of the benefits of the previous scheme. We remain absolutely committed to the EGIP works taking place.

We expect to make an announcement about the Borders railway shortly, once the commercial terms of the contract between the Scottish ministers and Network Rail have been finalised.

As the member knows, I had a productive meeting with her, Claudia Beamish and representatives from the Campaign for Borders Rail earlier this month to discuss tourist trains at Tweedbank station. I took that proposal seriously, and we have had further discussions with Network Rail. As I said, we are completing a further assessment. We will have a further meeting with the Campaign for Borders Rail, which I hope will be in November. I expect to make an announcement on our agreement with Network Rail shortly. As I have said, there is no change to the proposed journey times. The target of a 55-minute journey time remains. In the Network Rail contract, the specified journey time for the new section of railway remains unchanged, at 44 minutes. The fastest end-to-end journey time of 55 minutes also remains unchanged and I intend it to be achieved.

That important point must be discussed further with Network Rail and the eventual operator, ScotRail. Possible synergies between ScotRail and Network Rail to ensure that those services can happen are important but, obviously, it is more important that the standard services are delivered without interruption. As both Christine Grahame and Claudia Beamish have said previously, there are substantial economic benefits to be had from allowing charter trains, so we want to do that, if possible, while making sure that that has no effect on the regular running of trains.

I do not even agree with the terms of the question because, of course, David Parker is not an SNP councillor but an independent councillor. We will never be happy to see an increase in costs for any project. For example, we are bearing down heavily on the costs of the Forth road crossing, as we have in the case of previous projects, such as the M74 and the Airdrie to Bathgate line. We recognise that rail projects tend to be more challenging than roads projects, so we are not at all complacent about the costs, and we will do all that we can to drive down costs. To return to Christine Grahame’s original point, which has also been made to me by Claudia Beamish, if there are additions that we can make to the project that will help the economic situation in the Borders, we will look sympathetically at them.

Claudia Beamish will know that many of those issues are still under discussion. However, for example, park-and-ride facilities are an integral part of the project. Obviously, accessibility to stations should be built in from the start of a project, rather than being retrofitted, as it sometimes has to be. In passing, I thank Claudia Beamish for her constructive approach to the Borders rail project.

There is no connection between those two projects whatsoever. The same body is involved, but the decision on Borders rail was taken substantially before the decision on EGIP. The projects will result in a combined investment of about £1 billion in Scotland’s railways, and we are pleased to be working with Network Rail on something that will so advantage the people of Scotland and public transport networks.

A needs-based assessment was used to determine the routes and ferry services required for Islay. We published our proposals in the draft ferries plan for consultation in December 2011. A Final Ferries Plan setting out the way forward will be published before the end of this year.

I would have hoped that Jamie McGrigor would welcome that extra sailing and I would have hoped that he would have welcomed the extra sailing during the summer timetable, from Kennacraig to Port Ellen and from Port Askaig to Kennacraig. Obviously, CalMac introduced the extra sailing in response to local concerns and it has been very much welcomed. Whether we can continue with it will be partially dependent on the outcome of the final ferries plan—the draft ferries plan has been issued for consultation. I have had substantial responses from local people and many pieces of correspondence from the local member on the issue, but I have had no response from Jamie McGrigor or the Tory party on the draft ferries plan. I will, however, look at the issue and CalMac will look at it, as it always does, to try to respond to local needs.

When the Department for Transport publishes its report on the review of the west coast franchise debacle at the turn of the year, we shall assess whether there are lessons to be learned for future procurement of rail passenger services in Scotland.

Under the current devolution settlement, it is possible for public sector and not-for-profit bids to be submitted in relation to future provision of rail services in Scotland. We have had a number of discussions with the UK Government about relaxing the franchise arrangements. Indeed, I spoke to the Secretary of State for Transport yesterday about the implications of the decision on the west coast main line. However, as I made clear during the debate on rail that we had recently, it is for individual bidders to come forward with their proposals. The Brown review, which the UK Government has set up, will potentially have implications for the ScotRail franchise if it chooses to make recommendations that would change the basis of future franchise arrangements. To that extent, there may be as yet unknown implications for the ScotRail franchise. I make it clear that we have no plans, during the next franchise, to introduce a fares structure whereby someone can buy a standard-class ticket and sit in a first-class carriage. [Laughter.]

Presiding Officer, thank you for the opportunity to update members on how Scotland is becoming more resilient, year on year, in the face of severe weather, and on the preparations that we have put in place for this winter. As we all know, during the past three years Scotland has experienced some of the most prolonged and damaging severe weather that has been seen in modern times, mostly in the winter months but also at other times of the year. The one weather prediction that I can make with confidence is that Scotland will again experience severe weather, whether it is snow, a deep freeze, heavy rain or disruptive storms such as we had last winter. As I said, severe weather does not happen just in winter. The summer flooding that affected neighbourhoods across Scotland—for example, in the Borders, Fife and Perthshire—is fresh in everyone’s memory. The volcanic ash cloud also tested the country’s resilience. Only two fifths of the Scots who were questioned by the British Red Cross earlier this summer said that they were prepared for severe weather. They were most concerned about the loss of utilities—water, gas and electricity. We cannot prevent the weather, but we can prepare for it. The Government’s priority is to get the people of Scotland to think ahead and plan, and therefore to cope better with all kinds of severe weather. The changes that we are trying to bring about will not happen in a year or even in a few years. Our efforts represent a long-term investment in building a more resilient nation. This year, the public sector across Scotland is more prepared for severe weather than ever before. Year on year, with the measures that the Government is putting in place, we become stronger in dealing with the challenges of severe weather. On Monday, the Scottish Government began its second national resilience campaign in partnership with the British Red Cross. We are undertaking a range of activities to highlight to people that they can do relatively inexpensive but effective things to prepare themselves, their homes, their families, their communities, their places of work and their businesses to withstand the worst effects of weather. Our advice to the people of Scotland is that “taking a few small steps now can save a lot of trouble later.” That is advice that we are promoting and that we are trying to ensure gets into the consciousness of people throughout Scotland. We are engaging directly with the public and businesses on the high street. There will be 64 information roadshows visiting communities in each local authority area in Scotland and all 56 British Red Cross high street shops will become information and advice hubs. That takes the campaign out to more than 80 towns, cities and villages across Scotland. We are also engaging directly with schools. Pupils from primary 5 through to secondary 3 will tomorrow tune in to an online glow meeting hosted by Education Scotland, where they will take part in a conversation about preparing for severe weather. Young people can be particularly vulnerable—both physically and psychologically—in emergencies, so it is particularly important that they are prepared should they be caught in an emergency situation. However, they also have resources of creativity, energy and enthusiasm. It makes sense to build the foundations of the knowledge required through schools. In June this year, the Scottish Government launched the ready for emergencies web resource, which gives teachers a range of suggested activities to select from to enable children and young people to develop resilience as part of curriculum for excellence. The ready for emergencies resource was designed by Education Scotland, with a team of teachers, parents’ representatives and resilience experts from the public and voluntary sectors, and it is already being well used in the classroom. To date it has been used by 3,300 people and has had 17,000 page views. It is worth quoting the words of a teacher in a Scottish primary school that has been using ready for emergencies: “It is great that whenever there is a major event in the news, we can follow it up with a meaningful activity, and think about what we would do if something similar happened here in the future”. In my own constituency, that message was taken up by the pupils in Dunblane high school. In addition to ensuring that they were as well prepared for winter as possible, they took on the civic responsibility of trying to ensure that they looked after older people in Dunblane during the winter. They should be commended for that. One of the key priorities of the Scottish Government in preparing for severe weather is to keep Scotland moving. Transport Scotland delivers its winter service programme on Scotland’s trunk road network from the start of October right through until mid-May. Other measures that have been put in place ahead of winter include the purchase of two ice-breaking vehicles. I think that we can all remember the difficulties with trying to break down sheets of ice on the M8 after a prolonged period of very cold weather. We have made a commitment to have more salt stocked at the start of winter than was used across Scotland in the entire winter of 2010-11. We also have a stock of more than 100,000 litres of alternative de-icers that will work in the severest of conditions when road salt becomes less effective—usually around 8° below freezing or below—and we are providing guidance for operating companies on when to use these de-icers. We also have a strengthened network of weather stations and new cameras at 24 sites to improve decision making. We are publishing daily gritting plans to give the public and media more information about the treatments that are taking place. There is also a freight Scotland hotline for drivers to highlight network problems and provide guidance for heavy goods vehicle drivers. We also have a new YouTube video on winter service provision, which has been produced by key stakeholders and the public. We will continue to alert the public to important information about travel conditions through a wide variety of communications channels including Twitter, Traffic Scotland internet radio and the Traffic Scotland website, variable message signs and mobile applications. The multi-agency response team—MART—will continue to keep people informed and play a major part in the smooth running of the transport network this winter. Members may recall that it was an innovation two years ago that allowed all the key parties to be in the same place at Transport Scotland headquarters at the same time to aid decision making. ScotRail has completed its £2.2m programme of investment, which includes reliability improvements to trains over the winter period through train modifications and the purchase of additional plant and equipment, enhanced facilities at stations and depots, and a significant upgrade to passenger information systems. Network Rail has enhanced its infrastructure. For example, there is a new icebuster train, which costs between £1 million and £2 million and can quickly thaw out junctions and other key equipment. Network Rail also has many more four-by-four drive vehicles for operational and maintenance staff, and it deploys rail-mounted snowploughs at key locations across the network. In addition, Network Rail, in conjunction with rail freight hauliers, has plans to maintain clear rail routes for critical freight train movements. That will ensure that sufficient priority is given to movement by rail of vital commodities, including fuel and food. We recognise the serious implications for business and reflect airports’ commitment to their passengers. Scotland’s airports continue to devote significant resource to meeting the winter weather challenge, including investment in new equipment. For example, Aberdeen airport announced in August an investment of £1.3 million to upgrade its winter vehicle fleet to best deal with the worst conditions, and it has further investment plans for next year. Severe weather can happen at any time and we have to be prepared for every eventuality. On 7 December last year the Met Office issued the highest level of warning—a red warning—for storm force winds across parts of Scotland. An Atlantic storm soon brought gusts of up to 164mph in some parts, with gusts of 77mph in Edinburgh. The advance information we received from the Met Office enabled us to take steps to prepare the people of Scotland for the disruption to travel that resulted. The Met Office has done a lot of work since then to raise awareness of the meanings of its weather warnings. Red warnings are only issued when there is confidence that high levels of disruption will occur, and the public and responders must take action on those warnings to mitigate the effects of a potentially dangerous situation. Farmers also have an important role during severe winter weather. In recognition of that, Transport Scotland, in partnership with the National Farmers Union and local authorities, has developed a code of practice to encourage and facilitate roads authorities and farmers to work more closely to get additional resources where they are most needed. I welcome Jim Hume’s amendment in that regard. The storms of last winter caused some of the worst disruption to electricity supplies in recent memory, with more than 170,000 customers across Scotland affected. That is a significant number, although it is far less than the number during the previous comparable boxing day storms of 1998, which cut off over a quarter of a million users. With networks that are tens of thousands of kilometres long and which serve hundreds of thousands of customers over sparse geographical areas, there will be occasions when the power goes out. Scotland’s two distribution network operators have made network improvements in recent years, invested millions and enhanced their emergency arrangements in partnership with local responders. In emergencies, the capacity to exchange information and provide direction and support through resilient telecommunications is vital. I will highlight two areas on which we have made progress in preparation for this winter. First, we have acted to address issues that arose last winter regarding the Airwave network utilised by our emergency services. A tri-service group co-ordinated by the Scottish Government worked with Airwave Solutions Ltd to recommend appropriate action. Procedures have been improved to minimise site access problems during periods of intense and prolonged bad weather, generator maintenance scheduling has been enhanced, and engineering improvements have been delivered to improve electrical power reliability. Additionally, greater fuel, battery and electrical power generation has been provided to selected sites, to provide greater self-sufficiency in remote areas during prolonged periods of severe weather. We intend that a similar review of winter performance will be carried out in 2013 so that we can continue to learn lessons and improve reliability. Second, we have installed a resilient telecommunications network—RTN—which, in the event of public network failures, should provide back-up capacity for strategic co-ordinating groups—SCGs—to communicate with each other and the Scottish Government. For the particularly challenging areas of Orkney, Shetland, the Western Isles and Argyll and Bute, we have added a new satellite communications service. We have been making the most of new technology as well. The Scottish Government is introducing a new mobile phone application for iPhone and Android that is aimed at helping the public cope during emergencies. By downloading and using the ready Scotland application, people will be able to gain quick and easy access—

I give way to Alison Johnstone.

I made the point at the start of my speech that we want to keep Scotland moving. To the extent that they will help keep Scotland moving, I am more than willing to look at the issues that Alison Johnstone raised. The new technologies that I have been talking about allow us to gain quick and easy access to essential information from ready Scotland as well as storing advice and emergency contact details offline. Individual users will be able to find out when a road was last gritted and when it is next to be gritted, and they will get more road-by-road detail of the effects of weather on individual route journeys that they intend to make. The app stores the contents of a household emergency plan, adding national and local emergency contacts so that everything is in one place. It stores personal emergency checklists for the home, travel and business, which can be easily customised, and it will also advise users on which radio station to listen to during emergencies and provide the frequency needed to tune in to it. It is fair to say that we will learn something new each time that Scotland is beset by severe weather, which will not always be in the winter time. The Government and the responder community are doing all that we can to build Scotland’s resilience to severe weather for the winter and all year round.

I think that Margo MacDonald has stolen Alex Johnstone’s thunder. We have procedures in place to deal with potholes. My responsibility is for trunk roads, and I am confident in the procedures that we have to repair potholes quickly. Outside that, the responsibility lies with the relevant roads authority. Our infrastructure and services stand ready, and we urge the people of Scotland to be ready for severe weather all year round. That will help us to build a safer, stronger and more resilient Scotland. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the 2012 Ready for Winter public awareness campaign launched on 22 October in collaboration with the Red Cross, responder agencies and a wide range of partners across the public, private and voluntary sectors; commends the partners for their continuing long-term commitment to ensuring that Scotland is as prepared for severe weather as it can possibly be, and supports the activities taking place during Resilience Week, which emphasise that preparedness is essential, not just for winter, but for all kinds of severe weather, and highlight the simple steps that individuals, families, businesses and communities can take to prepare for this and other emergencies, all of which contribute to a more resilient Scotland.

It is worth looking behind some of the figures that Elaine Murray cited. Last year, many local authorities had very high levels of salt but did not use it because of how the winter turned out. It is for local authorities to take decisions that are in their interest. We are conscious that across the country we have more than enough salt in place—we have more salt at the start of this winter than we used during the bad winter two years ago.

I agree with the member’s point. He might remember that the six-point plan from 2010-11 included the placing of strategic supplies of salt on trunk roads. We do that at Harthill, which he mentioned and which is on a rise. There is also a procedure whereby we can take out the central reservation so that emergency vehicles can get in to grit.

Earlier, I outlined many of the steps that Scotland is taking to prepare for severe weather, not only in winter but all year round. I will try to address the points that have been raised. I do not think that I will get round to dealing with all of them, but if anyone wants to follow up any that I do not get to, I invite them to let me know and I will try to get back to them. It has been a good debate. I was struck by the preponderance of councillors and ex-councillors who were speaking in the debate. I think that, at one point, everyone on the SNP benches was either a councillor or had been a councillor. That has contributed greatly to the quality of the debate. Unlike some people, I think that people’s experience of local government stands them in good stead when they come to this chamber, and I welcome the contribution that those people made to the debate. I should say that there were one or two good speeches by people who have not been councillors—that is also possible. Exercise Arctic blast, which happens tomorrow, is a severe weather event training exercise that is an important part of our preparations. Responder organisations from across the Highlands and Islands will take part in the exercise, which will examine the detailed consequence management of a combination of emergencies, including prolonged loss of electricity and a shortage of basic supplies such as food as a result of severe snow and high winds. In my experience, it is a feature of proper contingency and resilience planning that we consider not just the last thing that happened and how we might deal with it again but new events and the fact that some events are compounded by further complications as they proceed. The Highlands and Islands strategic co-ordinating group has identified the loss of the lifeline A9 as a high risk to the region and the fact that, to return to the point that Alex Johnstone made, severe weather elsewhere, such as in the north of England, could seriously impact on the provision of food and other consumables to the area. I mentioned the resilient telecommunications network that we have installed. For the particularly challenging areas of Orkney, Shetland, the Western Isles and Argyll and Bute, we have added a new satellite communications service, which will have a degree of user testing during exercise Arctic blast. On the point that Alex Johnstone raised, as much as two years ago, when I first had this job, there were substantial discussions with the supermarkets directly and with Scotland Food & Drink. Those discussions have continued through me and with the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment. Much mention has rightly been made of the need for partnership working. The ready for winter campaign is an overwhelming success for partnership working and exemplifies our approach. In addition to the highly productive partnership that we have forged with the British Red Cross, we are working with COSLA and a multitude of other partners from the public, voluntary and private sectors. For example, the support of the major supermarket chains is enabling us to take our road shows into high-footfall areas across the country; 545 libraries will display information; and, with the help of groups such as the Salvation Army and Citizens Advice Scotland, we hope to reach more vulnerable groups. Specific mention has been made of councils and the Scottish Government working in partnership. That was a prominent feature of the national roads maintenance review, which concluded in July this year and which set out a framework for initiatives to maintain Scotland’s roads more efficiently. By encouraging shared services, collaborative working and innovation, the review’s outcomes will make road maintenance more efficient and improve the condition of our roads. In many instances in the south-west and north-east, council gritters grit trunk roads and trunk road gritters grit council roads. There already is a degree of collaborative working, but I agree that we should have more of that. We are trying to achieve that through the roads maintenance review and other measures. Mutual aid is a prominent aspect of the operating companies. For example, if a council is short of vehicles, vehicles can be made available from the trunk road stocks, as we offered to do many times last year. Partnership working is very much a feature of what we are doing. That underlines Anne McTaggart’s point that we can achieve more by our common endeavours than we can alone. I certainly agree with that. Mention was made of the fact that some people might not have access to advice on the internet. That is a fair point. We produce much of the advice in written form. One of the best pieces that I have seen is the advice on driving in bad weather, which seems common sense, but it is an excellent document that is produced by the police, the trunk road operating companies and Transport Scotland. It covers not only driving in ice and snow but driving in conditions such as very low sun, which can cause problems. I commend that document to everybody. Community resilience has been mentioned. As we have all seen and as members have mentioned, one wonderful thing that happens when emergencies occur is that people and communities pull together to get one another through the experience. Resilient communities start first and foremost with resilient individuals, and many communities in Scotland are organising their own efforts through local community emergency plans. To give just one example, this week, Howwood community council in Renfrewshire took its first steps towards that. Dozens of other communities around Scotland, in places such as Argyll and Bute, Stirling and the Borders, are further down that road. This is not about doing the work of the emergency services; it is about communities making sensible preparations that will enable them to work in support of the emergency services. For example, one rural community cleared snow from an access road to enable a fire engine to attend a house fire. The people knew not to tackle the fire, but their actions made it easier for the fire service to do so quickly. Much has been said on flooding, not least by Richard Baker. No one in the Parliament can argue that it is a bad thing for communities to prepare for emergencies, and flooding is one consequence of severe weather for which individuals can often prepare. Just last week, my colleague the Minister for Environment and Climate Change signed up for SEPA’s floodline service when he visited its flood forecasting centre in Perth. I am well aware of the serious effects that flooding can have on homes, businesses and health. SEPA’s national flood risk assessment has identified 125,000 properties that are at risk of flooding. Never mind what the winter will bring—we have just had one of the wettest summers on record, and the people of Scotland share a responsibility to protect themselves from flooding. One thing that they can do to start to put protection in place is to sign up for floodline. A number of other points were raised. Jim Hume said that 40 per cent or thereabouts of people feel that they are sufficiently prepared, which represents an 8 per cent increase on last year’s figure. In my opening speech, I made the point that we must build up the position over a number of years and raise awareness, and we will continue to do that. Far fewer people—16 per cent fewer than last year—are very or quite concerned about the consequences of severe weather, so we are taking action. Hanzala Malik mentioned white lines on the M8. A bigger proportion of the budget has been allocated to white lining, which is being prioritised where the need is greatest. Additional white line refresh has been programmed on sections of the M8 in this financial year, which I hope will address some of the member’s concerns. Two members mentioned the idea of a hotline for vulnerable people, which is being considered seriously. As many people know, services check on vulnerable people. Various agencies have lists of vulnerable people and are good at checking on them. The most sensible approach is to draw that activity together so that it is co-ordinated. Many people are familiar with the existing hotlines, so it is important that they continue to be available. We will continue to look at that. In a crisis, people react by using something that is familiar, whether that is NHS 24, the traffic Scotland service or local social work services. It is important that familiar services are available. We have also developed vulnerable people protocols, to ensure that they are taken care of. That also applies to people who depend on heating fuels—on off-grid energy supplies—which a number of members mentioned. A great deal of work was done 18 months ago to deal with the issue of the last mile in delivering heating fuels, which a number of members talked about. The companies that are concerned have invested a great deal in four-wheel-drive vehicles and many other measures.

I will come on to high energy costs. Of course, the Deputy First Minister recently made a statement that might interest Claudia Beamish in relation to the issue. As I said, I am happy to accept the Lib Dem amendment, in Jim Hume’s name. Of course, what it refers to was not his idea—as Maureen Watt said, such an initiative was developed in Aberdeenshire some years ago. I took up the issue when I came into my job two years ago, but the amendment is good and we are happy to accept it. I cannot accept Alex Johnstone’s amendment. I am sorry about that, because I see that he is often the only Tory on the Tory benches. I feel sorry for him and I would like to accept his amendment but, unfortunately, a number of the points in it are not exactly accurate. The reviews that he talked about are much more about general road maintenance. However, I give him the assurance that he seeks about the preparedness of the trunk road companies—we have ensured that they are prepared. I cannot accept the Labour amendment, which brings me to perhaps the key point of the debate. The debate was good but, unfortunately, Labour members once again made a list of demands for more spending. They wanted more money for local government, even though we could not guarantee that it would be spent in the required areas, as one member pointed out. They asked for more money for local and trunk roads, more money for central heating, more money for trains and more money to deal with fuel poverty—I am genuinely unaware of whether the winter fuel allowance counts as “something for nothing” in that context. They also asked for more money for flood prevention. As Mark McDonald said and as most people with a local authority background know, if more money is to be spent on something, it must be taken from something else. The position is not as it was in the days of Andy Kerr, when £700 million was left lying in the budget. We spend the money that we have, for good purposes. I say to Labour Party members and others who genuinely suggested ideas that I have tried to address them. If someone has a genuine suggestion of a good idea for improving the situation and if a cost is attached to it—I am not saying that the cost must be definitive; we can help with that—I am more than willing to listen to it. However, members cannot continually ask for more spending without identifying where the money would come from. I repeat that, this winter, Scotland is better prepared than ever to deal with the effects of severe weather. We understand that we can always do more, because the weather will always carry a risk of disruption. This year, we ask the people of Scotland not to let the nasty weather that might happen turn into a nasty situation. I commend the motion in my name.

We are already expediting the delivery of this vital project for the north-east. During the legal challenges, we ensured that as much preparatory work as possible was progressed so that we were in a position to move immediately following the United Kingdom Supreme Court judgment last week. The prior information notice signalling the start of procurement was published only two days after the judgment, on 19 October. Further works will begin next month—drilling rigs are on site to carry out vital ground investigations. Over the next year, there will be more advance works to clear the site ahead of the main works, which are expected to get under way in 2014 and to be completed by the spring of 2018.

I have assured the member that we will raise that issue with the procurement team for the project. Any development that ensures that materials do not have to be transported, helps the environment and means that we do not need to buy further materials but can use local materials instead will be good for the project. I have therefore given an undertaking to the member that I will take up the issue with officials to see what we can take forward. I give the member the commitment that I will work closely with the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment to see what we can do in that area.

We were sure of the savings that we would have made had we been able to proceed with the project when we wanted to some years ago. However, officials are currently working on the cost of the project and therefore the savings that would be arrived at by bundling those two projects together. I intend to produce that information for the Parliament as soon as possible.

It is not just ministers who have linked the programme; Aberdeen City Council has also said that the AWPR and the third Don crossing require to be in place in order to meet the transport planning objectives for the Haudagain roundabout. It is also worth saying that we have already committed £3 million towards the design work for the Haudagain roundabout. We now have to get on with the AWPR. It would be interesting to know from Richard Baker—if possible—whether he intends to continue to support the project or to start to cast it into doubt, as his colleague Elaine Murray has done with the Forth road crossing, which she now says she has had second thoughts about. We really should have continuity on that from the Labour Party.

It is worth saying that, over 30 years, the project will support 14,000 jobs in the north-east of Scotland and create £6.3 billion of additional income, so it will have a massive impact. As I said in relation to the Haudagain roundabout, it has always been our position that the Balmedie to Tipperty and AWPR projects should proceed first before we can accrue the benefits from the Haudagain roundabout and, obviously, we await legal proceedings in relation to the third Don crossing. I assure the member that we will crack on with the project as soon as we can and that we intend to see the benefits accrue to the north-east as soon as possible.

There is no update to provide in relation to Alex Johnstone’s question since the last time that he asked it. We do not intend to include that junction in the bundle for the AWPR.

The member will be aware of the legal constraints on discussion of the matter. There have been discussions between officials at this stage. We very much hope that Aberdeen City Council will share our desire to progress with the project as soon as possible, because we can then see the implementation of the whole suite of transport solutions for Aberdeen and the north-east. We will continue to work with Aberdeen City Council, with which we have developed a very constructive relationship on how the AWPR is paid for and progressed. We hope to continue such co-operation with the council on other projects.

As the member would expect, there is a very healthy interest in the market for the project. We have been asked to make as many projects proceed as possible within the resource constraints that we face. I do not expect there to be a lack of competition for the contract. In fact, the opposite seems to be the case. We will have the same huge level of interest that there was in relation to, for example, the M8, which was another NPD project. We are very confident about the level of interest that there will be in the project.

The mechanism will be one of dialogue. We are talking to the two councils. It is not beyond the wit of the officials and the politicians involved to ensure that we produce the right solution. Discussions have so far been very productive and I am very confident that we will get an agreeable solution.

Yes, I am perfectly willing to give a commitment that the figures that I will produce for Parliament very shortly—as the member will understand, given that the court decision has just been made, they are currently being worked on—will itemise the cost of the two projects. It will also be clear at that time that it makes sense to do the two projects together. There is no doubt about the benefits. I have mentioned 14,000 jobs. That is a serious issue. The project will support 14,000 jobs in the north-east of our country, there will be £6.3 billion of benefit and there will be huge environmental and safety benefits. This is a very good project and I am delighted that we are getting to grips with it.

I am grateful for the opportunity to make a statement on yesterday’s decision by the Department for Transport to cancel the award of the intercity west coast franchise. I wanted to provide as much clarity as is possible in the circumstances on the impact on passengers and on the refranchising of rail services in Scotland. My immediate concern is that passengers are not adversely affected by the Department for Transport’s decision. The department’s handling of the procurement process has been incompetent and shambolic. Most important, it has caused a great deal of confusion and speculation about arrangements for west coast services after the franchise handover date of 9 December. Neither the Scottish ministers nor officials were made aware of yesterday’s decision in advance of the announcement. I have yet to see the detail of the DFT’s contingency plan and it is still not clear who will be operating train services in December. However, after finally managing to speak to the United Kingdom rail minister, I have his assurance that services will run to timetable, using the same trains and staff, and that tickets and bookings will be valid. DFT ministers said yesterday that our Administrations have a common interest in ensuring that there is no break in the service for passengers after 9 December. In light of the mishandling of the franchise, I can understand that many people might be reluctant to give too much weight to DFT assurances. Although our powers in regard to rail remain limited, I and my officials will monitor the assurances carefully and offer all necessary assistance to ensure that passengers are not disadvantaged. I hope that that offers some reassurance for passengers, especially as we will be approaching the festive and holiday period at that time. Let us be clear. What has happened represents a huge failure in public procurement. I want to be clear about the anger and frustration that I feel on behalf of passengers who rely on the west coast main line. The Secretary of State for Transport conceded that there were “completely unacceptable mistakes” in evaluating bids for the west coast franchise. The mistakes were so serious that he has been forced to cancel the current franchising competition. I understand that the flaws were discovered after detailed examination by Department for Transport officials and evidence gathering in preparation for legal proceedings that Virgin Trains brought after the decision to award the franchise to FirstGroup. The Department for Transport has spoken to the four bidding companies, whose bid costs will be reimbursed. That scandalous waste of public money could have been avoided if the franchise had been awarded properly. A fresh competition will be started as soon as the lessons of the episode are learned. The secretary of state has announced a review of the handling of the process, which will report at the end of the month, and a review of the DFT’s wider franchising programme, which will be led by Richard Brown, chair of Eurostar, and will report by the end of the year. DFT’s three live franchise competitions have been suspended. The decision to cancel the award of the franchise has, of course, direct consequences for Scotland, for rail passengers and for the rail industry. The UK Government offered no discussion or advance notice of a decision that directly affects people who travel to and from Scotland on services that are crucial to the economies of our major cities. I have been asked a number of times whether the DFT’s actions have implications for our rail franchise procurement. Let me be clear. Yesterday’s announcement is focused solely on failings and incompetence in the Department for Transport, not in Transport Scotland. We are keen to offer our support for the wider review of franchising. The Deputy First Minister will seek to meet the Secretary of State for Transport as soon as possible, and the First Minister has already spoken to the secretary of state. The reviews and the recommendations that are made will provide lessons for us as well as for the DFT on how risk can be better assessed and on bidding and evaluation processes. I reassure the Parliament that although lessons will be learned, our franchise procurement process is led by an expert team in Transport Scotland, which is free to draw on external expertise as and when required. That can only be right given the scale of taxpayers’ money involved and the importance of passenger rail services to Scotland’s economy and its communities. The franchise is the largest single Government procurement exercise that we conduct. No corners are being cut in that process; no false economies are being made. On our current timetable, we are allowing at least 20 months to conduct the formal competition and, when the consultation that was launched last November is included, our process will last more than three years in total. In comparison, the DFT originally conducted a consultation in January 2011 in order to let a contract in April 2012, which is less than half the time that we have allowed for our process. It then delayed the process, but it still allowed only seven months from formal invitation to tender to contract award. We are still awaiting the consultation on the trans-Pennine franchise, including on services to Scotland, despite the fact that that is due to hand over at the same time as the ScotRail franchise, the consultation for which took place last year. That is more than a year behind our timescale. Only last January I wrote to Theresa Villiers, who is no longer at the department, expressing concern over the timescale for the east coast main line franchise, which is also a vital service for Scotland. As I set out in June, I will announce more details on the specification of our franchises around the turn of the year. Our more realistic timeline allows us to factor in any lessons that are learnt as a consequence of the DFT debacle and the recommendations that are made by the independent review commissioned by the DFT. I am confident of the competence and professionalism of Transport Scotland staff. This Government has an excellent track record on procurement, and recent examples of that are the M74 and the Airdrie to Bathgate rail line. We will, of course, draw on yesterday’s events and the forthcoming reviews to maintain our strong record but, without pre-empting the review, I do not think that it is credible to lay all the blame on civil servants. The new Westminster franchising policy has been changed to a preference for 15 year contracts with no break or revenue review clauses. That policy ignores the difficulty of accurately forecasting revenue over 15 years. When I announced the details of the next ScotRail contract, I made it clear that the 10 year contract would have an option for a break after five years. That will address one of the difficulties that the DFT is experiencing. We will ensure that the sleeper franchise contains appropriate provisions to address the forecast risk and that the Scottish Government shares in the return on its investment. I urge the Secretary of State for Transport to take the opportunity of the review to address those wider questions, as it would be a missed opportunity to narrow down the reviews simply to issues of technical process. Rather than another patch and mend, a different model is required. The current legislation—primarily the Railways Act 1993—envisaged a railway that was specified and funded in the public interest, but which was provided by the private sector. The result is a fragmented and inefficient model. We are doing all that we can in our powers to make that model work as best it can. We are committed to a deep alliance between the operator and Network Rail for the next franchise, and we are proceeding with the franchise process in a timely and competent manner. However, in 2012, the current model is not fit for purpose, and I have repeatedly raised that concern with the UK Government. Our powers to give Scotland the rail services that it needs are limited by UK legislation. Giving this Parliament competence to have full legislative control for rail would be the simplest and most effective way to ensure that Scottish ministers have the flexibility to consider the full range of options to deliver rail services in Scotland, including public sector models. The UK Government’s decision is further evidence of why Scotland needs the powers of an independent Parliament so that it can take full responsibility for its own rail services.

The points that Elaine Murray makes about political ramifications at Westminster are important, but what concerns me are the interests of passengers in Scotland, which she also mentioned, and the implications for the ScotRail franchise. Elaine Murray asked what representations we have made. I mentioned the letter to Theresa Villiers. We also wrote to Justine Greening, in May 2012. We asked for additional rail powers, not least because, as we have said previously, the franchising process is extremely expensive and the level of risk involved means that we cannot get the best return for rail passengers. We have made those points. We were told that we had no say in and no ability to influence the process for the west coast main line, although we were asked for our comments. The comments that we made were based on improving services to Scotland. Within the limited powers that we have, we have done everything that we are allowed to do to influence the process. If we had been more involved in it, we could have offered the benefit of the experience that people at Transport Scotland have from dealing with the ScotRail franchise, which might have helped to avoid the present situation. I hope that future Westminster Governments that have any control over Scotland—if there are any such Governments—will listen to what we in Scotland say. The fact that the UK Government did not listen to what we said is exemplified by the fact that the first that all of us heard of its decision was on the airwaves yesterday. It cannot be right that the memorandums of understanding that we have with the UK Government—and the so-called respect agenda that we were told that David Cameron would follow—were thrown out of the window at the first chance. We must be kept informed, not because we are important people, but because the people whom we represent have a right to proper services.

The obvious thing to say is: good try, but it is not going to work. I see that we have an uncommonly—almost uniquely—good turnout of Tory back benchers. I wonder why that can be. Alex Johnstone says that the concerns about the process are unjustified when it is quite clear that people across the country are extremely concerned about it, not least because £40 million of taxpayers’ money has been thrown down the drain—and that is just the start of it. The suspension of the other processes may give rise to substantial claims against the taxpayer, not the UK Government. There has been a massive squandering of public resources. When there is the slightest hint of what Alex Johnstone believes to have been misuse of resources in this place, he will shout from the rooftops, but he has nothing to say about what the UK Government has just done. People will be appalled by the lack of concern that the Scottish Conservatives have shown for people here. I do not know how Alex Johnstone has managed to drag ferries into the proceedings. What he calls the interim contract, we call the new contract. Can he be certain that the UK Government will not go to the European Commission and ask for another contract for Virgin Rail on this service? If that happens, will he criticise the UK Government? It would have been extremely important for the Scottish Conservatives to have said, “This is wrong. Whatever else is going on here, it is wrong that the Scottish Government was not told. It is wrong that the people of Scotland did not have that level of involvement.” It is a real missed opportunity on the part of the Scottish Conservatives that they have not done that.

That is an important point, given that the system we have in relation to rail franchising relies on interest from the market. If we treat the market with the contempt that has been shown by the UK Government, and if we do not put in the resources to run the procurement exercise properly, the market will of course take a look at that. The real worry now is what we do if we are to continue to have, under the current Government, a market-led, franchise-based system for procuring these services. Who would want to get into a contract with a Conservative-Lib Dem coalition when it runs things so shoddily? It is not just me saying that; anyone who was watching the television coverage last night would have heard all sorts of industry experts say it.

The key issue in that regard is that the process by which we were to have the stations investment fund, which was the new franchise, is seen to be sound. If the review that has been commissioned by the UK Government comes back in a couple of months’ time—when we will have taken the leap into the franchising process here in Scotland—and suggests fundamental changes to the franchising process, that is where the uncertainty lies. That is crucial. Notwithstanding that, it is my intention that we will run a proper, sound process that has the time and the resources that are necessary to make it go through without risking challenges to it. If that happens, and we have that level of certainty, the stations investment fund—to which I think that John Pentland was referring—should be secure.

Yes, we will. It is in our interests and the interests of rail passengers to do so. As I have said before, during the process we made a number of representations to the DFT about improved services in Scotland. We do not even know whether those representations were listened to, because we do not get that kind of response under the current process. However, it is my intention to work with whoever operates the service, and indeed with the UK Government, because there is a great deal that it could learn from us. Unfortunately, we are likely to get more co-operation from the UK Government than we are from the Scottish Conservatives.

Having heard from Tweedledum, we now hear from Tweedledee. This is a real chance for the coalition parties in this Parliament to say, as Patrick McLoughlin has said, “There has been a major mistake here. We are sorry.” Instead, ferry contracts and everything else are being dragged in as they try to distract people from what has happened. We will work to ensure that the ScotRail franchise proceeds in the way that it should and that there is no lack of certainty for the bidders, because they need that level of certainty that the process that they are entering into has some integrity to it. However, it is not all in our hands. First, we have to run a franchise operation despite the fact that we have major misgivings about that process. Also, the review by the UK Government, which I have mentioned, could fundamentally affect that. If Jim Hume is able to put any pressure on the UK Government and his colleagues in that Government who are responsible for this situation, that would be helpful in ensuring that we get the right services for Scotland.

Of course, the Scottish Government, not least because we have not been part of the process, cannot talk about preferred bidders. Also, because we are about to have a new process for that contract, we cannot talk about the particular improvements that might be possible as a result of that. However, yes, I spoke both to Virgin and to FirstGroup not just immediately after the award of the contract, because there are implications for both, but because we had a good working relationship with Virgin previously and we have a working relationship with FirstGroup. As the member suggests, it is an absolute scandal that because of this issue a prominent Scottish company lost a fifth of its stock market value in a few hours yesterday. It is right that we continue to work with FirstGroup, not least because it currently runs services here in Scotland.

Richard Baker learned from my lips yesterday that we can accept non-profit bids under the current process, although he had denied that in an interview beforehand. I can confirm to John Mason that it is possible for non-profit organisations to come forward. They have to be able to demonstrate a level of expertise and experience of running rail services and there are people in Scotland who can do that. I cannot go out and invite them to come forward, but they have the ability to do that. As to what the UK Government will do, I really do not know as we do not have any more information. As things stand, I have received no communication about the reviews other than a letter from the UK minister. I tried to get hold of him all yesterday morning and when he eventually phoned back—I was told that he was phoning in the next three minutes and then in the next five minutes—he said, “I want to talk to you because”; I thought that that was bizarre, given that I had been trying to talk to him. I got no more clarity on the process of the reviews other than the fact that they will be decided fairly soon, so we still do not know what the scope of those reviews will be. To return to John Mason’s point, of course we made representations about the nature of franchising and the ability to open that up. We do not have the power to do that, but the UK Government does—although there are still European criteria requiring the separation of track and train, which is another constraint that we have to observe. However, not-for-profit organisations are perfectly free just now to bid for the ScotRail franchise.

We do not have any documentation relating to this particular bid because we have not been involved in it, but I think that the member’s general point about the need for transparency on how the UK Government has ended up in this situation is a good one. Given that the first of the two reviews that has been called for will look at this particular process, we will wait and see what information is put in the public domain. The member may be aware, as I am, that apparently two of the main problems were the fact that passenger numbers were not properly calculated and, incredibly, that inflation was not factored into the figures. Those seem to me to be basic requirements of a tendering process—especially if as many people as we are told were involved were involved, including not just civil servants but consultants, as well as a great deal of scrutiny by a great number of ministers. I think that it is right that we see as much transparency as possible, not least because we are obliged to follow more or less the same process that they followed and we want to know what mistakes were made so that we can learn from them.

That is a real concern. As I mentioned, the Deputy First Minister will be meeting the secretary of state and I imagine that one of the items on the agenda will be to ensure that the review processes that have been ordered are robust. We have to do that because there is a real job to rebuild the confidence of the industry, as well as that of the public, that these processes can be conducted properly. That is a very important point. As I said, the First Minister has already spoken to the secretary of state and the Deputy First Minister will have an early meeting with the secretary of state, at which I am sure that point will be raised.

Patrick Harvie is absolutely right on his first point. It is a very serious issue that involves a huge amount of money, and yet all we have from the Opposition parties are attempts at distraction. Within an independent Scotland we would acquire powers that would open up a range of different opportunities to all the parties, who could put them to the electorate.

There have been substantial discussions on that in the run-up to the process. It was also canvassed in the consultation process that we carried out well in advance of the procurement exercise that we are about to enter into. The option was canvassed and I spoke about it with officers and others. There were also discussions with the trade unions, who were very interested in that particular aspect. We have made it clear that legislation allows us to accept a bid from a not-for-profit body, although that body has to be able to demonstrate experience in running a rail services. Not many in Scotland can do that, but members can probably think of one or two. If a body can do that, there is nothing to stop it making a bid—there is no barrier. However, I cannot promote a particular bid. The Government cannot do that and it has to be seen to be impartial, but the possibility is there. I will help out the Presiding Officer by making a final comment about the point at which we were told about this. I see in today’s Daily Mail—a fine newspaper indeed—that a Downing Street insider spoke about why the announcement was made at one minute past midnight. They said: “It was unusual”— I think it was— “but the Secretary of State decided to act as soon as he was made aware of the facts. It had to be done outside of financial markets. Calls had to be made and key people alerted.” I do not know who the key people were, other than perhaps Richard Branson and one or two others, but I think that the people of Scotland should have been among them. That ready contempt for the interests of the people of Scotland is one of the most disturbing aspects of this episode.

I know this only from reading the media, of course, but two of the obvious points—I have mentioned them already—are passenger numbers and the calculation of inflation. Those are two things that seem to have caused some trouble and which have made it into the public domain. As the member can imagine, I have had a number of discussions with Transport Scotland officials and, as I mentioned earlier, with the minister of state. There are some things that industry insiders would say are of concern. The DFT is considering a vast number of franchises. It has changed the franchising process and there are question marks over whether sufficient resource went into managing that process in the DFT—that comes from industry insiders. Another point concerns the length of time. We had our rail consultation last year, well in advance of the franchising process. We have given ourselves a further 20 months. We are very close to starting that process, although obviously we have to take stock of what has just happened. Of course, we will take on board for our franchise any lessons that can be learned from what has happened in this case.

The camera does not lie and everyone can see what happened yesterday. Richard Baker was blissfully unaware of the fundamentals of rail franchising, which is quite worrying. I was happy to set him straight then and I am happy to say now that, of course, we welcome bids if they come forward from not-for-profit organisations, but we cannot promote individual bids. He should also know that a fundamental of public procurement when the exercise is competitive is that we cannot favour one bid over another. We would welcome not-for-profit bids as we would any others.

Consultation took place with regional transport partnerships, Passenger Focus and local authorities during May 2012 on the details of changes to rail services between Glasgow Central station and Ayr in December 2012.

The timetable had not been agreed in advance of the consultation, and we followed exactly the same process as the Labour and Liberal Democrats followed in previous consultations. The process was carried out by ScotRail and involved the partners whom I mentioned. I would have thought that Neil Bibby would have taken the opportunity to acknowledge that, with no additional subsidy from the Scottish Government, there will be two additional services between Ayrshire and Glasgow in the morning peak period, which will provide an additional 500 seats. Perhaps he will acknowledge that. There will also be two additional services from Glasgow to Ayrshire in the evening peak period, providing a similar number of seats. All those services will call at Paisley Gilmour Street. The new timetable is forecast to generate more than 500,000 additional passenger journeys each year. That is good news for passengers, and I would have thought that Neil Bibby would have taken the opportunity to commend us for that. I understand that, in discussions that he had with officials, he said that he was content with the changes, so I am not sure why he is complaining.

In discussions with the member, I have made clear that ScotRail, which has responsibility for the matter, constantly reviews its timetables. There are constraints in the current franchise, which should be acknowledged: if we make changes to the timetable we must pay the franchise holder for that. We have managed to reach agreement, and ScotRail says that it will carry out additional work to ensure that passengers who use the service have a chance to express their views—I am more than happy to have a further passenger survey, to ensure that that is formalised. Of course, when we have the new franchise—notwithstanding events today—further changes can be made at the time.

As I said, the timetable will improve connectivity between Ayrshire, Inverclyde and Glasgow in a number of respects. For example, the current half-hourly Sunday summer service from Glasgow to Ayr, which calls at Paisley Gilmour Street, will become an all-year-round service, which will be an improvement for the member’s constituents. As I said to George Adam and in response to consultation with members, I am more than happy for ScotRail to look at the situation, through the passenger survey, so that it can find out the views of the most important people in all of this: the passengers.

Transport Scotland officials last met Aberdeen City Council, Aberdeenshire Council and Nestrans—the north east of Scotland transport partnership—on 12 April 2012 to discuss improvements to the Haudagain roundabout and other infrastructure projects. At the meeting, officials reconfirmed the Scottish Government’s commitment to starting improvements to Haudagain once the Aberdeen western peripheral route has been completed.

I could not agree more with the point that Mark McDonald makes. It is worth saying that all options to emerge from the Aberdeen City Council Scottish transport appraisal guidance report require both the AWPR and the third Don crossing to be in place before the solutions work effectively. If the third Don crossing is not put in place, the proposed solutions at Haudagain will simply not be effective. However, it is clear that the completion of it and the AWPR would ease the strain on the Haudagain junction and assist during the construction process for delivering improvements at that bottleneck.

I will have to give the same answer that I have given to the same question from Richard Baker over a number of months. I have just made the point, as has Mark McDonald, that the studies that have been done show that the benefits to come from the Aberdeen western peripheral route require the improvements to the Haudagain roundabout to come afterwards. We have taken professional advice on the matter, including the STAG report that was mentioned, and are following it. That is the order in which to do the projects. We are, of course, frustrated by the delays to the AWPR and await the outcome of the court process. However, in the meantime, we must ensure that we go about it in the right way, not only because it will be the most effective solution but because it is the most effective use of public resources.

As I said in my answer to the first substantive question, of course we are willing to discuss with our partners, including Aberdeen City Council, how best we can expedite the process. The major decision is still to be taken and we are hopeful that it will be taken shortly. I am well aware of the uncertainty that Brian Adam mentions. I am more than happy to work with our partners on that and to come back to him with a further update once we have done so.

The Scottish Government is firmly opposed to the possession and threat of nuclear weapons. We are in contact with the Norwegian authorities to secure further information on the conference.

Perhaps the member wants to pay more attention to his party than to my party—that might be in his interests. I am here to answer for the Scottish Government. We note the role that humanitarian law has played in the banning of landmines and cluster munitions, for example. It is right to focus attention on the devastating consequences of nuclear weapons, which Patrick Harvie mentioned. We support the work of the Norwegian Government and others in seeking to build the political support that is needed to secure binding treaties on the reduction and ultimate withdrawal of nuclear weapons.

At present, we have no plans to introduce new rail links in the west of Scotland, but we have announced the £30 million Scottish stations investment fund and we will consider any proposals that are affordable and demonstrate value for money.

I understand that, as the local MSP, the Minister for Local Government and Planning will meet his local council to discuss the issue. That shows ambition on both sides. The process by which people can access the stations investment fund has been laid out, albeit that it starts in 2014. If the local council and the local regional transport partnership care to work together to go through the process of providing the appropriate analysis of whether bus, rail or other forms of transport are ideal, they can of course make a bid to the fund, which will be considered in due course.

The stations investment fund will start in April 2014. Before then, I recommend that local campaigners work with their local authorities, regional transport partnerships and developers in some cases. We have said that the £30 million that is available can be best used if it is spread among as many stations as possible. If we can access money from regional transport partnerships that are keen to have a station, or if—as in the two cases, at least, of which I am aware—stations can be built entirely with developers’ contributions, that makes more sense. At this stage, it is appropriate to ensure that campaigners engage with local authorities and regional transport partnerships.

The Government is committed, as its main purpose, to creating a more successful country, with opportunities for everybody to flourish through increasing sustainable economic growth. I remind members that the subject of the debate is the Scottish green bus fund, as it is not immediately obvious from the Labour amendment, for example, that the debate is about that. The Scottish green bus fund is an integral part of how we will deliver the commitment to a sustainable economic future for Scotland. Our public transport services play a vital role in enabling access to employment, training, public services, leisure, and friends and family. They produce less carbon, pollution and congestion per passenger mile than private cars do. That is reflected in our commitments in our climate change agenda to encourage a modal shift towards more sustainable and active modes of travel and to support lower-carbon and more fuel-efficient options within modes. The bus sector plays a particularly key role. In 2010-11, buses ran 354 million kilometres on local services in Scotland. Buses deliver 438 million passenger journeys a year and 80 per cent of all passenger journeys made by public transport. They carry some 12 per cent of the population to work every day. For many communities, they are the principal or the only means of public transport. Over the past few years, the Government has worked closely with the bus industry to support the introduction of more environmentally friendly, low-carbon vehicles into the Scottish bus fleet. The debate will consider the importance of that continuing work for transport, the environment and bus users. Last month, I announced a further round of the Scottish green bus fund worth £3 million and, last week, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth announced further funding of £2.5 million for hybrid buses in 2013-14 as part of his budget statement. I will start by setting the context for bus transport in delivering our climate change agenda. Our environment is increasingly affected by the decisions that individuals make on a daily basis, transport being one of those decisions. Transport is a major source of greenhouse gas emissions. Greenhouse gas emissions by all transport, including freight, account for a quarter of all emissions in Scotland. Within that total, road transport accounts for 70 per cent. Bus transport produces 3 per cent of road emissions, but that figure is growing, partly because of increases in the weight of conventional diesel buses resulting from the equipment that is needed to ensure, rightly, that they are accessible to all passengers, and partly because of increasing improvements in the efficiency of other road transport modes, including cars and freight. Buses in urban areas also contribute to the particulate and other emissions that have a detrimental effect on the air quality in too many of our towns and cities. As we see bus transport as an important and growing part of the transport mix, it is important that we take action to address those environmental impacts. That is why the Government has been incentivising the purchase and operation of low-carbon vehicles. Part of our approach to doing that is the Scottish green bus fund, which has a number of potential benefits. It can reduce the direct impact of buses’ carbon and other emissions on the environment and newer vehicles improve the quality of service, encouraging modal shift from car to bus. It can increase demand for low-carbon vehicles, benefiting bus manufacturers and allowing them to develop and invest in technology and achieve economies of scale. That is an important point because, although the Government’s role is to incentivise the purchase of low-carbon vehicles, it is not the idea that we will continue to do that for ever more; we want to help the industry to move towards that and provide encouragement for operators. The Scottish green bus fund can contribute over time to reductions in the overall cost of low-carbon vehicles, which will improve their commercial viability and encourage increasing investment by bus operators. In turn, that will create and sustain opportunities for Scottish businesses to develop expertise in innovation in bus manufacturing and operation. So far, we have completed two rounds of the Scottish green bus fund. The first two rounds have already delivered 71 low-carbon hybrid vehicles to nine bus operators that provide services in Glasgow, Edinburgh, Perth, Dundee and Aberdeen. Last month, I announced a third round of £3 million, to run this year. As I said, last week, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth announced further funding for hybrid buses in 2013-14 of £2.5 million, which will bring Scottish Government funding for green buses over four years to £11.3 million, which I believe represents a continuing and sustained commitment to lower-carbon bus services. What are the practical benefits that we are achieving as a result of those investments? We have reduced the direct environmental impact that is made by vehicles, as each new bus delivers an average reduction in CO2 of around 21 tonnes per year and 300 tonnes over its life cycle, which makes an important contribution to achieving our climate change targets. In parallel with reducing carbon use, those buses are also producing less exhaust gas, which helps to improve air quality. It is worth noting, in relation to the buses that we have funded in the Edinburgh area, that the initial estimate of a reduction in fuel consumption of around 40 per cent has been substantially exceeded; we are told by Lothian Buses that the reduction is around 60 per cent. Obviously, as well as using far less fuel, there are benefits to the environment and business benefits to the operators. In some instances, the newer vehicles that are being supported are helping to encourage modal shift by delivering higher quality services that can encourage car drivers to go by bus rather than car. An example of a successful operation, which has seen a growth in patronage, is the number 10 route that is run in Edinburgh by Lothian Buses. The operator took the opportunity of improving the overall specification of the vehicle and developed a specific marketing brand. That demonstrates that bus users respond to the provision of high quality green transport. Central to the Government’s approach to climate change is a sense that tackling climate change is not just a moral and practical imperative, but an economic opportunity. Green buses are a case in point. Scotland is fortunate in having in Alexander Dennis Ltd a world class bus manufacturer that has been successful in developing diesel and electric hybrid buses. The green bus fund is competitive and market driven. Operators receiving grants make their own commercial decisions about who to place their orders with. It is therefore commendable that Alexander Dennis has enjoyed such considerable success in winning orders from the first two rounds of the green bus fund in competition with other manufacturers, which has helped the company to invest further in hybrid bus technology.

That is a fair concern, but the way in which the green bus fund has been distributed so far shows the benefit to small companies rather than the bigger ones to which Patrick Harvie refers. For example, Henderson Travel in Lanarkshire has benefited greatly from hybrid bus technology. We are aware of the situation that Patrick Harvie described. Further development of the green bus fund will provide the possibility of doing some exciting things in the school bus transport system, which comprises a number of small operators as well. We are concerned to ensure that small and medium-sized enterprises benefit. So far, as I said, that has been the picture with the green bus fund. Alexander Dennis has won orders across the world and now has substantial investments in bus building in Australia. It continues to innovate and is looking at how hybrids can be made still more effective in operation. When I recently visited Alexander Dennis I discussed school buses, not least because some of the fleet comprises older and less environmentally friendly buses. I hope that that discussion will lead to further innovation. Alexander Dennis can also provide examples of the delivery of other benefits that we have sought through the Scottish green bus fund: investing in technology, developing Scottish expertise and delivering real commercial benefits for operators as well as environmental ones. Given the recent history of Alexander Dennis, we should all be pleased about the turnaround that has taken place in that company and the vibrancy with which it approaches the future. The green bus fund supports capital investment, but it is not the only way in which we incentivise low-carbon vehicles across Scotland’s bus network. The bus service operators grant, which is mentioned in the Labour amendment, has been refocused so that we provide additional, continuing revenue incentives for the operation of low-carbon vehicles, including hybrids, which benefit from a doubling in grant compared with that for conventional vehicles. Members will remember that the rationale for the changes to the bus service operators grant that have taken place is to help more rural areas and to ensure that what we do rewards actual miles travelled by buses with passengers, which is important and was not the case before. We have doubled the incentives for operators to use environmentally friendly vehicles and the bus service operators grant is another means by which to improve the environment. We must acknowledge, though, that operators take something of a risk when they purchase what is still a relatively new and unproven technology, albeit with the caveat that I mentioned previously about the experience in Lothian. The technology is increasingly less unproven and is becoming more known to more bus operators. However, such purchasing decisions can be difficult, given the technological and market uncertainties. The green bus fund and the low-carbon bus service operators grant try to help reduce the risks and shift the balance. In the long term, I believe that operators stand to reap considerable benefits. I referred previously to a 60 per cent reduction in fuel consumption in that regard. Fuel costs for the bus industry have gone up by 57 per cent in the past five years, so the ability to substantially reduce such costs—by more than half in the case that I mentioned—must be good news. I applaud the way in which operators have used our support creatively as an opportunity to develop their services and not just their vehicles. If that is done well it makes a substantial difference for the user, with higher-specification vehicles. If anybody has not tried the number 10 vehicles in Edinburgh, I encourage them to do so—they have a higher spec and a different appearance so that everyone knows that they are on a hybrid vehicle. Such vehicles give a smoother ride, have strong branding and highlight the clear contribution that travelling by bus makes to helping the environment. That imaginative use of new technology has helped its early acceptance by the public and it offers a direction for future improvements in service quality. Talking about the future, it is now clear that there are substantive benefits from the investment made through the green bus fund. However, there are 5,400 vehicles in the Scottish bus fleet, so we have more to do. I re-emphasise that we are trying to incentivise the move towards green buses. The benefit will be that, over time, the investments by operators and producers will start to make that easier. The third and future rounds of the fund will have their part to play. I look forward to continuing to work in partnership with bus operators and manufacturers to finish what we have started and to make a substantial centre of excellence in Scotland. The Government considers the green bus fund to be a proven success. Despite the current financial difficulties, we will continue to take every opportunity to make the investment and to consider how to further that investment with the industry, to help with its drive to ensure that the cost reductions and other benefits from the technology that is there or coming are realised. I have focused on hybrid buses and the green bus fund, but it is important to recognise that other technologies offer similar benefits to our bus fleets and to other forms of road transport. For example, the Government supports the hydrogen bus project that is being led by Aberdeen City Council and SSE. That will result in 10 hydrogen buses operating on routes in central Aberdeen, which will be the largest fleet of hydrogen-powered buses anywhere in Europe. A local company in my constituency developed a hydrogen power unit that can be used in ferries. In fact, it is being used in a ferry in Bristol. Because the unit is so efficient and light, after it was fitted more ballast had to be put into the vessel. There is a difficulty with new technologies to do with ensuring that the regulatory framework is there. That project was, if you like, a pipe clearer for future projects. We also support electric vehicle technology. In March, we launched our E-cosse initiative, which is a partnership between Government, industry, WWF Scotland and other key stakeholders to advance the adoption of electric vehicles in Scotland. The initiative aims to make Scotland an EV pioneer. We are producing a road map, to be published in early 2013, which will lead to a portfolio of projects to advance electric vehicle adoption. I have set out the original environmental aims of the Scottish green bus fund, outlined the benefits to the environment, the economy and bus users that have been delivered so far through the introduction of low-carbon vehicles to the bus fleet and looked forward to our continuing programme of support for the take-up of new hybrid technologies. I am therefore happy to move the motion in my name. I move, That the Parliament notes that the Scottish Green Bus Fund has already supported the delivery of 71 new low-carbon hybrid buses; welcomes the contribution that these are making toward reducing fuel consumption and Scotland’s carbon emissions; urges the Scottish Government and the bus industry to continue to work together to improve the environmental performance of Scotland’s bus fleet, and further welcomes the launch of the third round of the fund, worth £3 million in 2012-13, and the provision of an additional £2.5 million for hybrid buses in the draft budget for 2013-14.

We have representatives from the Confederation of Passenger Transport in the gallery and the member should be aware that we are in discussion with it on that very issue. It is right that we look at the rate of reimbursement because it is some time since it was set. However, I have sustained the concessionary travel scheme. In the interests of the honest debate that the member is asking for, please say what you would do with concessionary travel and where you would get the money from. That is a reasonable question.

Will the member take an intervention?

It might repay the member to look at the figures. The amount for concessionary travel has substantially increased year on year and will increase again next year.

Does the member acknowledge that the changes to BSOG affect fares by only 1 or 2 per cent and that the 57 per cent increase in the price of diesel is having a much bigger effect? If he wants to put more money into BSOG, can he tell us where that money will come from?

Thank you very much for that opportunity, Presiding Officer. This has been, at least in large part, an interesting and positive debate. The funding of the services—an issue to which I will return—has been less consensual, but the points that have been made on the green bus fund have been well received and well supported around the chamber. For the avoidance of doubt, I intend to support Alex Johnstone’s amendment and not to support the Labour amendment. During the debate, I tried to intervene on Alex Johnstone to say that I intended to support his amendment, but he refused to accept any intervention from me. I thought that I would at least have a chance when one of his back benchers spoke, but there were no Tory back benchers.

There is now, but there were none earlier. As we have said, low-carbon vehicles deliver benefits. A range of different figures has been given: such vehicles make at least 30 per cent carbon savings over the diesel equivalents, and we heard that such buses in the Lothians have achieved savings of between 56.7—a very precise figure—and 60 per cent in fuel consumption. A number of members spoke about the reduced impact on the environment and the ability of low-carbon vehicles to improve air quality and, of course, drive down carbon emissions. Of course, the point was also made that carbon is still used in electric and hybrid buses. The real boon would be hydrogen buses, which a number of members mentioned and which would enable us to drive down carbon emissions even further. By providing funds to incentivise a new bus fleet, we create an opportunity to help to improve patronage and widen the appeal of bus travel to more people. A number of members made the point that we can achieve economies of scale. Claudia Beamish mentioned something along those lines and asked about the extent to which the funding that we have already made available is driving improvement. We are seeing that. I mentioned the plans to expand green buses into other areas, specifically school buses; Alexander Dennis told me about that when I visited the company. The member will be aware that some school bus contracts have some of the oldest elements of the bus fleet in Scotland. The funding is developing expertise. A number of members pointed out the extent to which Scotland has achieved a real lead in relation to not only hybrid buses, but batteries that provide power for buses and other vehicles. We should both celebrate and encourage that. Nothing in the motion is self-congratulatory, but it is important that we acknowledge what has been achieved to date. We have had two rounds of the Scottish green bus fund—the third round has been announced—and 71 vehicles have been delivered. We have said that so far the buses will run in Glasgow, Edinburgh, Perth, Dundee, Aberdeen and Lanarkshire. A fourth round of £2.5 million was confirmed in the budget announcement. The funding rounds represent major contributions to helping to achieve the climate change target, not only in themselves but as a result of what they will encourage bus operators and some manufacturers to do. I return to some of the points that were made in the debate, which started with Elaine Murray’s appeal for an honest debate. We have had an awful lot of conversations about that. However, the Labour Party says consistently—as we heard last week—that we should spend £350 million more on EGIP and that we should spend more money on BSOG and on concessionary travel. There have also been demands from the Labour Party for more money to be spent on housing and on colleges. If the Labour Party genuinely wants an honest debate, it must specify exactly what it would ditch and what it would do differently. It is perfectly legitimate for an Opposition party to say those things, but if we are to have an honest debate—I am sure that Elaine Murray genuinely wants to have such a debate—we must have more clarity about what the Labour Party would do.

Patrick Harvie refers to the profitability of the companies. To be honest, it is not a bad thing if companies are profitable. However, it is true that the fact that many hundreds of thousands of people—pensioners and others—make journeys using concessionary travel schemes has contributed to that profitability. I do not think that that is a bad thing. If the member wants to spend more money on buses, perhaps he can explain why he had us spend £776 million on a tram scheme in Edinburgh when we could otherwise have given further support to the bus industry. In relation to the different demands, we require more clarity if we are to have an honest debate. Neil Findlay was perhaps unfortunate, in that his argument collapsed as a result of his starting off with the wrong facts. He said that the budget for the concessionary travel scheme has been reduced. If I am wrong, I will come to the chamber and apologise the next chance that I get. I ask him to do the same. The fact is that this year £187 million will be given to the concessionary travel scheme—that is up £7 million from last year. If Neil Findlay finds out that he is wrong, as I think that he will, perhaps he will come back and apologise.

That is not what he said, but we will wait and find out whether he comes back with an apology for what he said. Having constructed his argument based on the wrong facts, Neil Findlay got himself into real trouble. I wondered where he was going with his argument, but we got the answer that we have always suspected would explain Neil Findlay’s position. His words were, “I do not support anything that the SNP does.” Whatever this Government says, instead of having a rational, mature and honest debate Neil Findlay and others in the Labour Party will decide to do something different. Perhaps that approach has got the Labour Party into the situation that it is in now. Iain Gray made a relatively positive contribution. He talked about red buses and green buses, which Richard Baker also mentioned. Like Iain Gray, I certainly favoured the green buses. I have to say that nostalgia is not what it used to be and that, having been born here and having grown up in the Lothians and Edinburgh, I do not have the same memories that he has of the bus services running in the idyllic way that he described. However, I take his point about the Eastern Scottish and Lothian Regional Transport buses being very well used. Iain Gray talked about reregulation. If the debate is to be honest, what that regulation would involve must be spelled out. Would it mean the things for which Strathclyde partnership for transport has asked, which we have agreed to look at and on which we have said that we are willing to listen? Today and when Charlie Gordon brought the idea to the chamber, no price tag was put on it. Unless at least an indicative price tag can be put on proposals, nobody will take them seriously. Charlie Gordon was mentioned in relation to how we started talking about the green bus fund. I remember Michael Matheson talking about it long before Charlie Gordon got round to it, not least because of the interest in Michael Matheson’s constituency. I was waiting for Jim Hume to mention Alan Sugar, but he was not mentioned. Nick Clegg has said that the Liberal Democrats want to look at the concessionary travel scheme in England, because they do not like the idea that Alan Sugar gets a bus pass. They should have checked their facts first—I think that everybody knows that Alan Sugar does not use buses, and he does not have a bus pass. There is coalescence between the Labour Party, which wants to look at the concessionary travel scheme in Scotland, and the coalition parties, which seem to share an agenda of cutting vital public services. Kezia Dugdale, who is often called the future of the Labour Party, was mentioned. According to her, the future will involve looking at the concessionary travel scheme with a view to rolling it back. In her defence, we heard that she was speaking only in a personal capacity, although she is a front bencher. We also heard that Johann Lamont spoke yesterday about the idea of cutting back on concessionary travel, although that was quickly changed afterwards.

I am certainly aware that Labour members are capable of thinking for themselves; it is the speaking part that seems to be a problem. Patrick Harvie made a number of points. He started by saying that most people who had spoken were partly right—the implication was that he was wholly right. He mentioned the need to do more, but I have talked already about the contribution that we have made to public transport, not least to a project that he supported—the trams, the current cost of which is £776 million. BSOG was mentioned frequently. Of bus service providers, 75 per cent have had a beneficial impact from BSOG since the changes were introduced last year to incentivise rural travel and to deincentivise the use of more fuel. Claudia Beamish, Angus MacDonald, Gordon MacDonald and Mark McDonald made good speeches. Apart from the obvious points about the green bus fund, a point that Mark McDonald made was the centrepiece of the debate. Repeated demands have been made in the chamber for increased spending on concessionary travel, as with housing, colleges, ferries and, last week, railways. Previously, £750 million was demanded for trams. What has been said in the chamber stands in stark contrast to what Johann Lamont said yesterday. Labour members cannot face both ways at the same time. They cannot demand, every day in the Parliament, additional spending in virtually every area of Government activity and then say that they want to have a sensible and mature debate about Government spending. They will find that people will not take their proposals seriously if people know that no money is attached and that the real agenda is to cut back on what the Government does. The Labour, Lib Dem and Tory parties have coalesced around a cuts agenda. They do not just think that they are better together or that we are all in this together. Iain Gray rose—

No—I am in my final minute Whether it is going after our prescriptions, the council tax freeze or people’s bus passes, we now know that the Labour Party—in common with the Conservative Party and the Lib Dem party—is in the business of cutting benefits. We will stay in the business of cutting emissions through our Scottish green bus fund.

The Deputy First Minister met Strathclyde partnership for transport on Monday to mark the refurbishment of Hillhead station as part of the subway modernisation programme to which the Scottish Government is contributing up to £246 million. They discussed subway modernisation and the artwork at Hillhead station.

The SPT 10-point plan is being given serious consideration and is the subject of discussions within the bus service users and providers group, which we have established not just for that purpose but to look at bus issues generally. The member raises the issue of bus services being reduced in some localities. We have almost exactly the same, largely deregulated system of bus provision that we had under the previous Administration, and it is up to individual bus operators to decide which services to provide. If they are going to change services, there is an obligation on them to give notice to the traffic commissioner for Scotland. The member suggests that there should be a wider consultation before that happens, and that is being given active consideration.

David Stewart may be aware that I visited the Western Isles in July, when I announced the extension of the discount scheme to volunteers and employees of third sector organisations. While I was in Stornoway, I met senior members of the council and local business interests. We discussed the air discount scheme.

I have answered that question a number of times. We cannot do that, as the scheme, as described by the European Commission, is for “aid of a social character”. It does not apply to businesses. That is why we have extended it as I described. I say to David Stewart, who has raised the issue a number of times, that if he can put forward a legally based proposition in a budget, we will see whether he is serious about the matter or is just posturing politically.

The member seems to have neglected two particular statements that have been made. The leader of Glasgow City Council said: “this announcement is good news for the city.” The transport convener of the City of Edinburgh Council said: “We welcome this investment in public transport which will greatly improve the journey from Glasgow to Edinburgh”. The member did not mention those statements.

Since the funding of rail was devolved to the Scottish ministers in 2006, there has been major investment in the rail network and its services. The Government has presided over the opening of two new lines, seven new stations and the procurement of 38 new trains. New powers have also brought new investment, and people across Scotland have seen the benefit, with new rail services providing access to jobs, education and leisure. Performance has also increased to record levels. The past four weeks have seen the best levels of punctuality and reliability on the Scottish network since 2005. Journey times are improving across the network and ScotRail passenger satisfaction rates are consistently well above the average in Great Britain, although it would be the first to say that more is to be done. Good performance and record investment since 2007 have also stimulated a resurgence in rail travel in Scotland over the past few years. Indeed, passenger numbers have increased by 30 per cent since the start of the ScotRail franchise. That is good news for the economy, the environment and the travelling public. However, sustained improvement and growth need sustained investment in the future. As I announced in June in the chamber, we will be investing £5 billion in rail between 2014 and 2019 to support the franchise passenger services and to enable Network Rail to operate, maintain and enhance the network.

No, not just now. In that statement to the chamber, I committed to continuing the delivery of EGIP and ensuring that it and other network improvements are compatible with our approach to high-speed rail, and I said that further progress on EGIP would be announced shortly. In fact, EGIP has already delivered key infrastructure improvements at Haymarket tunnel and new services on the Edinburgh to Glasgow via Shotts line.

Earlier this year, Network Rail began advanced route-clearance works and the redevelopment of Haymarket station in readiness for increased passenger numbers and full-route electrification.

In December 2012, new Edinburgh to Glasgow via Carstairs services will be introduced. Delivered a year earlier than expected, the new services respond to local demand for new links between Edinburgh and Glasgow from Carstairs and Carluke, and they will deliver a step change in passenger capacity on that important route between our two major cities, with improved connectivity opportunities to the south and west of Glasgow. On 4 July, I announced that we will electrify the core Edinburgh to Glasgow via Falkirk line, deliver the new Edinburgh gateway station with connection to Fife line services, and deliver the electrification of the Cumbernauld lines in time for the Commonwealth games. That represents a £650 million package of investment in Scotland’s railway infrastructure, rolling stock and service provision, which will enable hundreds of new jobs to be created and provide a major boost to the wealth of Scotland and to its long-term economic sustainability.

I will give way to Patricia Ferguson, but perhaps she could say where the £350 million that the Labour Party says that it intends to reinstate would come from.

There was no answer to the question about where the £350 million would come from. I note the member’s previous intervention in relation to this—[Interruption.]

Her previous contribution was to propagate scare stories about Glasgow station closures that never happened. On the point about the EGIP timetable—

On the point that I have just mentioned, we have already started progress towards EGIP and will continue that progress according to the previous timetable of trying to achieve all the improvements by 2016.

No. I have taken one from the member already. The Jacobs review identified a new opportunity to deliver increased capacity by lengthening platforms as part of the Queen Street station redevelopment. Transport Scotland is now working in partnership with Glasgow City Council, Network Rail and Buchanan Partnership to make that a reality. As well as delivering faster, better electrified services for passengers, that opportunity will also bring considerable savings, which we need to identify, and will meet passenger demand well into the next decade. We are determined to ensure that the rail programme is affordable and that we continue to drive the best value out of every pound that we invest. We must, therefore, take advantage of every opportunity to maximise the investment in any way that we can. I remind Parliament that, in my June statement, which has been mentioned, I committed the Government to sustained increases in rail investment until the end of the decade. Any savings that are made will, of course, increase opportunities for investment elsewhere in the rail network. The Jacobs report, on which these developments are based, was published today and copies are available in the Scottish Parliament information centre. [Interruption.] I am sure that Labour members will welcome that when they speak subsequently. I hope that the report will put to rest any concerns or speculation over the future of EGIP.

I am not sure whether the member is saying that Winchburgh railway station is not going to open or whether he is asking when it will open. If he talked to his local council—in particular, the deputy leader of the council, with whom I am in correspondence—

Perhaps if he did so, he would get a better idea of the fact that that proposal will come forward from the council. We have said to it consistently—

Well, it depends on when the proposal comes forward from the council. Perhaps the member should talk to his Labour colleagues on the council. The timing and specification of future activities will be dependent on other considerations, including high-speed rail. It is only natural that we will take into account possible developments for high-speed rail—it would be foolish of us not to do that. That is important to the EGIP programme and it also relates to wider capacity and affordability issues. The Government is also committed to a continuing programme of electrification of the Scottish rail network following EGIP. Mention has been made of the Stirling, Dunblane and Alloa services.

No, I must make some progress and I do not have much time left. I am in my last minute.

I have mentioned that we will progress 100km of electrification every year for the next five years over and above that to which we have committed within EGIP. My officials are currently exploring the delivery of options including the electrification of the Dunblane and Alloa services. Our record of investment stands comparison with anybody’s. The Transform Scotland report, which was published this morning, says that progress is now being made in the United Kingdom at a greater rate than in Scotland. However, the figures show that we are investing £624 per head as compared with the UK, which is currently investing £324 per head. We also have £5 billion of investment planned over the next five years, including the Borders rail project, the Airdrie to Bathgate project and the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine project, which I was proud to initiate as the leader of the council and which, in its first year, attracted 400,000 new passengers. That is a record of which to be proud. I move amendment S4M-04165.2, to leave out from “notes” to end and insert: “welcomes the substantial increase in the number of people using rail; recognises that punctuality and reliability are currently at record levels; notes the record investment in rail since 2007, including new lines between Airdrie and Bathgate and Stirling and Kincardine; also welcomes the announcements of 21 June and 4 July 2012 by the Minister for Transport and Veterans of a £5 billion programme of future investment in rail, including the new Borders Railway, and details of the Edinburgh Glasgow Improvement Programme (EGIP); further recognises that EGIP will bring faster journeys, new trains, enhanced capacity, a new station at Edinburgh Gateway, improvements to Edinburgh Haymarket station and previously unplanned improvements to Glasgow Queen Street; further welcomes the commitment to future electrification of the network through EGIP and the High Level Output Specification, and believes that this announcement is fully consistent with the Scottish Government’s stated aim of investing in infrastructure to stimulate the economy and that, as a result, businesses, passengers and areas will benefit.”

Will the member give way?

If the member believes that our level of investment is failing to support public transport while it is at twice the level of investment in the rest of the United Kingdom, what does that say about the Liberal Democrat commitment to public transport in England and Wales?

Much mention has been made during the debate—perhaps not surprisingly—of the issue of finances. Perhaps I should address that first. As we have said, there has been a cut of around a third to the Government’s capital budget—around £1 billion in resources. Obviously, such cuts have consequences across Government expenditure. One of the comments surprised me. Mark Griffin—I think—said that the Scottish Government was in danger of incurring unsustainable debt. We had a lecture from Ken Macintosh recently about the meaning of the word “irony”. Is there any irony more rich than the idea that the Westminster Government is worried about irresponsible debt on the part of the Scottish Government—every pound of whose debt is approved by the Westminster Government—when it is standing on a massive debt created by the previous Labour Government and sustained in current times by the coalition Government? That is irony at its worst. It is worth remembering the departing words of the Labour Party as it left office. In the words of Liam Byrne, the chief secretary to the Treasury, “there’s no money left.”

Perhaps later, but not just now. That was Labour’s legacy. At the same time, Alistair Darling said he wanted to see cuts deeper than Margaret Thatcher’s. That is what we have been left by the Labour Party. What is perhaps more surprising is Labour’s eagerness to play the role of the alibi to the coalition Government when it imposed some of the cuts that were caused by Labour’s economic legacy. Obviously, cost is extremely important and we must try to be careful with the costs that we incur. We heard mention of some of the other improvements: £30 million for the Scottish stations investment fund; £100 million for the sleeper services; £60 million for other network improvements; and the Paisley canal line and Corkerhill depot being electrified over the next few months so that, from December 2012, the two-car diesel trains will be replaced by three-car electric trains, which will provide more seats for passengers. I announce that the Conon Bridge railway station will open by February 2013, in time to help mitigate major disruption from the planned resurfacing works on the A9 Kessock Bridge. There is substantial investment. The Labour Party looks at this Government’s £5 billion investment programme and what we have done on fares—which it criticises, although exactly the same rise of the retail prices index plus 1 per cent took place down south—and says that, if it had the chance, it would take similar decisions. It has to look for something else to criticise. It also tries to wish away the economic legacy that it bequeathed to us. I will address one or two other points that were made. Richard Simpson made a point about my constituents asking questions about the investment plan. I have fewer constituents to deal with than he does, so perhaps I deal with mine more regularly. The question that I am asked is, “Why was £750 million spent on trams in Edinburgh? Could more not have been done on rail and bus services throughout Scotland with that money?” I get that question much more than the questions that he talked about. Richard Simpson makes a fair point about the disruption that is caused by the night trains. However, I think he knows that it is unfair of him to comment that I have been involved with that from the start. Neither he nor I was party to the decision, but we have both been involved in trying to resolve it, and I have tried to treat his approaches in good faith and work with him. His comments on that were unfair. It is clear that our approach on EGIP has been to sustain the bulk of the project. Most people would welcome £650 million as a positive investment in the railways. Members should not forget that that investment will create hundreds of jobs—major, well-paid jobs—in Scotland.

Let us go back to the £1 billion scheme. I asked where the Labour Party would find the other £350 million. I assume—[Interruption.] I assume that nobody in the Labour Party would take away anything else from the investment programme, because no Labour member has said that they would. If they would not fund that £350 million from the investment programme, I assume that they would fund it from fares. That would mean a 20 per cent increase in fares to everyone in Scotland if the Labour Party had its way. [Interruption.]

I am confident that we have made the right decision on EGIP. The Jacobs Consulting report was mentioned. It is available for people to have a look at. They can check through its figures. As Network Rail will also say, it is right to analyse the future effectiveness of a project that has been talked about for many years. It has changed over the years, but of course it should be analysed and of course we should have an eye on value for money. The Government does that regularly; I only wish that the previous Conservative and Labour Governments down south had done the same thing. On that point, why are we still talking about the electrification of the Edinburgh to Glasgow line? The unionists have had control of the chance to electrify that line and dual the A9. They could have anticipated many years ago that the Forth road crossing would reach capacity, but they did nothing. Nobody wants to start from that position. We have to pick up the consequences of the UK Government’s decades of underinvestment in Scotland. That is why we have to take some difficult decisions, and we are making the right decisions. One of the speakers mentioned wi-fi. It will be available on all trains on the Edinburgh to Glasgow via Falkirk route by the end of 2013 and then between all Scottish cities by early 2014, after which it will be rolled out to other fleets. That shows substantial ambition for the railway in Scotland. Mention was made of the CBI, a witness that the Labour Party regularly trails out during virtually every debate. That is surprising to some—although perhaps not nowadays. Mention was also made of the trade unions. I met the trade unions yesterday and questions were asked about EGIP. We had a fairly positive discussion—I think that the trade unions would say the same thing—but they were much more concerned about, for example, the indemnification clause that Labour included in the previous franchise, which they find to be a standing affront to their rights. Whether trade unions or the wider Scottish public, people see the benefits of the SNP’s investment plans. As I mentioned, £5 billion has been committed going forward. The Airdrie to Bathgate line has been reopened, and the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line has 400,000 passengers. That project was opposed by some Labour people in my constituency, but we worked that through. Those were substantial improvements—[Interruption.] The Labour Party voted against the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line. Billy Calder voted against it. We are making substantial improvements to the rail services and the public realise that. For that reason, I support the amendment in the Government’s name.

Given what the member has just said, would he reinstate £350 million to the project? How would he fund that?

The Scottish Government is absolutely committed to supporting our island communities and we continue to invest millions of pounds in new, cutting-edge ferries, ports and harbours that are fit for the 21st century. As I said in my statement to the chamber on 5 September, on the subject of ferries to Orkney, our next challenge is the replacement of the contract for the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services, which expires in October next year. We will announce our plans for the procurement of the next contract soon. No final decisions have been made regarding the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services tender.

I think that I just explained that no final decisions have been made regarding the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services. I cannot be held to account for statements by RMT. I have said previously, as the member well knows, that we feel that the contract length for all the tenders for ferry services is too short. We made that known to the European Union when I met the European Commission in Brussels. However, as yet, no final decision has been taken regarding the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services.

I must point out that that is not what the First Minister said. He said that we have no plans to unbundle the routes and that no case had been made for unbundling. That gives a fairly strong indication of the Government’s thinking. It is right that the Parliament, as well as the communities that are most affected by the services, should be told first, and that is of course what we will do.

We must bear it in mind that the tendering process has to be open and fair—we are obliged to do nothing but that. As the First Minister said recently and as the member says, we enjoy a fantastic service from the people at CalMac who provide services right across Scotland. Obviously, the awarding of the NorthLink contract was something of a shock to the system for CalMac. I know from speaking to CalMac that it has learned lessons from that and that it intends to apply those lessons to its application for the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services contract. CalMac is working to the October 2013 deadline, and it is working hard to ensure that it is successful in the next contract process.

The member has made that point before, as have Mike Russell and other members who have an interest in the issue. We will of course consider all those issues when we go out to tender. I can guarantee the member that the bidding process will be fair and transparent.

The Scottish Government welcomes proposals—[Interruption.]

The Scottish Government welcomes proposals for new stations such as Robroyston, which could be considered under the £30 million station investment fund that will operate from 2014 and which aims to lever in third-party funding.

My apologies—I assumed that the member knew more about the background than he does. He will be aware that Glasgow City Council has attached a condition to the application that requires a STAG—Scottish transport appraisal guidance—appraisal to be undertaken. The evidence of that appraisal has not yet been presented to Transport Scotland, which is waiting for it. I am aware that one of the viable options would be for a new station to be created once the Cumbernauld line is electrified. It is unfortunate that the member has taken the approach that he has, because each time that he has asked questions on the subject or asked to meet me we have taken a positive approach, and we remain positive about it. We would not be investing £40 million in the fastlink project or £300 million in the Glasgow subway if we were not positive about public transport services in Glasgow. We are positive about the proposal, but there are processes that must be gone through first.

The Scottish Government recognises the importance of sustained capital investment and we are using all the levers at our disposal to maximise infrastructure investment and support economic growth throughout Scotland. We therefore remain absolutely committed to getting the likes of the A90 Aberdeen western peripheral route project up and running as soon as possible, subject to the current legal challenge, given that it is estimated that the project will generate additional income in the north-east of more than £6.33 billion. We have also repeatedly called on Westminster for a capital spending boost in the interests of jobs and recovery in Scotland. We have provided Westminster with a list of shovel-ready projects that we could take forward if we were given additional funding and we will continue to press for that.

The benefits that are currently being avoided include the construction boost that would come from the employment of people in the project, the onwards multiplier effect and economic boost for the area and, as I mentioned, £6.33 billion of additional income. That is part of the cost of the delay. The member is right to point out that we have a democratic and legal process to follow for the AWPR, which the Government cannot avoid. It is unfortunate that an anti-democratic decision by the council has stopped another project going forward.

I am happy to repeat the answer that I have given Alison McInnes a number of times, which is that the Balmedie to Tipperty project will make most sense and be most economically viable if it is undertaken at the same time as the AWPR project. We have been told that by independent assessments that have been carried out to make sure that we do things in the most cost-efficient way possible. I would have thought that somebody from the Liberal Democrats, who are anxious to cut our budgets, would be keen that we do things in the most cost-efficient way. I will be happy to write to Alison McInnes once again to outline that and the reason for the compulsory purchase orders that are taking place.

I am delighted to be able to give my statement so soon after the Scottish Cabinet’s successful meeting in Orkney. I also recently had the opportunity to travel to Orkney by ferry, under the new management, and I enjoyed the usual Orcadian hospitality and some very helpful and pragmatic discussions with the islands’ council. I was a little confused when the Labour Party asked for a ministerial statement on ferries to Orkney. I was not confused about the content—the Scottish Government understands the importance of ferries to the communities of Orkney and Shetland—but about the timing. The most recent events regarding ferries to Orkney and Shetland took place during the previous parliamentary term when the Scottish Government concluded its tendering of the northern isles ferry services contract. Serco was announced as the preferred bidder on 4 May. There was a short delay while one of the other bidders appealed the outcome, but the court found in the Government’s favour and the contract was signed on 1 June. The new contract commenced as planned on 5 July, following a well-managed handover period on which I must congratulate the staff of the outgoing operator, NorthLink Ferries, and the incoming operator, Serco. Those events were certainly of public interest and they created understandable, if temporary, concern for staff and ferry users. Some members took the chance to speak to me at the time, but I do not recall any calls from Labour for a ministerial statement. By my reckoning, there were eight weeks between the announcement of the preferred bidder and the end of the previous parliamentary term. If I had been asked for a statement, I would gladly have given it. We are now in a new parliamentary term, looking ahead to new challenges and opportunities, including the new legislative programme announced yesterday by the First Minister. However, we have been asked by the Labour Party to look back for the next 30 minutes, so we will. I have set out the main milestones that led to the successful handover to Serco on 5 July. Serco has chosen to trade as Serco NorthLink for the provision of the services, thus recognising the value that the communities attach to the NorthLink brand. As I mentioned, I had the opportunity to use the ferry service when I travelled to Orkney on 9 July. As always, I was very impressed with the service and I recommend it to all members. The vessels that provide the services are among the best that we have in Scotland, although the latest ferry that we have introduced to the Hebrides, the £25 million MV Finlaggan, is of a similar standard, and the new £42 million ferry for the Stornoway to Ullapool route that I announced on 8 June will be a further step forward in technical prowess. That new vessel will use around a quarter less fuel than the current service, which is an important consideration given the Parliament’s climate change targets and ambitions. The Serco NorthLink staff are, by and large, the same staff who have been providing an outstanding service on board and on-shore for many years. They continue to provide an efficient and courteous service and the on-board facilities are excellent. There were those who were concerned about the change in operator. I can understand that. Change always brings uncertainty and it is the responsibility of the new operator to prove that it is up to the task. The feedback from customers and stakeholders that I have received is that Serco NorthLink has achieved that. It has adopted the NorthLink brand, employed the existing staff and is deploying the same vessels, so there has been much more continuity than change. The operator has planned improvements for the future that ferry users in Orkney and Shetland will welcome, I am sure. One change that users, particularly those in Shetland, will notice and appreciate is that Serco NorthLink is taking a fresh approach to vessel overhauls. I understand that during the winter there will be no interruption to services, in contrast to the long dry-dock period of last year. That responds to the representations that I received from the local community, the council and the constituency MSP. I also received representations from the trade unions about the position of their members. The contract that we put in place ensured the transfer of all those employees who wished it, with their terms and conditions intact. There was a particular concern about pensions, and strike action was briefly mooted by the RMT. Thanks to the contract’s provisions and the commendable response of Serco NorthLink management and the RMT in getting around the table, I am pleased to say that the issue was quickly resolved to the satisfaction, I understand, of the RMT. I plan to follow that up when I meet RMT representatives tomorrow afternoon. In tendering the northern isles ferry services, the Scottish Government was doing nothing different from its predecessors. The Labour Party and, after devolution, the Liberal Democrats, were responsible for the award of three northern isles contracts: the first to P&amp;O Scottish Ferries in 1997, the second to the original NorthLink, which commenced in 2002 and—when that contract failed—the third to the second incarnation of NorthLink in 2006. We may not always support the tendering of public services. I am sure that many Labour members feel the same, but we are working to the same set of European rules to which they worked when they were in government. As Duncan McNeil, whose constituency includes the David MacBrayne headquarters, said when the Parliament debated the issue in 2005: “The primacy of European Union law over United Kingdom law is long established. We might not like it, but we need to make the best of it. We need to meet our international obligations and our moral obligations to those who elected us.”—[Official Report, 14 September 2005; c 19046.] When we have to tender public services, we have an obligation to do so efficiently and effectively and to work within the current rules. The northern isles tendering exercise attracted four high-quality and competitive bids. That ensured the continuation of a high-quality ferry service, as well as best value for public money. Since 2007, we have allocated record sums of money to the ferry services in Scotland despite severe pressure on public spending and despite cost pressures, such as the rising cost of fuel. For example, in the previous financial year we absorbed an increase in subsidies to CalMac Ferries and NorthLink of around £14 million, which was due to fuel costs. I also look to secure changes to the European Union rules. I have met the European Commission to point out the absurdity of having a maximum contract length for ferries of six years when, under parallel EU rules, rail contracts can be at least 15 years long. I will continue to make that case to the EU. We have committed to publishing our final ferries plan by the end of the year. That will provide a blueprint for improvements to ferry services throughout the country, as well as a foundation for a long-term programme of investments in modern, efficient vessels and accompanying shoreside infrastructure. Those investments support jobs in Scotland, not only for the ferry operators but in civil engineering and shipbuilding. I am proud that the Scottish Government has brought commercial shipbuilding back to the Clyde with the award of a contract for two cutting-edge hybrid ferries to Ferguson Shipbuilders Ltd. That not only safeguards 75 jobs, but creates 100 more jobs and, for the future, 20 modern apprenticeships. Following the publication of the final ferries plan, we will focus on the next major challenge: the replacement of the contract for the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services, which expires in October 2013. The Government awarded the current contract to CalMac Ferries in 2007 following a competitive tendering exercise undertaken by the previous Administration. We will soon announce our plans for the procurement of the next contract. I am aware that the trade unions have concerns about how their CalMac members might be affected. They raised the same concerns with me at the time of the northern isles tendering and I was able to work constructively with them and achieve an outcome with which all parties appear to be satisfied, notwithstanding the concerns that we share about the current EU tendering rules. I have two meetings with the unions planned for the coming weeks to enable me to listen to and respond to those concerns. I assure members that I am always happy to come to the chamber and defend the Government’s record on ferries. As I have shown with the examples that I gave, we have achieved record investments, have maintained services despite severe financial pressures and once again see commercial ships being built on the Clyde. I said at the start that I was confused by the request from Labour for this statement, but I hope that nobody is in any doubt about the strength and clarity of our commitment to our island communities and to the ferries that serve them.

A number of those questions go well beyond the remit of the statement that I have just made, but I will try to answer them when I can. I tried to be a bit more general in my statement, to cover some of the issues that Mr Baker raised. As regards tendering, I am not sure whether Richard Baker is saying that we had a choice in the decision that we took on the awarding of the northern isles ferries contract. I do not know whether he is saying that we should have taken a different approach to that of the previous Administration. I read out Duncan McNeil’s fairly candid view on the need to follow EU regulations. Michael McMahon said the same. He asked the then Opposition members whether they were “really prepared to allow the decision on the tender process to be taken out of the hands of the Minister for Transport ... and handed over to EU officials”.—[Official Report, 14 September 2005; c 19033.] That would be the consequence of taking a decision that was not based on the best outcome. Richard Baker asked whether I agreed to the NorthLink tender in the knowledge that the CalMac tender cost less. I have no idea whether the CalMac tender cost less. It did not qualify to be considered. It could not be looked at. That is the process, and we have to go by that process. I am clear that the outcome that we achieved by doing that is an improving ferry service, and a great deal of continuity and stability. I mentioned that the same vessels and, by and large, the same staff who provided the service before are still providing it. I think that that is a good outcome. In addition, there have been significant improvements, some of which—such as those relating to dry-dock arrangements, which people on the islands and stakeholders were unhappy about—have been mentioned. I am sure that there are further improvements to come. Richard Baker also asked whether I had issued instructions to the CalMac board. I issued no instructions to the CalMac board, nor did Alex Neil in his capacity as Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment. As the major stakeholder in David MacBrayne Ltd, we have an obligation to make clear our view of the public interest and the stakeholder interest, but no instructions were ordered. I am confident that services to the northern isles have been improved and safeguarded. The fact that our expenditure on ferry services to the northern isles amounts to around £240 million gives some idea of the extent of this Government’s commitment to the lifeline services that those islands enjoy.

I will respond first to the point about tendering. As someone who worked for nearly 20 years in local government and was a councillor for 11 years, I have experience of the compulsory competitive tendering regime that was introduced by the Thatcher Government and the extraordinary costs, bureaucracy and destruction of many public services that it resulted in. That alone gives one an idea that public tendering is not always the best process, depending on the service that is being provided. The second point is that there is no question that we will attempt to use EU legislation to close down competition; in fact, EU legislation is by and large designed to ensure that competition takes place. Alex Johnstone is right to say that the outcome of the process in relation to the northern isles shows that the Government is committed to carrying out that process as efficiently as possible. It can also result—and in this case, did result—in the most efficient way of providing a service. That can improve a service but does so with regard to the public cost, which is very important. It is also true that the background information that we have had in relation to future tenders—the member mentioned the upcoming CHFS contract—suggests a very healthy interest, not least because of the tendering process that took place in relation to the northern isles. Of course, I have no way of knowing who will tender for those contracts; whether it will be a single tenderer, many tenderers or even whether some small tenderers will come forward, as the member suggested. We have decisions to take on those issues shortly. I do know that the appetite is there; people see these services as very important, and they know the extent to which the Government is committed to them. We are far from starting the process, but at this stage there is no suggestion that we will have anything other than healthy competition for those tenders.

I know that Liam McArthur was in favour of protecting, for example, the Scrabster-Stromness route and the 90-minute crossing. We did a substantial amount of work to make sure that those vital interests of the people of Orkney were protected. On the wider issue of staff terms and conditions—although we are not the employer; the new contractor is—discussions have taken place with the relevant trade unions and employee representative groups. I understand that they have reached a satisfactory conclusion in relation to terms and conditions, which are not changing for the employees. I agree with Liam McArthur about the excellent service that the employees have given and continue to give, and I understand from the discussions between them and the employer that they are well pleased with the outcome of those negotiations thus far. Obviously, we do not stand back completely dispassionately from those discussions, as we have an interest in ensuring that the service continues to run. So far, many of the issues that Liam McArthur has raised with me have been raised with the individuals concerned. One example is freight services, which we have talked about with stakeholders. After discussion, we seem to be reaching resolution of the issues, or being given reassurances that had perhaps not been obvious at the time when the tender changed. I think that we are reaching a satisfactory conclusion—that was certainly the emphasis of the discussion that I had with Orkney Islands Council, which also raised concerns. Of course, we will continue to listen to any concerns that there might be.

That is a good point. I emphasise that we are following the same process as was followed by previous Administrations, which was laid down for us by the European Union. That said, we are not content simply to accept the process. As I said, we think that the regulations are inadequate, at least in one important regard, which is the length of contract into which we can enter. I think that anyone can understand that the level of investment that is required for vessels is such that a longer contract period is required if investment is to be recouped. We should continue to put pressure on the EU to ensure that we can change the length of contract, as we do for trains and as can happen for buses and other public services. However, with the exception of the representations that we are making in that regard, we are following exactly the same process as previous Administrations followed in relation to the northern isles contract, as we will do in relation to the CHFS contract.

I am happy to look at the issue, although the information that I have is that all the relevant organisations and trade unions were involved in the talks with Serco, which seem to have had a satisfactory resolution. Agreement has been reached between trade unions, the employer and representative groups that terms and conditions that were previously enjoyed will be enjoyed in future under Serco’s management. To underline the point about TUPE, I should say that I met the unions many months before the contract was let and gave them assurances, which I think were important to them, that we would go as far as we could to insist on TUPE being respected. Those reassurances led to the terms and conditions agreement that I mentioned. We were concerned about the issue. We must have regard to contract law, but we have made it a priority to consider the interests of staff, which seems to have been successful on this occasion.

I met the unions on 11 October and was happy to confirm with them our understanding that the TUPE regulations would apply. As I said, I will meet the RMT tomorrow afternoon and the other trade unions shortly thereafter.

That is a key aspect of the contract. We had substantial consultations with the stakeholders, freight companies and service providers involved. In the iterative process that was undertaken with each bidder, the issue was highlighted as crucial. I am confident that the islands’ freight interests were taken into account and that the islands are being properly serviced by the freight companies. Of course, we are early into the new contract. If anything occurs that causes concern, we will be happy to look at the issue again.

I accept that the issue was not designed into the previous contract. As Rob Gibson said, the problem arose last year and caused substantial consternation on the islands. When I met people in Shetland in January, I said that the new contract would not allow such a situation to be repeated. As I said, there will be no dry docking whatever this year, and work that takes place on the ships will not lead to disruption to services. I think that that is a first for the contract.

I am not certain about what the member means by keeping the contracts in the public sector. The contracts have been tendered on a commercial basis for a number of years, including by previous Administrations. We have to go through that process. As I have already mentioned, the process is no different from that which the previous Administration went through, and it is consistent with European legislation. If the member has particular suggestions or proposals to make about ways in which we can fund future ferry provision, I am, of course, happy to discuss them with her, but the process had to take into account the fact that the previous contract involved leases for the vessels that currently service the islands which were entered into in a private arrangement some years ago. The vessels moved forward not just to the contract, but to the very end of it. The opportunity to undertake new ferry provision for the islands did not exist this time. However, if the member has a further suggestion to make about future contracts, I am happy to listen to it.

I have, of course, mentioned the dry docking arrangements, which are very important to people on the islands. There is the knowledge that there will not be a nine-week period in which there is disruption to the services. That is crucial. Beyond that, there is enough scope within the tender that we have agreed with the operator to allow it to take decisions on a commercial basis that might lead to improvement of the service. We have made very clear to the operator the need for the continuity and reliability of the service for passengers and freight customers, but there is, of course, always the potential for further improvements. I am aware that some improvements are being worked on, but it will be for the company to come forward with improvements when it is ready to make an announcement.

Obviously, Inverclyde is quite a long way from Orkney, but I am prepared to answer the question. I think that I have answered some of the questions that Duncan McNeil asked about terms and conditions and trying to protect them. We have an interest in that and we will push it as far as we can. The point that I was making in quoting Duncan McNeil—I also quoted Michael McMahon, but I could have quoted Des McNulty and others—was about the necessity of following the relevant legislation. We will do that and, at the same time—

No, we did not. It was tendered and the contract failed shortly afterwards. We will look at staff interests. We have displayed that already, and we will meet a trade union tomorrow and other trade unions subsequently. That shows that we are taking that commitment seriously.

That question raises an interesting point. We are often told—I am sure that previous Administrations were as well—that the majority of people in Scotland do not live on islands. People wonder why the Government spends the sums of money that I have talked about supporting the transport needs of what they perceive to be a relatively small number of people. Our investment in ferries does not go just to people; it has wider benefits. As we have mentioned, island communities are at the forefront of key industries in Scotland, such as the energy, oil and gas, and renewables industries. Jamie McGrigor mentioned shellfish and other fishing interests. We should consider everything from Arran cheese and Islay whisky to Orkney beef, Shetland salmon and tourism. Such businesses may be island businesses, but they support and are supported by networks and supply chains across the nation. Our investments also support a large number of jobs—more than 1,500—in the ferry operators that provide the subsidised services and more in the ports. What I have said about supporting the services and investing in new vessels on the Clyde for the first time shows that we support the contracts and the services to the islands, because they also support the rest of Scotland.

That resignation is a matter between Archie Robertson and the board of CalMac. I did not say that the bid was incompetent; I said that I had not seen the figures that attached to it, because it did not pass the final stage. I will go no further than that just now, but I will say, for the last time, that the ferry service in the northern isles replicates the best elements of what we had before and will further improve them.

As other members have done, I congratulate Christina McKelvie on securing this debate on what is an excellent initiative from Citizens Advice Scotland. I also welcome members’ comments, which illustrate the keen interest in the Parliament in the support and welfare needs of our veterans community in Scotland. To repeat a point that I made during the previous debate on veterans, it is appreciated by veterans and by those in the armed forces that there is such a consensus on the issue, or at least on what we have to try to do for veterans. When I was first elected to the Parliament, I very much enjoyed the confusion that the then Presiding Officer, Alex Fergusson, had in trying to tell me and Jamie Hepburn apart. Of course, the reason why I very much enjoyed that comparison was that Jamie Hepburn’s grandfather served with the Seaforth Highlanders in the second world war and my grandfather served with the Black Watch in the first world war.

Certainly.

In the past few months, several members have lodged motions congratulating Citizens Advice Scotland on the armed services advice project, or ASAP. Today’s debate has enabled us to acknowledge publicly the success of ASAP, which is important. Initiatives by national third sector organisations such as Citizens Advice Scotland are widely acknowledged as examples of forward thinking and collaborative working that have a significant impact on the ground and which deliver help, support and tangible results to those who face a disadvantage. That is an important point. I hope to visit Stirling citizens advice bureau on 19 July.

I certainly commend Scottish War Blinded on its work. Dennis Robertson’s intervention underlines my point that many different organisations across the country provide services. They might not be directly involved with the Scottish Government but they work on their own merits. Many of them, including Scottish War Blinded, have been around for many years and we acknowledge the work that they carry out. ASAP is a free, independent and confidential advice service that is available to serving personnel, veterans and their families, regardless of where they live in Scotland—although I take on board Maureen Watt’s point. The Scottish Government does not provide these services directly, but we must as far as possible ensure that veterans throughout Scotland are able to draw on available services. ASAP’s specialist advice is available through appropriate signposting and is only a phone call away. Initial advice is available on a national helpline—0845 231 0300—and, after that, veterans can get an appointment with an adviser at a designated CAB. This excellent, intuitive and well-designed tool makes the right connections with organisations and agencies that have expertise of direct benefit to those who need it and provides the right people to assist with benefits inquiries; debt and money management advice; housing issues, to which I will return in a moment; work-related problems; consumer issues; and help in coping with relationships. In response to Alex Fergusson’s point about the preponderance of veterans in the homelessness figures, I point out that we have been tackling homelessness directly. For example, as was made clear during First Minister’s questions, the level of homelessness dropped by almost a fifth over the past year while, south of the border, there was a substantial increase. We have managed to reduce those figures in the teeth both of a recession and of certain welfare reforms that have increased homelessness south of the border. If Mr Fergusson has more information on the figure that he mentioned—more than 10 per cent, I believe—I would be interested in hearing it. In order to tackle this issue more effectively, we need more effective joint working between those who help veterans, the Scottish Government and the Ministry of Defence. We have certainly had a great deal of co-operation from those at the very top of the armed forces, who have made it very clear that they are keen to work with us; and Veterans Scotland has said the same. However, if the MOD and the Scottish Government can engage more effectively, we will be able to pick up certain issues, particularly the point highlighted by Christina McKelvie about the ability of members of the armed forces to apply for housing.

I take Alex Fergusson’s point. All I am saying is that I would like more information. I know that that has been the case in the past when there have been substantial reductions in the homelessness figures but it seems counterintuitive that that should continue to be the case. As part of my work with the MOD, I have recently visited two bases. The visits were not public; I had gone along with the intention of asking serving personnel to give me their views and to highlight certain issues, particularly with regard to leaving the service. In one base, the tables were turned on me and I had around 40 personnel from the different ranks asking me what the Scottish Government was able to do. Housing came up repeatedly, but often their questions were less about what the Scottish Government could do before personnel left the service and more about what the MOD could do with regard to, for example, housing grants, which are available only in certain parts of the country. It was extremely useful for me to realise where we have more work to do and to get an idea of serving personnel’s concerns. The statistics in the motion make very impressive reading. Christina McKelvie mentioned some of them: ASAP has helped more than 1,400 clients in 21 months and addressed 6,000 issues. I am particularly struck by the fact that it has secured almost £900,000 in additional benefits for those who access the service. That is a successful project by any description and I congratulate all the advisers in each CAB on their considerable achievement. It is only right that the other partners in the project are congratulated on their foresight and commitment, and on their support of ASAP. First and foremost the role of Poppyscotland must be applauded, as Alex Fergusson mentioned. The staff from that veterans charity work very closely with CAS and it is entirely appropriate to acknowledge the fantastic work that Ian McGregor and his staff have done to move the project forward. It is also right that we acknowledge the other funders. There are many, which demonstrates the faith that they put into ASAP. I welcome the contributions and support of the other veterans charities mentioned in the motion. I am sure that members would also wish me to record the role of the Scottish Government in the project, which is a minor part, but integral nevertheless. We contribute to the Scottish veterans fund just more than £6,000 towards the cost of booklets for advisers, which has helped to build the library of information that has proved to be so invaluable. I am pleased that we have made a contribution to that. Of course, ASAP is a tool to be used to assist those who face difficulties when transiting from military to civilian life or who experience problems some years after discharge. Mark Griffin spoke about some of those challenges for service personnel and I should challenge one of his points. Service personnel often cook for themselves, although that tends to be in circumstances where they have ready-made food products in the field. He is right to say that when service personnel move into a tenancy or new housing arrangements they face a challenge of home economics. The armed forces could do more about that while people are still serving. I look forward to reading the CAB report on veterans’ issues, which was published today. I am sure that it will provide valuable insight into particular needs and aspirations. Members will be interested to know that yesterday I met with Colonel Martin Gibson, who is chairman of Veterans Scotland. Once again, he congratulated the Scottish Government for its inclusive, supportive and effective raft of programmes, which was developed to support our armed forces and veterans community. Last year I announced in the chamber that the Government would publish a road map, which would set out our future plans for the planning and delivery of support and advice services. That road map is almost ready and I will write to all members shortly.

I am sorry. I am taking a bit longer than I intended because I took three interventions. As Paul Wheelhouse mentioned, it is important that we acknowledge armed forces week. I went to armed forces day in Stirling on Saturday and I will go to armed forces day in Edinburgh this week. The interests of serving armed forces personnel and veterans are served by ASAP, which is a fantastic project, and the motion sums up its success very well. It is a vital source of advice and support, and it succeeds in exactly what it sets out to do. It makes a significant contribution to help veterans recover from problems and it should be commended. 13:13 Meeting suspended. 14:15 On resuming—

Building on the successful installation of more than 300 electric vehicle charging posts in phase 1, good progress continues with phase 2 in concentrating on expanding that network further. We are in discussions with a number of stakeholders to widen the current infrastructure to include trunk roads, workplaces, ferry terminals, homes and transportation for the Commonwealth games in Glasgow. Work is also on-going on the creation of a Scottish plugged-in places and electric vehicles website, which will provide information on how to purchase electric vehicles, their associated benefits, as well as a map that details charge point locations.

That is an important issue. We should understand that it will be very difficult to encourage people to buy electric vehicles until the infrastructure for them is in place. I take on board Claudia Beamish’s point about ensuring that people are aware of where charge points are. They are all in the national charge-point registry and, as I mentioned, will be on the website that we are developing. It is worth saying that the new charge points that we will create will include a number of fast-charge points, which are important for range—Claudia Beamish mentioned range. They will be in more rural areas, and we will ensure that we can join up between the cities as well. With those things being taken forward, we will have the infrastructure in place that will, I hope, encourage more people to use electric vehicles.

The £30 million stations investment fund, which was announced in April this year, will aim to lever in additional funding to deliver improved and new stations from 2014. Transport Scotland has received 12 inquiries since the announcement, but we are aware of further station aspirations, including those that are highlighted in responses to the “Rail 2014” consultation.

Stations that are owned by third parties such as Prestwick airport will be eligible and will be considered for funding through the Scottish stations investment fund. The eligibility criteria and the application process will be discussed with stakeholders over the coming months. I certainly encourage Prestwick airport to get involved in that process. As I said, the station development programme will start in 2014.

I think that every member in the chamber could think of two stations in their constituency. It is important to repeat that we will seek to have others contribute to the capital costs, whether they are regional transport partnerships, local councils or private developers. Some of the bids that have already been put to us will also be considered in that respect. We want the capital costs of new stations to be covered in that way as much as possible. The franchise holder will, of course, take on the on-going subsidy costs to provide the service. The more we can cover the costs, the more stations we can take forward. The criteria are likely to include how such contributions will be made. They are also likely to cover the necessary Scottish transport appraisal guidance arrangements, because we must ensure that the train option is the right option for any proposed stations. All those aspects will be considered for the criteria that will be formed by officials and brought forward in the coming months.

The Scottish Government has been absolutely clear in its aim to deliver during this session of Parliament at least 30,000 affordable homes, at least two thirds of which will be for social rent. In the first full year of this Parliament, almost 6,900 affordable homes were completed, 5,662 of which were for social rent.

John Finnie might be aware that a consultation on proposals for integration of adult health and social care is under way and that the deadline for responses is 11 September. I encourage all members, including Mr Finnie, to respond to it. As for conversion of vacant office space for housing, details of public sector surplus land and properties are circulated internally to check for potential interest. That system allows the Scottish Government to consider with local partners whether any of the surplus properties that are available might, where practicable, be suitable for housing use.

We have made absolutely clear our opposition to the UK Government’s cuts to the coastguard and its proposed closure of the Clyde and Forth maritime rescue co-ordination centres. That has included our responses to the Maritime and Coastguard Agency consultations, sustained correspondence with UK ministers, engagement with staff and communities affected by the cuts, and repeated calls for those decisions to be reversed.

Ministers are aware of the incidents that have been mentioned, and our thoughts are with the family and friends of the man who lost his life. As Stuart McMillan said, I met representatives of the Public and Commercial Services union from the Clyde maritime rescue co-ordination centre this morning, along with Duncan McNeil, Stuart McMillan and others. The PCS members are to be commended for their on-going professionalism at a difficult and uncertain time. I assure Stuart McMillan that the Scottish ministers will continue to press the UK Government. I will write to the UK minister with responsibility on the point that Stuart McMillan has raised about ensuring that the transitional commitments given by the UK Government are adhered to.

That is substantially outwith my portfolio responsibility, but it points to the fact that we have a joined-up response from the emergency services just now, which we are keen to see continue. I will incorporate those comments in the approach that I make to the UK Government. If I can be assured of support from the Conservative and Liberal Democrat benches in that regard, I am sure that we can make progress with the UK Government.

Rail transport is vital to Scotland’s success as it supports economic growth, strengthens connections and provides sustainable alternatives to road and air travel. The Government has invested record levels in rail, opening two new passenger lines and seven new stations, providing 38 new trains and increasing train services by 10 per cent. Since 2004, intermodal rail freight traffic has grown substantially and passenger numbers have increased by 30 per cent. We are determined to build on that success and ensure that our railways meet the needs of the people of Scotland. Rail must form a key part of a fully integrated transport system. Rail passengers are also cyclists, bus users and ferry passengers and it is essential to everyone that journeys are joined-up. We have an opportunity to make that happen in 2014, with the new contracts for rail passenger services and a new funding agreement for Network Rail. The “Rail 2014” consultation showed the importance that the people of Scotland attach to rail services. It attracted more than 1,200 responses, which are being published today, and I thank everyone who contributed to the debate. I am also grateful to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee for its scrutiny of the issues, and I have today written to the convener to set out how we will pursue its recommendations. Rail services in the United Kingdom are provided through a private sector model. Although the Scottish network is funded entirely by the Scottish ministers, the structure of rail remains reserved. We have written to UK ministers several times, most recently in February and May, making it clear that we could achieve better outcomes for passengers if Scotland had overall responsibility for rail. I am disappointed that, so far, UK ministers have chosen not to respond. A yes vote in 2014 will enable us to rectify the situation and create a more fully integrated transport network. In setting out the way forward for Scottish rail services from 2014, I will focus on three areas: the structure of our railways and the requirements that are placed on the rail industry; the future of the franchise; and the benefit to passengers. I am pleased to announce a £5 billion programme of investment in Scotland’s railways between 2014 and 2019. That will support the delivery of franchised passenger services and enable Network Rail to operate, maintain and enhance the network over that period, which will continue the delivery of the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme and the Borders railway. We will announce further progress on EGIP shortly. Network Rail will also be required to advance a series of strategic enhancement projects, including work on the Highland main line and the Aberdeen to Inverness rail improvements project, as detailed in our infrastructure investment plan. We are working to future proof the network. Organisations across Scotland have come together to make the case for high-speed rail. We will continue to drive forward work on that while ensuring that EGIP and the other network improvements are compatible with our approach. We are establishing separate funding streams to provide for future growth. A £30 million fund will support strategic freight enhancements, while £60 million of investment will improve journey times and punctuality, and £10 million will develop future projects, alongside the £30 million that has been announced for new and improved stations. A further £10 million fund will accelerate the closure of level-crossings, to make our railways even safer. Our requirements and funds are set out in our high-level output specification and the statement of funds available, both of which are being published today. We will issue new guidance to the Office of Rail Regulation on how we expect it to best represent Scotland’s interests. On taking forward the franchise, we agree with the rail unions and others that privatisation has led to too much fragmentation and additional costs. The rail industry has for too long been distracted by internal arguments over responsibility. We will therefore expect the ScotRail franchise holder and Network Rail to work together to develop a deeper alliance, which will be a significant step towards greater industry integration. The industry should focus on passengers, providing better services and enhancing resilience and operational effectiveness. We expect that deeper alliance to generate annual savings of up to £30 million. Passengers have made it clear that they value a single focused contract for services across Scotland. We therefore intend to let the next ScotRail contract for 10 years, with a potential break point after five years, to encourage investment and ensure that the franchisee focuses on improving performance, increasing passenger numbers and enhancing the rail experience. We will welcome bids from a wide range of operators, including not-for-profit operators. When we consider the future of rail services, the Caledonian sleeper stands as a unique and cherished service for rail users to and from Scotland. In December, we announced our contribution to the £100 million-plus of transformational investment in the service. To get the best from that investment and ensure that the Caledonian sleeper remains a unique, valued and high-profile service, we intend to let a separate franchise for it of up to 15 years. The Caledonian sleeper is more than just a train service; it is sometimes part of a holiday, it is a business office and it can be a hotel. The sleeper is special to passengers and to Scotland. Users should be clear that the improvements will be made in the term of the next franchise. A separate longer franchise, coupled with more than £100 million of investment, will give this historic service the 21st century future that it deserves. The specification of both franchises will be published at the turn of the year. Of course, our passenger rail network’s primary purpose is to enable travel connections for work, services and leisure. We are determined that passengers will feel the benefit of the new arrangements. Rail fares will be attractive and affordable, and we intend to expand fares regulation to protect those in rural areas, as well as commuters. We will look to the next franchisee to increase passenger numbers through innovative fares packages. That will build on the Stranraer promotion, under which fares will be reduced by 65 per cent. We need the franchisee to use available capacity on off-peak and lightly used services. We are fully aware that people want joined-up journey options, so we will require bidders to develop plans and proposals for the actions that they can take to link with other forms of transport—bus, bike and ferry. It is sensible to ensure that buses arrive in time for trains and vice versa. To support that, we will expect comprehensive smart ticketing across the network by the end of the franchise. In line with the digital strategy, which the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment laid out, and in response to business and passenger demand, we will look for wi-fi-type facilities to be available across the network by 2019. In preparation for that, I was delighted to launch the pilot wi-fi programme earlier this week. Members may recall that, during the consultation, there was discussion about antisocial behaviour and the consumption of alcohol on trains. We had a substantial number of responses on that issue. We will take forward with the franchise holder and British Transport Police more measures to ensure that antisocial behaviour is driven out of our trains. The ICI committee quite rightly stressed the importance to passengers of trains running to time. We will set a minimum performance level and punctuality targets that will increase over the period. We will also require the industry to publish right-time information for all routes so that we can all see to the minute how services are improving. The industry will also be expected to work with passenger representative bodies to ensure that new performance regimes and information meet their needs. I draw the attention of Parliament to the issue of indemnity clauses, which the trade unions have regularly raised concerns about. We have decided to review the clauses with a view to developing an alternative approach that is fair to both operators and the workforce. The response to the “Rail 2014” consultation demonstrated not only the importance that communities place on the railway but their willingness to play a part in it. We want to see that enthusiasm harnessed and promoted. Therefore, we will encourage the creation of local community rail partnerships and will require the industry to work with them to establish facilities and services that address local needs. We have created a comprehensive package of measures that, working with the rail industry, employees and passengers, we believe will deliver high-quality rail infrastructure and services that are responsive to Scotland’s needs and represent good value for money, while supporting our businesses and communities, promoting tourism and offering real alternatives to road and air travel. Scotland deserves a 21st century railway and this Government will see that that is delivered.

I thank the member for the various questions that he asked. First, it is worth pointing out that the extensive consultation that we undertook, which included a number of options, stands in stark contrast to the lack of consultation by the current and previous United Kingdom Governments on the franchises for which they have been responsible. For example, I think that the east coast rail franchise consultation started only this year, even though the contract is to be let for the coming year. It is quite difficult to climb down from a consultation. We had a genuine consultation in which we asked people for their views as part of a genuine and open debate. Perhaps Richard Baker’s previous allies in the former Administration were strangers to that concept. I do not know whether Richard Baker picked up this point, but I said during my statement that there will be a break in the 10-year franchise after five years. Things may well change during that time. I am sure that Richard Baker will be aware that a number of different things will apply in 2019. For example, the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 will come into full effect then, and there are issues to do with the leasing of rolling stock. There could also be significant new constitutional opportunities for a Government of Scotland to take measures to improve the rail service. I would have thought that Richard Baker would welcome that point. Richard Baker made the point that there will be fragmentation as a result of having two franchises. We were accused of the same thing in relation to the northern isles ferry service—it was said that unbundling the service would be a disaster. What do we have? The same operator operating both services quite happily. It is entirely possible that that could happen here. This represents a very good deal for passengers across Scotland. It substantially improves the situation that we had under the Labour Party. Richard Baker should not chide us for not having pursued more vigorously the issue of the franchise constraints, because we have done that—we have written to UK ministers repeatedly, but they have not even bothered to give us the courtesy of a response, and they have not listened to us. We have to operate within those constraints. If he thinks that the features are constraining, then perhaps he will be voting yes in 2014 so that we can eliminate them.

I have not seen the tweets to which Alex Johnstone referred. Obviously, he is a better twitterer than I am. What I announced was that the 10-year franchise will have a break after five years; that is what the word “break” means—the franchise can be broken after five years. I understand Alex Johnstone’s point about the length of the franchise and the need to encourage investment. However, it is worth looking at the issue more widely. Some of the franchises that are held south of the border are extremely short. One is as short as one and half years, and there have been improvements to more than 50 stations on the line where that franchise is held, so there is no obvious or direct correlation between the length of a franchise and investment. Of course, the issue of rolling stock is dealt with almost separately—it was designed to be done that way so that it could then roll over to the next franchise holder. I do not deny that there is a relationship, but we believe that it is important to have that five-year break to take advantage of other opportunities that might exist. The separate franchise for the sleeper will give it a real focus. The sleeper is a distinctive service, with a different customer base from the rest of the network. As we know, it is receiving its own capital investment of £100-plus million. It is important that we treat it differently, and the franchise holder has the opportunity to develop it over time. If the franchise holder does that, as I expect that it will, then the answer is yes, we believe that it will be a stable franchise in future. I do not know why previous Governments introduced the indemnity clause. I understand the point that it protects passengers but, to our mind, there is an element of one-sidedness about it. There is no incentive for people to avoid the dispute if they know that it will not come at any cost to them—that is an issue that we want to bear in mind. As the member asked us to do, we will seek to protect passengers interests, but we will also want to listen to the workforce and the trade unions. That is the right thing to do. I have mentioned that seven new stations have already been built, one of which is in my constituency. It has been tremendously successful, with more than 400,000 people using it in its first year, which was substantially in excess of the 80,000 predicted. As I said in my statement, we have made available around £30 million to encourage proposals for new station developments, but that will be in the hands of local communities and developers—they will have to come forward with those proposals. In many cases, they will want to contribute towards the cost of that station. We will have to assimilate the cost of the running of the services through the station, but we will work in tandem with local people, communities, and developers, who will also have responsibility for doing the necessary studies to prove that the option is viable. Given that, we will wait to see what is brought to us rather than tell people where stations should be.

Local organisations are working with Transport Scotland to ensure that there is adequate co-ordination of community transport links in the Stranraer area to allow people, businesses and attractions to make the best use of the fares promotion. It goes in tandem with what I have said about buses, cyclists, and ferries, which I know are also important to the member. We want to have much more integration and to move towards a timetable that makes sense to people who have to use more than one mode of transport.

I have mentioned already that we want to look at rural areas in particular. If members look at the work that the cabinet secretary has already undertaken on the Stranraer pilot scheme, perhaps they can get an idea of our intentions. It is quite clear that there is substantial extra capacity on lightly used and off-peak services. We want to ensure that the fares are attractive enough to get more people on to those services, because that will increase funds coming in. We have a very good record on regulating fares. We have had a substantially lower increase than south of the border by regulating those fares to a lower standard in relation to inflation. We will maintain that good record, but we will also look for further opportunities, especially through pilots such as the one in Stranraer, to get more people on to the railways.

The railway services that are provided for passengers will be based on the current level of service and the timetables that are in operation now. As I have said, we will specify the franchise in much more detail at the turn of the year. The contract will include the flexibility to provide new services as required, including in the member’s constituency.

On the specific issue of the electrification of the Cumbernauld line before the Commonwealth games, yes, we are proceeding with that. On EGIP, it is right for us to take into account the possible implications of high-speed rail. We have to ensure that we have a credible and worked-out proposal to make to the UK Government. As I said in my statement, we will take some time and come back with a fuller explanation of what we are doing with EGIP. The member can be assured that the electrification of the Cumbernauld line is going ahead.

The member will know that First ScotRail undertook a review of calling patterns between Dundee and Aberdeen in consultation with both the Tayside and central Scotland transport partnership and the north-east of Scotland transport partnership. However, the proposed changes from the 2011 review are still being worked through. We intend that railway services provided for passengers will provide roughly the same level of service to the same timetables that are currently in operation. However, as I said to Jamie Hepburn, the contract will include the flexibility to provide new services as required.

The member should know that the vast bulk of intercity fares are regulated by the UK Government, not by the Scottish Government. There is a direct correlation between fare levels and the funding that is available. Had it not been for the substantial cut to our budget by the Government that he supports south of the border, I am sure that we would have gone even further on fares. As I said in my statement, the general philosophy is that we want to make the railways as attractive to people as possible. We want to get more people on the railways, thereby increasing the revenue that goes to the franchise holder. With that additional money, we can improve services further.

As I mentioned in my answer to Alex Johnstone, when the £30 million was announced it was made clear that it would start from April 2014 and go through to March 2019—the period that we are talking about just now. I know that there are some well-developed proposals, including the one for East Linton, which the member mentioned. It is only right that, if people want to get on with undertaking a STAG 2 study to get more detail, they should do so, so that they are ready to go ahead with the proposal as soon as we are. Officials are working on exactly what the criteria for that should be, but it is likely that—as I have said before—well worked-out proposals with developer contributions and local authority contributions are most likely to succeed.

I have made clear the restrictions that we currently have to operate under in terms of the franchise. It was surprising to find out that we cannot have a Government-controlled railway in this country but we can have a railway in Scotland that is controlled by the Governments of other countries. That is the result of the previous Labour and Conservative Governments’ views. The indemnity clause that the member finds objectionable—I understand the point that she makes—was a creation of former Administrations at Westminster and not of the Scottish Government. We think that there are possibilities for doing that in a way that is much better and fairer to the workforce. As I have said, we will review the situation to achieve that.

Dave Thompson will know that the pilot that has been run by Railtrack will come to a conclusion shortly. I hope that the cabinet secretary or I will be able to join him at the Ardrossan pilot at that time. It is right that we are waiting for that. Network Rail is the expert in the area and, if the pilot provides us—as we hope that it will—with a cost-effective way of reducing the number of level-crossings and increasing the safety of our rail network, the £10 million to which he refers will, I imagine, be superbly used to do that. I know that the subject is of particular interest to the member because of the preponderance of level-crossings in the Highlands.

I have explained the point about fragmentation. The “deeper alliance” to which I referred—typically, Patrick Harvie ignored that—is a way in which we can have much more integration in the network. There has already been a move towards an alliance, but we are proposing a deeper alliance. For example, when the franchise holder and Network Rail are working on stations, they can use one logo, which will make it straightforward for people to get the right information. They can also work more coherently together, which has not been happening since the railways were privatised. I would have thought that Patrick Harvie would welcome those steps instead of, as usual, taking a pot shot on other issues. He should welcome the extent to which we are integrating our railways, as far as we are able—we would like to go further, but we are not allowed to do so by the Westminster Government. The move will be a vital step forward towards providing a much more joined-up service to the passenger and, in the case of the sleeper service, a much more focused and attractive service.

The member will realise that the issues of Dalcross and Kintore stations are being considered seriously, and we expect information to come back to us on those matters. Initially, at least, if such projects are embarked on, they would be outside the £30 million fund that I mentioned previously and would be dealt with as part of general line improvements. Beyond that, if communities across Scotland believe that they should have a railway station—I can think of one or two such communities that have been mentioned in the past by a member who is sitting very close to me—we will listen seriously to them, provided the proposition is viable and, following a procedure such as the STAG process, it is felt that a rail service is needed there, rather than, for example, a bus service. We will be able to do more if other people contribute towards the necessary work. We are aware that some developers are willing to do so as part of a community gain provision that is attached to a larger development, and councils and regional transport partnerships can also contribute. I confidently expect more new stations to be built in the course of the next franchise, just as we built seven new ones during the course of this franchise.

My previous answers make the point that funds will be available for those proposals if the proposals are genuinely community based and well worked out and enjoy the support of councils, RTPs and developers to the extent that they will take on substantial elements of the cost, which I believe is the case in relation to Plains. If that is the case, there is more chance of their being successful. All of the places that the member mentioned can of course put forward proposals, but decisions will be made on the basis of trying to get the best deal for the taxpayer and the passenger. To that end, fully worked-out proposals that enjoy local support—such as the support that North Lanarkshire Council has shown in relation to some of the stations that the member mentioned—will be supported.

Since 2006, Transport Scotland has progressively rolled out smart technology across all Scotland’s buses. That has streamlined and greatly improved the reimbursement process for the concessionary travel scheme and facilitated the management of potential fraud.

I am happy to provide that reassurance. Transport Scotland receives a number of complaints of that type, every single one of which is investigated. Investigations have found that some complaints involve an element of overstaging. However, it has been found that, even though a ticket might show a longer journey than was undertaken, the value of the reimbursement was correct—so sometimes it is not fraud at all. Since 2010, there have been 1,267 complaints, 650 of which have been confirmed as overstaging. Those incidents can result in a bus operator’s claim for reimbursement being reduced, a process that has been successfully utilised on a number of occasions. It is probably also worth saying that Transport Scotland is a registered specialist reporting agency and can submit—and has submitted—reports to the procurator fiscal.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Elaine Murray for giving us the opportunity to discuss road safety in general, and in particular the A75. As other members have done, I pass on my deepest and genuine sympathies to the families and friends of all those who have been killed or seriously injured on our road network. Police investigations into the accident on the A75 are on-going, so it would be inappropriate for me to comment further on those. We should also take time to remember all the personnel who are involved in dealing with such emergencies and accidents. They are often overlooked, and they do an extremely difficult job. It is worth pointing out—notwithstanding what I have just said about the accidents that have taken place—that Scotland currently has its lowest figures for road casualties since records began. It would have been good to have had that mentioned in members’ comments on road safety, because it has been the result of a huge amount of work by people not only in the current Administration, but in previous Administrations, and by people who—as I said—do very difficult jobs. The Scottish Government is committed to further improving safety. Our aim to reduce casualties is reflected in our road safety strategy, and the most recent statistics, from 2010, show that there has been tremendous progress in reducing injuries across the road network. That said, one death is, of course, one too many and the Government is determined to continue to do all that it can to reduce road casualties still further. We have spent more than £2 billion on roads since 2007. Alex Johnstone was right to say that there was a hiatus before that, and it is not possible to make that ground up quickly. We should bear it in mind, given some of the comments from Labour and Liberal Democrat members, that—as Joan McAlpine pointed out—that hiatus took place at a time of abundant public resources. We are now having to deal with the exact reverse of that. We have invested more than £935 million in the south-west of Scotland alone on improvements and maintenance.

No, I will not. Jim Hume did not take one from me, which is becoming a feature of his speeches. More than £27 million has been spent since 2007 on maintaining and improving the A75. We recognise that it is—as Elaine Murray and Graeme Pearson pointed out—a key strategic route for the people of Dumfries and Galloway, and a key link to our ports. The Government is committed to investment in the road network and that commitment is unwavering. My response to the points that have been made about road safety is that the A75 safety group is due to meet in July. That multi-agency group is made up of key stakeholders from the police, local authorities, Amey, the fire service and the safety camera partnership. That group is committed to improving the safety of the road. I am perfectly willing and keen to raise the issues from this debate at that meeting and also to consider some of the signing suggestions that were made by Elaine Murray. Over this year we have spent £650 million to try to ensure that our road network remains safe, efficient and effective. In 2012-13, £3 million has been allocated to the Scottish budget for the road safety framework delivery and road safety Scotland activities. We are committed, as Joan McAlpine and Aileen McLeod said, to building the £25.6 million Dunragit bypass, which—like the Hardgrove to Kinmount link—was not done previously, despite the length of time that was available in which to do it. We are having to pick up that slack now. The Hardgrove to Kinmount scheme is shovel ready, which means that when we have the money to get the shovels and go into the ground, we will do that. Again, as has been pointed out, we made that pitch to the United Kingdom Government. It was not done just because we want more money—although it was probably our money in the first place—but because we had a £1.3 billion cut that comprised £500 million in terms of capital and £800 million in terms of revenue. That was before our capital budgets for the next three years were cut by a third. It is not possible to wish away those facts and say that we should be doing all the things that were not done before, at the same time as saying that we must cut our budgets. I assume that Jim Hume and Alex Johnstone support the budget cut. We cannot do the same amount of work after such a cut, so they must choose what their priorities are, rather than always asking us to cope with the consequences of their cuts. The First Minister, as was mentioned, wrote to the Prime Minister recently to seek funding for that and a number of other schemes from the Westminster Government. That request was turned down. There has been some talk of cross-party collaboration. That was how Elaine Murray started her speech, but then it became what Graeme Pearson accused Joan McAlpine of giving—a particular history and a particular set of politics in respect of how that was interpreted over the years when there was a Labour and Liberal Democrat Administration. Our request for additional funding was turned down. We will seek to do what we can. As Joan McAlpine said, it is much better to look for ways to work together to try to achieve something. That is what we have sought to do over a number of years rather than making simple complaints and accusations. Accusations such as those that were made by Jim Hume are made in the full knowledge that he and his party are responsible for the cuts to our budget. I welcomed the recent opportunity to write to the Dumfries and Galloway Standard. I recommend it—as other members have done—on its campaign to improve the A75, which is an example of local democracy in action and of pressure being brought to bear. I could not have been clearer in the article that the SNP Government will upgrade the road if the UK Government gives us that funding. We have to find the funding from somewhere. There can be no one who is involved in this debate—including me—who does not want the project to go ahead. I would love to be—I intend to be—the transport minister who eventually says that the road will be built. I want to do it and I cannot imagine that the Opposition parties could come up with any reason why I would not want to do that. Of course we want to do that—not least because we believe that such projects also create jobs. They are good for the economic wellbeing of the country as well as leading to improvements in safety and infrastructure. Irrespective of the road, one death on our network is too many, especially for the families of those involved. However, we should recognise the substantial improvement that we have made in relation to road safety—we now have the lowest statistics on record, despite increasing car usage. I am determined to do whatever I can to contribute to prevention of loss of life on our roads, whatever the cause. The Government also recently committed to lowering the amount of alcohol that drivers can consume before driving. That shows the action that we can take as a result of the Scotland Act 2012—we now have the powers to do that. Elaine Murray may know that a substantial amount of action was taken by the police following the accidents to which she referred in order to try to reduce further the accident rate on the road and to make it safer. The police have said that that will continue and that they will keep an eye on the situation. On the lower limit on alcohol, on 18 December 2008, the Parliament voted clearly in favour of a reduction in the drink-drive limit. I would like to think that the Parliament stands united in taking that forward. It will result in further safety improvements on our roads. I confirm that we will soon prepare a consultation paper as the next stage in implementation of that change. The Government is committed to working with its partners to ensure a co-ordinated approach to road safety. I believe that any objective assessment of what we have done in relation to the A75—Joan McAlpine gave us some interesting figures on that—stands comparison with the record of any previous Administration. As the minister who is responsible for safety on Scotland’s roads, as a road user and as a father of three children, I am determined to do all that I can to prevent such tragedies. It is up to us, individually, to do all that we can to improve safety, but there is obviously an expectation on Government in that regard. I think that our record shows that we have tried to do that. I have taken on board a number of the points that have been made. I am happy to engage in further multiparty discussions on the matter. I am sure that if we work together to find an innovative approach, we can get the right solution. Meeting closed at 17:40.

The A90 Balmedie to Tipperty scheme will be procured alongside the Aberdeen western peripheral route in a non-profit distributing model form of contract.

If Alison McInnes and the Liberal Democrats were so keen for this scheme to proceed as soon as possible, they would have done something about it in the eight years that they had the opportunity to do so. As I have said before to Alison McInnes, the approach that we are taking has been supported by the local councils and we will continue with the approach on the basis that the benefits of doing it in that way are substantial. Of course—I am bearing in mind the Presiding Officer’s injunction—if we proceeded ahead of the result of the legal proceedings only to find out that we did not get the legal outcome that we are looking for, we would be criticised by Alison McInnes and others for wasting public resources. We will proceed in the way that we always said we would, and we will get this road built.

The Scottish Government will review the transport needs for the V&amp;A at Dundee after Design Dundee Ltd has produced a transport strategy to support its planning application for the museum. Ahead of that, Transport Scotland contributed £1 million towards the redevelopment of Dundee railway station into a major transport interchange hub in advance of the opening of the museum in 2015.

The Scottish Government will carry out a joint economic study with its partners to look at the role of the city airport in serving Dundee and the surrounding area. The study will look at the opportunities for developing air services, as the member mentions, and at how the airport can contribute to the wider regeneration work that is being done in the city, including, crucially, the waterfront development, so that we can promote and enhance those developments.

The estimated capital costs of constructing the Borders railway are expected to remain within the £235 million to £295 million range at quarter 4 2012 prices.

I am happy to write to the member with details of that. As he will know, the information was outlined in the business case that was made for the railway. Given the question that he asked, I hope that we are now seeing from him some support for the railway, which is different from his previous stance. I am sure that the railway will be an outstanding success and the Government remains committed to seeing it through.

I regularly meet and visit a range of veterans organisations at both national and local level. I also meet representatives of Veterans Scotland, which is the umbrella body for veterans organisations in Scotland, four times a year to discuss ways in which veterans charities and bodies can and do help to inform Scottish Government policy in respect of its devolved responsibilities where they impact directly on veterans.

The member is right about the concern that that is causing among veterans. We have already made representations to the UK Government. Bruce Crawford, the Cabinet Secretary for Parliamentary Business and Government Strategy, wrote to the Secretary of State for Defence on 2 March and again on 11 May calling on the UK Government to retain the Army’s links with Scotland’s proud regimental names, battle histories and traditions, and he will discuss that and other defence matters of concern to Scotland when he meets Nick Harvey, Minister of State for the Armed Forces, in the near future.

The Scottish Government recently announced funding of nearly £33 million, as part of the affordable housing supply programme, to build houses in the Highlands and Islands over the next three years. The funding will provide additional developments to those that were successful in the 2011 innovation and investment fund and initiatives such as the national housing trust, which is already providing affordable housing in the Highlands. In addition, schemes such as the new supply shared equity with developers scheme provide further opportunities to increase affordable housing in the Highlands and Islands.

I outlined in my previous answer the action that the Government is taking, not least in relation to the £33 million across the Highlands. Each council area has been given its allocation, and the work is being done in collaboration and through dialogue with the Scottish Government. However, it is for local government to take forward initiatives with local partners to ensure that there is a proper spread of affordable housing and that it meets all the rural parts of each council area. If the member has particular concerns and thinks that the Scottish Government can play an additional part, I will be more than happy to listen to that.

The member is right. The Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment hosted a construction summit in Inverness on 14 May along with the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism and the Minister for Local Government and Planning, and a range of key construction industry stakeholders were involved. The purpose of the summit was to hear attendees’ experiences and thoughts on the challenges that the construction sector is facing to enable the Scottish Government to identify areas in which it can better provide support on a local and regional basis. As with previous construction summits—I attended one in Inveraray a few months ago—issues to do with planning, procurement and affordable housing were raised, which resulted in positive discussions taking place.

The funding will be used by the hubs to enable the sharing of practice between local authorities and their partners, all of which is aimed at preventing homelessness.

The extra funding will support the good work that the housing options hubs have done to date. The housing options approach seeks to achieve sustainable and long-term solutions to individuals’ housing problems. Working in partnership, the hubs have done substantial publicity work around housing options services, training needs analysis and implementing housing options information technology systems. They are putting in place the necessary infrastructure. Richard Lyle will be interested to know that the homelessness statistics that were published in February showed a 20 per cent drop in applications and assessments. That is the lowest in a decade and demonstrates the impact of the prevention activity that has been led by the hubs.

The Scottish Government promotes better public transport to connect people, places and work. Our investment is significant, such as the £0.25 billion per year on bus services, and it is wide-ranging, with new capital projects such as a £30 million programme of improvements for railway stations across Scotland and our £40 million support for Glasgow fastlink—which will be a rapid bus corridor linking the city centre with the new Glasgow Southern general hospital—and for improving transport links for the Commonwealth games.

The bulk of that support will be spent on concessionary travel, with additional funds being provided for the bus service operators grant. MyBus cannot be used for attending hospital appointments, except in exceptional circumstances, because it has been agreed that those appointments are the responsibility of the national health service. That reflects the specialist nature of the transport that is required and the lack of flexibility on arrival times. SPT’s website advises that patients should contact their general practitioner’s surgery if they have difficulty in attending hospital appointments.

The first reason is that Jim Hume has already asked us to spend that money on 10 or so different things; it cannot be spent more than once. It is also worth saying that we have provided £0.25 billion of support against the backdrop of the substantial cuts by the UK Government that he supports. The money is being used to ensure that we expand the services that are available. The member will, of course, know that the changes that we have made to the BSOG will help rural bus services, which the previous Administration—of which his party was a part—failed to do.

I, too, congratulate Paul Wheelhouse on securing this debate on what is an important issue and am gratified to see members’ attempts at being as consensual as possible. I realise that there are a number of very important public policy and resource allocation issues to address but, from my discussions with veterans organisations and veterans themselves, I can tell the chamber that they appreciate the united front that the Parliament has often displayed on veterans’ issues. I also welcome members’ speeches, which illustrate their very clear interest in the issue and their determination to focus support and assistance on those with alcohol and drug problems. Dr Richard Simpson will know that I am well aware of the William Simpson’s home, as it was previously in my constituency, which he represented before me. Last night, I received a communication from a former MSP, Dennis Canavan, asking me to attend an abseiling event on Sunday. I am tempted to say to Richard Simpson, “If you do, I will, too,” but, in any case, my association with the home and its redoubtable chief executive will continue. The home, whose origins are steeped in the military—it was founded by the parents of a returning naval officer—does tremendous work and I will continue to advocate its case in its efforts to raise funds. In response to Paul Wheelhouse’s important point about NHS numbers, I point out that substantial work is being carried out on that matter. Officials are developing arrangements in partnership with the MOD to allocate numbers to all military personnel in Scotland to facilitate the provision of an NHS record for every serviceperson and the eventual migration of military and health details on to that record. Paul Wheelhouse was quite right to highlight an important issue that many veterans have mentioned directly to me. I am also delighted to confirm that the Scottish veterans fund, which members have mentioned, has provided support to Gardening Leave to allow it to expand its services into Dundee and that I will be visiting its facility at the Tayforth centre in the very near future. I know that this issue was discussed in detail at a recent meeting of the Scottish Parliament cross-party group on veterans, which heard from the MOD surgeon general, Vice Admiral Philip Raffaelli. As members have pointed out, it is the responsibility of the armed forces themselves to tackle alcohol and substance misuse by serving personnel. As employers, the three services have put in place clear and unambiguous rules that must be obeyed under pain of court martial. James Dornan suggested that, historically, the armed forces have had a reputation for a work hard, play hard culture. That is understandable and, to some extent, inevitable. However, as Mr Dornan made clear, that culture is changing for the better. Alcohol consumption by service personnel is permitted, provided that it happens in controlled circumstances and off duty. Soldiers, sailors and airmen and women have the armed forces’ reputation to maintain—which they do, with pride and honour. Apart from the very dangerous work that they carry out, service personnel have to work with heavy, sophisticated and dangerous equipment and must do so in full control of their faculties. Everyone is aware that, under such circumstances, no serviceman or woman can be under the influence of alcohol, so we must welcome the fact that the services have programmes for and training on sensible and responsible drinking. Drug use is also strictly forbidden. The armed forces routinely conduct random drug tests and those caught using drugs are dismissed. It is important to stress that, when they leave the armed forces, the vast majority of service personnel return to civilian life and live quietly and successfully in their communities. No one should take from the debate the idea that service inevitably leads to problems with alcohol, drugs or mental health. However, we recognise that, for some people, problems will arise and might lead to heavy drinking or drug use. That is a tragedy for the individuals concerned and, as has been made clear in the debate, it often leads to other problems such as family breakdown, a lack of employment opportunities and perhaps even homelessness. Many types of support are in place to help those with alcohol and drug problems. Naturally, the armed forces are considering better and quicker ways of identifying those who might be at risk of falling into alcohol and drug dependency and that work will, in itself, lead to improved and tailored interventions. As members have said, a number of service charities offer a range of support packages and I applaud them for their selfless work in support of veterans. They offer invaluable assistance in myriad settings across Scotland, some of which we have heard about today. That is why the Scottish Government has set up the Scottish veterans fund and allocated more than £400,000 to projects of direct support to the veterans community. The armed forces are a reflection of the society from which they recruit. It is inevitable that some individuals will become involved in problem alcohol or drug use. That can manifest itself in a number of ways. However, despite all that has been said, it is important to recognise that problem alcohol or drug use are no more prevalent in the armed forces than they are in an equivalent demographic profile within wider society. The national alcohol strategy, “Changing Scotland’s Relationship with Alcohol: A Framework for Action”, sets out a broader agenda and adopts a whole-population approach, which is augmented by guidance for the provision of effective alcohol treatment and support services. The “Quality Alcohol Treatment and Support (QATS)” report from 2011 outlines 14 recommendations that, if embedded in practice, will help to better identify and respond to the specific needs of people, including veterans and those in the armed forces.

The member raises two distinct issues, one of which is decompression. Nobody would dispute that that happens. From my limited experience a long time ago of going through a traumatic event, I know that the experience of decompression that happens afterwards was almost always associated with alcohol. One report called it self-medicating. It is obviously a problem. The heightened levels of stress that are associated with serving for long periods of time in Afghanistan or, in the past, Northern Ireland are bound to have an effect, and alcohol comes into that picture. I do not want to apportion any blame, but it is also true that some have said that the armed forces cannot be held responsible for the people they recruit if they have a pre-existing propensity to be involved with social problems, if I can put it as generally as that. I do not accept that that is the case. For centuries, the armed forces have harvested people from their communities and they have a responsibility to those people. From what I am hearing now from the armed forces and the MOD, they are taking that responsibility seriously. They should continue to do that. The Alcohol etc (Scotland) Act 2010 came into force on 1 October 2011 and is a significant step in the battle against Scotland’s unhealthy relationship with alcohol. The main measures in the act are a ban on quantity discounts in off-sales that encourage customers to purchase more than they might otherwise, a restriction on material promoting alcohol, and the involvement of health boards in licensing issues, notwithstanding Paul Wheelhouse’s point about the limited ability of civilian organisations to involve themselves with what goes on on MOD bases. There is a substantial range of legislation in place, which I mention to point out that the general issue is certainly being taken extremely seriously by the Government. We are aware of some of the particular issues that present themselves in relation to serving service personnel and veterans, which is why we see the breadth of assistance that is available. I do not think that we are at the end of that. We are about to do a refresh of our veterans strategy, and this is one of the issues that will be covered. I am grateful that the issue has been raised and for the work that has been done by the cross-party group. Raising these issues is the best way of ensuring that we improve our response to dealing with such problems. 13:04 Meeting suspended. 14:15 On resuming—

I last met the chief executive of Strathclyde partnership for transport, Gordon MacLennan, on 13 March 2012.

Duncan McNeil has raised points with me in the meetings that I have had with him and Jackie Baillie, and I have had discussions on the matter with Stuart McMillan. I have sought to raise with SPT the legitimate concerns that Duncan McNeil has raised with me. In addition to that, Transport Scotland has remained engaged with SPT as further issues have arisen—Jackie Baillie has raised such issues with me. I am happy to raise the issues, but I have made clear the extent of my responsibility in that regard, and I think that Duncan McNeil has acknowledged that. We can raise concerns, but I cannot rerun a procurement process that is run by another public body. Of course, we do not currently plan to take over the service, which SPT has just tendered for. All that I can say in response to the points that Duncan McNeil raises is that I will continue to look at any further issues that he has and will ensure, as I have tried to do so far, that SPT responds timeously to the points that he raises.

I repeat that I cannot rerun or interfere in a procurement process that is run by another public body in the way that might be being suggested. As the body in question is a public body that disburses public funds, it will, of course, be subject to scrutiny from Audit Scotland. If the member wants Audit Scotland to look at the matter, he should properly raise it with Audit Scotland.

Jackie Baillie’s last point is very good. We are all trying to achieve the same thing. Again, I say that I cannot jump into the contract discussions or into a dispute where it appears on the surface that a contract is not being adhered to. However, I am happy to give the assurance again that I will continue to raise issues that are raised with me. I repeat that we are all after the same thing. We all want to ensure that the service runs regularly and reliably and according to the contract.

The Scottish Government is continuing to make record levels of investment in transport infrastructure projects throughout Scotland and the north-east, including Aberdeen. We remain committed to delivering the Aberdeen western peripheral route and improvements to the Haudagain roundabout. On rail, we remain committed to service improvements between Aberdeen and Inverness.

That is exactly the same question that Richard Baker asked very recently—and, not surprisingly, my answer remains the same. We will complete the Haudagain roundabout once we have completed the AWPR and the Balmedie to Tipperty scheme. It is not just me who thinks that things should be taken in that order; if the member looks at the study that has been carried out on the project, he will see that those other schemes must be in place if we are to achieve the necessary benefits from the Haudagain roundabout. That is the sensible approach and we are taking it—and will continue to take it—in concert with our partners at the north east of Scotland transport partnership and Aberdeen City Council.

I am very surprised to hear that there might be contradictions in the Labour Party’s case, but what the member suggests might well be true. We should rely on objective evidence, and the study that has been done shows that the real benefits from the Haudagain project will arise after we take forward the AWPR and the Balmedie to Tipperty scheme. That is the option that has been investigated; that is what the experts have suggested; and that is what we are going to do.

I thank Maureen Watt for her opening remarks and the members of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee for the report. I welcome the report, which recognises the positive progress that has been made towards achieving the 2012 homelessness target. For clarity, I remind everyone what the target is, because it is often misquoted. It is that “by end December 2012, local authorities will provide all unintentionally homeless applicant households with settled accommodation as of right”. As Maureen Watt said, the target has been internationally acclaimed. That is to the credit of previous Administrations and Oppositions, as well as the current Administration and Opposition groups, because there has been a general consensus on the benefits of the target. We concede that the target is a challenging one to meet in difficult economic times but, despite that, we are committed to supporting local authorities to achieve it. We will introduce the necessary secondary legislation to the Parliament before the end of the year. It is important to note that much of what we will do this year to reach the target will be a precursor to what will have to happen when the target has been achieved. At that time, we will start another process and embark on the important task of maintaining quality services for homeless people and, of course, preventing homelessness wherever possible. I have already written to the committee convener with the Scottish Government’s response to the committee’s 24 recommendations. They were all made in a positive spirit and there were some constructive suggestions. As the convener mentioned, positive updated homelessness statistics were published in February for the period April to September 2011. They record a reduction of about 20 per cent in homelessness applications and assessments, which is the biggest ever fall. The Guardian has quoted the corresponding figure in England as being a 14 per cent increase. We should recognise the efforts of our partners, particularly in local government, towards meeting the target. As we have heard, in 90 per cent of homelessness assessments in Scotland, those concerned are regarded as being in priority need and so are entitled to settled accommodation. Nine local authorities are fully meeting the 2012 target and 11 are within 10 per cent of achieving it. However, even more local authorities have met the target since the statistics were reported. The new statistics will be published in June 2012, and we hope to see further progress in future. The Scottish Government and COSLA joint 2012 steering group was established in 2009. I first attended the group in November last year and I know that there is a focused effort to ensure that we do not take our eyes off the ball. At the most recent meeting of the group that I attended, I suggested that as soon as the local elections have passed—just in case anyone is in doubt, I remind members that there are some local elections next week—we, or COSLA, should have an early meeting with the newly appointed housing conveners to reinforce the need to make further progress and achieve the target. The priority areas for the group have been the prevention of homelessness, which has required substantial joint working and corporate buy-in; investment in the appropriate areas; and the opening up of access to all housing tenures. Chief among those priorities has been prevention. In that area, the work that Alex Neil led previously led to the establishment of the five regional, local authority-led housing options hubs across Scotland. They focus on the individual and the range of needs that they might have, and the action plans that the hubs have come up with are being implemented with positive results. A culture change has begun that has seen the refocusing of homelessness services for the better, and it has been an important, innovative public service reform. The convener mentioned the committee’s desire for the Scottish Government to allocate further resources to the hubs. I can announce today that we will provide another £150,000 of on-going funding to support the hubs throughout 2012-13. We will discuss the disbursement of that funding with COSLA, and an independent evaluation of the hubs approach will be published shortly. We can see the beneficial impact of good prevention work, but the other side of the issue, which I am sure members will mention, is the supply of new housing, which remains a priority for us. We have committed to the delivery of 30,000 affordable homes over the next five years, at least 20,000 of which will be social rented homes. We also want access to the private rented sector to be made easier to assist homeless households, and we are working with the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations, through its membership of the 2012 group, and individual registered social landlords to enable greater access to that sector. The convener made an important point about the impact of the UK Government’s welfare reforms on housing benefit, and we are apparently in the midst of a second recession, which also makes the work extremely difficult. The welfare reforms will have a major impact and risk effect on the underoccupancy provisions and the way in which we can configure new housing stock. That is happening during a recession—until yesterday, we could have said that it was a recovery, but we are now into a second recession. We should acknowledge the achievements of local authorities in particular in making progress towards the target at what has been an extremely difficult time for them. They deserve credit for that. They are working hard to stay on track to achieve the target and a strong foundation is being built for what comes after 2012. I am confident that, if we keep an eye on the ball, between us, our partners and local government we can achieve the target despite challenging conditions such as welfare reform and the economic situation. I am delighted to have seen the committee’s report. I will continue to work with the committee and will report back to it to ensure that we achieve what we all want, which is to meet the 2012 target by the end of this year.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I thank all members who have spoken for their contributions. I will try to address some of their points and give the Government’s point of view. Elaine Murray, Jim Hume and others mentioned the temporary accommodation situation. It is worth noting that there was a 4 per cent reduction in the number of households in temporary accommodation to December 2010; a reduction of 13 per cent in the number of households with children in temporary accommodation; and a reduction of 18 per cent in the number of children in temporary accommodation. We are now down to only 15 households with children or pregnant women in bed-and-breakfast accommodation; that is also a key indicator. Substantial progress is being made. We have not taken our eye off the ball as we make progress towards the 2012 target. A number of members made a crucial point on the supply of affordable housing. Richard Baker is quite right to mention the difficulties that the housing benefit reforms and the general economic situation have caused. However, the impact on achieving the target of the 33 per cent cut to the Government’s capital resource was not mentioned by the Labour Party, the Conservative Party or the Liberal Democrats. The capital budget has been cut by about one third—that has to be recognised and none of the speeches that have been made so far has recognised it. That cut has had a huge impact on our budgets. On the other side of the equation, Richard Baker mentioned cuts to local authorities. It is worth bearing in mind the fact that we give a bigger proportion of our budget to local authorities than the previous Administration did. If the previous Administration had carried on doing what it was doing before, it would have given less to local authorities than what it criticises us for giving. We have done well by local authorities and protected their share of public resources. Hanzala Malik made a point about the return of proceeds from sales. We often do that, but the housing association is required to ask us and make a case to us. If, for example, we have given a grant to allow houses to be developed in the first place, the public moneys have to be protected. We work on a case-by-case basis, but we take a pragmatic approach and try to help wherever we can. It is worth reasserting that recent statistics indicate the lowest figures for a decade on homelessness applications and assessments. I should also point out the current success of prevention measures. As I said, the Scottish Government will continue to support local authorities to drive the housing options approach. About £70,000 has been made available to the hubs to help them to consider how to mitigate the effects of the housing benefit changes. Initially, £500,000 was given to establish the hubs and, as I mentioned, there is the subsequent award of £150,000, which was announced today. We are providing support. We will learn from the independent evaluation of the hubs approach, which will be published shortly. It is easy to say this, but it is absolutely crucial that we continue to have cross-sector partnership working. At present, things seem to be working well, with joint responses across sectors and services. Alex Johnstone raised a point about ex-services personnel. The important thing is to ensure that those people do not suffer a disadvantage. It is more difficult to provide them with an advantage, but they should not suffer a disadvantage, for example by not being allowed to be on a waiting list when they are in service or by not being able to establish a local connection because they are on duty. Several authorities, particularly Aberdeen City Council, take that issue very seriously. We are keen to roll out best practice to other authorities. There are questions for the UK Government, not just about the fact that it is making some of those people redundant, but about ensuring that people are as well prepared as possible for civvy street. Several members have mentioned the supported accommodation implementation group. The group reports in November, which will be an important step in improving services for homeless people and those who are at risk of homelessness. Humza Yousaf gave good examples of people who are in that category. We also have a consultation on our strategy for the private rented sector, which was published last week. A higher-quality private rented sector can make a great contribution to dealing with homelessness. We share the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s view that it is vital that the 2012 commitment is met across Scotland. We know that work is required with the councils that still report challenges in meeting the commitment. Members, particularly those who are members of the committee, will know exactly which councils those are. It is important that those councils achieve the target. We have made that point strongly to them, while telling them to let us know what more we can do if there are particular circumstances in their areas. One thing that is not in doubt is the record of strong support for the 2012 commitment among wider stakeholders. That underlines the fact that Scotland is a progressive nation. That is evidenced by the general consensus on the issue and, as I have said, by the fact that the commitment has been subscribed to by successive Governments and Oppositions. The Parliament has a good record. However, it is perhaps easy for the Parliament to say that we want to achieve something when we know that delivering it is largely up to other people. I was on the other side of that debate back in 2003 when, as a council leader, I signed the accord. By and large, councils and others will deliver the commitment, so they will deserve the credit for doing that if they can achieve it by the end of the year, although that is not to say that the Scottish Government does not have obligations, too. It will be a proud achievement if we can do it. Even at this stage, we can rightly be proud of the progress that has been made. We bandy about numbers and percentages, but we are talking about people’s lives. We heard telling stories, particularly from Margaret Burgess. If people are now avoiding that kind of experience, that is a massive achievement, even at this stage. We will continue to build on the hard work of local authorities and their partners to achieve sustainable outcomes for all homeless people beyond 2012. I am grateful to the members and convener of the committee for their support in that process.

The member mentions other parties. Tim O’Toole, the chief executive of FirstGroup, has said that “underlying weakness ... led to this performance”. He identified that the price increases that FirstGroup previously imposed had not had the effect that was wanted. If the member thinks—as she seems to say—that the BSOG is virtually the sole reason for service cuts, does she think that the 27 per cent cut by the Labour Party in Wales might have had a far greater impact than the impact here?

As Elaine Murray said, the previous debate that we had on buses was held in Parliament on 26 January 2012. At that time, we had a fairly wide-ranging discussion and there was, I think, some degree of agreement about the importance of bus as a mode of transport and the need to continue to consider future policy in relation to bus transport. For my part, I set out the Government strategy and how it would involve a range of key stakeholders in determining bus policy. On 3 April, we had our first meeting of the bus stakeholder group, which was very constructive and productive. I note that the motion that Elaine Murray moved in January contained no mention of any other influence on bus fares—or cuts, as Elaine Murray describes them. We have seen some change since then; today’s motion at least mentions fuel. It is interesting to note the impact of fuel alone: for example, over the past five years, the price of diesel has increased by 57 per cent. There was no mention of fuel in the motion in January; at least there is some acknowledgement now. There was also no mention of some of the other factors that are at play. I have already mentioned the view of FirstGroup—it acknowledges that there were difficult trading conditions, not least in East Lothian and Midlothian—and some of that company’s previous actions on pricing policy. I can only assume that the change and the bringing back of the debate to the chamber have more to do with political events than anything else. The Labour motion is full of promises, but it is worth taking the time to work out what those would cost, in the absence—as the cabinet secretary mentioned—of any commitment from Labour on how such costs would be met. We have to deliver bus services in the real world, which means using fixed budgets. Elaine Murray glibly tried to skim over the fact that we have to work within a fixed budget from Westminster that has been reduced by £1.3 billion. We have not heard from members on any side of the chamber—excepting, perhaps, the Liberal Democrats, who have asked to cut the concessionary travel scheme for those over 60—about the cuts that would facilitate any spending increase. We have had endless lists of demands for further spending in my portfolios of housing and transport, and in many other areas.

I have lost track of the number of times that the Liberal Democrats have spent the consequentials that have been allocated. It is important to acknowledge that substantial cut in our budget. A good starting point is to work out the cost of the commitments in the Labour Party motion. For example, we calculate that it would take approximately £85 million immediately to reverse changes to the BSOG subsidy and £50 million to reverse the fare increases that have been mentioned. It is sometimes genuinely difficult to work out what the Labour Party means by reregulation, to go back to Charlie Gordon’s member’s bill, so we have to take a stab in the dark. It could cost up to £1 billion to fund the changes that he mentioned. I am less certain of the Labour Party’s current position. The suggestions from Strathclyde partnership for transport, among others, are fairly reasonable. We cannot implement them all, because some—as Elaine Murray acknowledged—relate to reserved powers, and some of the decisions rest with parties other than the Government, but we are looking seriously at progressing a number of them. We have listened to those suggestions, which were discussed by the bus stakeholder group, and the cabinet secretary has made clear that we will give them a warm welcome. Those suggestions involve changing some of the regulatory aspects of the current regime to ensure that as far as possible we have bus services of the required standard in the required places at the required prices. They do not involve a £1 billion project for renationalisation or reregulation. The Labour Party had eight years—10 years, in fact—in which it could have reregulated, but for whatever reason it chose not to do so. We need therefore to ask whether Labour’s commitment is genuine. If that is Labour’s position—which is sometimes hard to work out—how can it be that the 17 per cent cut that Elaine Murray mentioned is causing all those things to happen while a 27 per cent cut to bus services by the Labour Party in Wales is apparently not causing such chaos? There is a fundamental inconsistency in that.

I have different information. I read a publication this week that stated: “Labour meanwhile blames the SNP for bus cuts and pretends that it would end deregulation if it governed. ‘Ministers don’t seem to understand that people rely on buses,’ wailed Johann Lamont, Labour’s Scottish leader. Let’s hope nobody points to Wales, where people who rely on buses have suffered” —they are not about to suffer, but have already suffered— “huge fare rises after Labour ministers there announced bigger bus-subsidy cuts than the cuts in Scotland or England.” Those are the facts of the situation. We also have to ask whether that £85 million—

I will let the member in once I have made some progress. I have mentioned the £85 million and the £1 billion. Labour has not identified one penny of the money to fund what it is calling for. Even if it had done so, we must also ask whether that would be the best use of public money. As members know, the bus industry is dominated by five operators, representing 95 per cent of the bus market. FirstGroup and Stagecoach are large multinational companies that are based in Scotland and of which we are rightly proud. However, they are extremely successful companies that make substantial profits. It is important that we obtain value for money for the public—it is taxpayers’ money that we are using—and I suggest that providing further subsidies to successful operators is not the best use of public money.

The source is this week’s edition of Private Eye. I will give the member a copy if she likes. [Laughter.] Obviously, those on the Labour benches are avid readers of Private Eye. Franchising is another of Labour’s long-term solutions. Everyone knows how expensive the franchising process is. Once again, I have to ask whether that would be the best use of taxpayers’ money. The cost of Labour’s solutions makes them unaffordable. Renationalisation would cost around £1 billion.

I might have done that if I had not been intervened on so much, so I am happy to get to that point. Some of the coverage in the papers has been disappointing. For example, an invitation from CPT to hold a bus summit in 2011 was presented as my summoning the organisation to attend a meeting to discuss bus policy. There have been reasonable and moderate changes to the calculation of the bus service operators grant. To come back to the point that Kezia Dugdale mentioned, there have been substantial effects, particularly in East Lothian and Midlothian. To that end, I have been happy to meet with Unite, representatives of which are in the gallery today. I met them inadvertently this morning, but I also met them yesterday and on previous occasions, and we have had constructive and positive discussions. It is up to Unite to say what it believes, but I believe that it is a commonly accepted fact—First itself has said so—that the issues that we are dealing with are to do with the way in which those services were run over a number of years, not the fact that, in the past two weeks, a new BSOG regime has been brought in. I am not saying that First is happy about the changes to the grant, but it acknowledges the other factors that impact on the situation, not least the United Kingdom Government’s proposed further increase in fuel costs later this year. An increase of 57 per cent in diesel costs will be hard for any company to cope with. I have discussed the issue twice with Paul McLennan, the leader of East Lothian Council, who contacted me as soon as the announcement was made. I met him during the bus stakeholder group meeting and have spoken to him since then. East Lothian Council has also had a summit with the bus companies. To come back to Kezia Dugdale’s point, an assurance has been given that not one community in that area will go without a bus route. I have not heard the same representation being made by Midlothian Council, but I have said to Unite that I am happy to work with Midlothian Council and East Lothian Council on the issue. It would be productive if they worked together. I have heard from local MSPs, such as Christine Grahame and Colin Beattie, and I have seen Iain Gray’s motion, although he has not yet spoken to me directly about the issue. We are keen to do what we can. I have said that the officials in Transport Scotland will provide every assistance to the councils in their efforts to ensure that they can backfill those services, by whichever means. I have never said that we could not regulate in Scotland. If Elaine Murray goes back and listens to “Call Kaye” again, she will realise that I was speaking in an entirely different context. It is possible to regulate. As we see in Lothian, it is possible for a successful bus company to run at arm’s length from the council. There are possibilities and we will work constructively in that regard. That is what we have to do in Government in the real world. We cannot just make promises worth £1 billion-plus, which nobody has any faith will be delivered—I do not think that even Labour believes that they can be delivered, especially not in the context of a fixed budget. We will continue to work with people on the issues around jobs and the routes that are affected, and will do everything possible to help the councils and others in relation to their commitments. I have said to Unite that we will meet its representatives any time. If they want to pick up the phone, we will speak to them. There are very challenging conditions, and we recognise in our amendment that fuel is one of the biggest factors. We call again for the introduction of a fuel duty regulator and for common sense on fuel costs. That will have a much bigger beneficial impact on the bus industry. I am happy to listen to what other members have to say. I move amendment S4M-02639.3, to leave out from first “concerns” to end and insert: “total funding of nearly £250 million per year provided to Scotland’s buses as part of total Scottish Government support for public transport of £1.181 billion; welcomes the Scottish Government’s continuing commitment to the national concessionary travel scheme and Bus Service Operators Grant; welcomes the inclusion in these schemes of demand-responsive transport services available to the general public, such as dial-a-bus; welcomes the Scottish Government’s additional funding of up to £40 million for Glasgow Fastlink, £6 million for low-carbon buses and up to £10 million for Halbeath Park and Ride; welcomes the Scottish Government’s commitment to innovative solutions such as hard-shoulder running on the M77 and the new £3 million Bus Investment Fund; welcomes its ongoing financial support for passenger-focussed organisations such as Bus Users UK, the Community Transport Association and Traveline Scotland; notes the role of local government in supporting local bus services, previously through the Bus Route Development Grant, which is now incorporated in the general funding of local government; recognises that the per capita subsidy for bus services in Scotland is significantly higher than in England; welcomes the constructive dialogue initiated in the Bus Stakeholder Group and in the Lothians over the future of bus services; notes that First Bus states that fuel prices and economic conditions over a number of years are contributing to its increased costs; notes that the price of diesel has increased by 57% over the last five years and the price of petrol by 55%; further notes that fuel duty in the UK is the highest in the EU, and therefore calls on the UK Government to ease the pressure on all forms of transport by introducing a fuel duty regulator to stabilise fuel costs for all forms of transport and to scrap plans to increase fuel duty in August.”

Can I take it from what the member is saying that he thinks that we should reinstate something that rewards fuel consumption rather than distance travelled? He might say that what we say makes no business sense. I disagree. It certainly makes environmental sense not to reward fuel consumption, but to reward distance travelled.

Will the member give way?

If the member thinks for a second about his own experience, he will know, as I do from my experience of using Lothian Buses when I was younger, that the relationship between Lothian Buses and the council is not one whereby the council directly provides bus services. He must surely be aware of that distinction.

I am sure that the member is aware of Henderson Travel, which is a company in his own area. When I met it to announce the latest hybrid bus vehicles that will go to it—those buses have exceeded fuel savings expectations—it said that the BSOG changes had worked very well for it, because many of its routes benefit from them. Does the member acknowledge that more than 200 companies are benefiting from the BSOG changes?

There were some very good speeches in this debate, some less so. Patrick Harvie’s speech was referred to several times and, certainly in his opening speech, he made a few points that I would want to examine further. I should also tell him that bus passengers already have a voice—for example, we have Passengers View Scotland and Bus Users UK—but I am more than willing to listen to any other suggestions that he might wish to make to improve the situation. On Mr Harvie’s comment about spending money on roads, however, I have to say that I am not sure how buses will get around the country if we do not spend money on that, and we will continue to do so.

As I have said, buses need to travel on roads and we will continue to invest in them. One of the best speeches this morning came from Alex Johnstone. I did not agree with many parts of it, but it was certainly very considered and in his six minutes he touched on a lot of important issues. On his basic point that, in spending money, we should at all times consider our priorities, I can reassure him that we do so regularly. However, Mr Johnstone’s most telling point was that we are in this situation because of the Labour Party’s legacy in destroying the UK economy. Indeed, when he left office, the previous Chief Secretary to the Treasury, Liam Byrne, left the written message, “There’s no money left.” That is the root of the problem with regard to the money that we can afford to give not just to the bus industry but to everyone else. I thought that Jim Hume’s speech was bizarre. I am sure that the few remaining Liberal Democrat supporters in Scotland who live in rural areas and are interested in the environment will be interested in hearing his staunch support for the consumption of fuel over environmental benefits and his special pleading on behalf of urban operators at the expense of rural operators. He will be able to explain his position when he gets back to his constituency. In his own speech, Jamie Hepburn very tellingly pointed out that the Labour Party did not even know the terms of its own motion. That is important because a number of members in the debate were seriously trying to address the issues that we are facing while others were clearly not. It is also true that Richard Baker—he has not yet spoken publicly but I am sure that he will make this point when he winds up—has said that there has been a £7.5 million cut in the concessionary travel scheme. However, I can tell him that the funding has gone up by £7 million from £180 million to £187 million.

Mr Baker will get his chance to come back on that point shortly and I hope that he will apologise for getting it so badly wrong. On the subject of ignorance, I point out to Iain Gray that the bus route development fund has not been abolished; instead, under the concordat, the money has been given to local authorities as a direct grant, to allow them to support local bus services. Indeed, as a former transport minister, Iain Gray should know the difference between a council running a bus service itself and it doing so at arm’s length. The two things are quite distinct. One is possible; the other is not.

The East Lothian proposal is a matter for East Lothian.

We have said that we will ensure that Transport Scotland provides as much advice as possible on the issues that the council will have to face. The council has also talked about running the services in conjunction with school transport and other services. It all depends on how it intends to configure the business. In any case, if Iain Gray is so determined that the bus industry should receive more support, why did he support the spending of £770 million on the trams in Edinburgh? Does he think that the bus industry was happy that the trams received three times the amount of support that we can give to it each year? As I have said, the important speeches in this debate sought to address serious issues in a serious way. Indeed, as Kezia Dugdale suggested, at the root of all of this lie the people who might lose their jobs and communities worried about the future of their services. I suppose that we can address the matter in a number of ways: we can meet the people concerned and support them in what they are trying to do; we can meet their representatives, by which I mean councillors or MSPs—and indeed we have done so; or we can meet the communities and the operators. For example, we have had fairly productive discussions with First since the announcement was made about the future prospects for its staff, which we hope will safeguard as many jobs as possible. James Dornan made the point that the serious way in which to go about trying to address the issue is to talk to people and see what resolutions we can get. That is what we have to do in government, as I am sure Iain Gray knows. We betray rather than serve those people’s interests if all that we do is to make promises that we have no intention of keeping. Labour does not have the costings or the track record of putting forward proposals during the budget process that would give credibility to the things that it proposes in its motion. A number of members—Paul Wheelhouse in particular—pointed out the problems that First has had in East Lothian and Midlothian. First has acknowledged those, but that never finds its way into speeches from the Labour benches. As I mentioned, we have had discussions with First and we are also going to speak to Lothian Buses—that came out of the meeting that I had with Unite. We will also try to get Midlothian Council on board, as it will be much more effective if both of the councils that are most concerned talk together. In a good speech, Sandra White discussed green buses. She asked the pointed question—which I cannot answer as it is for those concerned—of why there were no applications for green buses in Glasgow. When we put in additional money to provide the green buses in Edinburgh, particularly on the number 10 route, we estimated that savings of about a third in fuel consumption would result, but the company tells us that the saving is more than two thirds. That is the way to go in investing in buses. What Lothian Buses has done with its services must be the way to go for the future benefit of both passengers and the environment. Not enough mention has been made of the fact that the cost of diesel has increased by 57 per cent in the past five years, and the figure for petrol is about 55 per cent. We also have the highest fuel duty in the European Union. People who wonder why the bus companies are looking for more support should look at those facts. What is the UK Government’s response? It is going to hike fuel duty again in August. That is the biggest driving factor for the fare increases. Just before the 2007 election, we had support from the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats for a fuel duty regulator and tough action on fuel. It will be interesting to see whether we get the same support today. We will continue to make representations to the Westminster Government and encourage it to scrap the increase in fuel duty. No mention was made in the speeches from the Conservatives or the Liberal Democrats of the effect of the fuel duty increase, which vastly outstrips the impact of BSOG. The impact of BSOG is 1.9 per cent in relation to the turnover of First, but fuel duty is bound to have a massive impact. It would have been far better for the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats to support us in our call for the Westminster Government to look at that seriously. I am convinced that we are doing a great deal to support the bus industry, not least by trying to get rid of some of the worst effects of the fuel increases from Westminster. In that regard, I am happy to commend to the Parliament the amendment in my name.

The member made the point that the concessionary fares budget is reducing by £7 million this year. Will he acknowledge that it is going from £180 million last year to £187 million this year? At the same time, will he tell us what exactly the Labour Party’s position is? Is it to support concessionary travel or is it, as Richard Simpson said before the election, to take it away from those who are over the age of 60?

I was hopeful there for a second, Presiding Officer. [Laughter.] In the past three financial years, Transport Scotland has invested more than £482,000 on safety improvements on the A85 trunk road. As part of that, Transport Scotland has delivered a route accident reduction plan—RARP—study of a section of the A85. Following a further road accident study, measures with a total value of £210,000 have been included for delivery in the 2012-13 road safety programme. In addition to investment in specific road safety measures, Transport Scotland spent more than £2.1 million in the previous financial year on restoring the condition of the A85 through major carriageway maintenance, carriageway patching and minor improvements. In the current financial year, Transport Scotland plans to spend a further £2 million on maintaining the route, including £500,000 of works in Oban.

I am happy to look at the specific issue of road markings, but the RARP study that I mentioned represents the best way to tackle the issues that are prevalent on the A85. The study looked not only at the incidence of accidents, but at measures that might help to alleviate them, such as measures on approaches to challenging bends and potential hazards. Such measures have been proven to be successful on other routes across Scotland. As I have said, I undertake to look at the issue of road markings as well.

Transport Scotland’s annual accident analysis identified issues on a stretch of the A85, including at Comrie, which Annabelle Ewing mentioned. A study has been carried out, and road safety measures are being designed. When their design is finalised, we will write to Comrie community council to detail the planned works and the construction date. That is likely to be in July this year. In addition, Comrie community council has written to Transport Scotland about the possibility of a pedestrian crossing on the A85 in the village. We have asked Scotland TranServ to investigate that matter, and we will write to the community council on that subject in due course.

As at 28 March this year, 328,266 people aged between 60 and 65 were in receipt of a national entitlement card under the Scotland-wide free bus travel scheme for older and disabled people. Those figures were provided by the local authority card management system.

It is perfectly legitimate to ask that question; indeed, it was asked in the debate earlier. Audit Scotland has also looked at the issue. The Government thinks that it is extremely important that people between the ages of 60 and 65 should continue to benefit from the concessionary travel scheme. Many of those people face huge and rising living costs as things stand, and we think that it is important that we retain that support for passengers and bus services more generally. I know that the issue has been raised previously, and it has been raised again by the Conservative spokesperson today, but that it is our position. In relation to community transport, we have extended the scheme further to allow some demand-responsive transport services and services such as Dial-a-Journey that are available to the general public to include concessionary travel. That is a welcome change that perhaps goes some way to meeting Annabel Goldie’s ambitions. However, we intend to retain the concessionary travel scheme for people aged 60 to 65 in the meantime.

The member will know that Transport Scotland recently met East Lothian Council and that the First Minister has stated that safeguarding bus routes is an absolute priority for the Government. We recognise that bus routes often provide a lifeline service in communities across Scotland. For my part, I am very hopeful that the recent meetings with East Lothian Council and Midlothian Council at officer level will lead to progress on the issue and will move us closer to a solution that serves the needs of local communities and protects as many local jobs as possible. Transport Scotland is providing support to local authorities and bus companies.

In addition to more than £1 billion of investment in recent years on the M74 and M80 motorways and the Airdrie to Bathgate railway line, the Scottish Government is committed to further improving transport infrastructure in the west of Scotland, as we set out in our infrastructure investment plan. That includes up to £246 million in capital funding for the modernisation of Glasgow’s subway; up to £40 million of funding towards the fastlink scheme; £508 million to complete the M8 motorway and upgrade the M73 and M74; £169 million for the Paisley rail corridor improvements, which are nearing completion; and almost £12 million on essential strengthening works on the M8 White Cart viaduct at Glasgow airport.

It is inevitable that on-going works on the motorway and trunk road infrastructure lead to some level of congestion. I can confirm that the temporary traffic management measures at the M8 White Cart viaduct will be removed by 6 May, and that the strengthening works will finish on 5 July.

We invest around £250 million each year in bus services across Scotland. As I mentioned earlier, we are committed to the national concessionary travel scheme and the bus service operators grant. The inclusion in those schemes of demand-responsive transport services that are available to the general public, such as dial-a-bus, will assist vulnerable and elderly people in particular. We have provided more than £6 million for procurement of low-carbon buses, and we are investing up to £40 million in the Glasgow fastlink project and up to £10 million in the Halbeath park and ride. In addition, we are committed to innovative solutions such as hard-shoulder running on the M77 and the new £3 million bus investment fund.

As was mentioned during this morning’s debate, we believe that one of the main drivers—excuse the pun—for the additional costs that local bus companies face is fuel duty. The price of diesel has gone up by 57 per cent over the past five years. A reform of the funding system that rewards operators on the basis of distance travelled rather than fuel consumed is well overdue and seems to me to be environmentally sensible, which is why we have introduced it. In the final part of my first answer to Mr Malik, I mentioned that we have invested in a £3 million bus investment fund. First Glasgow will benefit from that fund if it wants to work productively with us.

I thank Alison Johnstone for lodging the motion and for the way in which she has spoken to it. It is a comprehensive motion on cycling that provides us with a good opportunity to debate further what actions and partnership working are needed. As she suggested, Parliament is generally in agreement that cycling should be a safe, healthy and realistic choice as a mode of transport. There has recently been a focus on cycling, not least because of the four fatalities in Edinburgh in the past 12 months, which have led to the recent road safety operational partnership group meeting. That meeting provided an extremely fruitful discussion; it was well attended and there was participation from a wide range of cycling stakeholders, some of whom have been mentioned. In Scotland, the growth in the number of cyclists has been accompanied by a 12 per cent drop in cycle accident casualties between 2000 and 2010. That was the result of a lot of activity by different partners. As Alison Johnstone said, we have a vested interest in trying to make it clear to the public—as far as we can and with the appropriate caveats—how safe cycling is and how much safer it has become, with fewer serious accidents happening. If we do that, we are more likely to encourage more cycling. That said, we cannot be complacent. Everyone has been shocked by the cycling deaths in Edinburgh over the past 12 months. When such tragedies happen, we are all reminded that, although Scotland’s roads are among the safest in the world, one life lost is one too many. I accept Alison Johnstone’s point that the Government has a leadership role to play in making use of our roads safer for everyone. We will do that by facilitating partnership working. At the forum that I mentioned, there were two excellent presentations from City of Edinburgh Council and Glasgow City Council, which showed stark results in the reduction in the number of cycling casualties—in one case going back 50 years and in the other case going back 60 years.

At the road safety forum, we discussed several initiatives that are taking place in different localities, and the need to spread those out as best practice. Kevin Stewart mentioned one such initiative; others are happening elsewhere. The leadership role of the Scottish Government is to draw in those examples and to ensure that they are extended where that is possible. I commend Nestrans for having undertaken that initiative. A number of approaches to better cyclist safety are either being trialled or are in practice around Scotland, but people are not always aware of them. There is a role for Government in making people aware of them. Currently, 98 per cent of Scottish primary schools offer cycle training and 70 per cent of pupils take up the offer. Of the eligible cohort of 55,000 pupils, 69.5 per cent receive some form of cycle training, but only 31.5 per cent are receiving on-road training to the national standard. That is why I have agreed a target with Cycling Scotland of 40 per cent of children receiving on-road training by 2015. I urge every local authority in Scotland to work in partnership with Cycling Scotland not just to meet that target, but to exceed it. We must reinforce the message that learning to cycle in a live environment is more beneficial than learning to ride a bike in a playground. An immediate development from the operational partnership group meeting is that, following a representation from the sustainable transport team, which has responsibility for cycling, it will provide on-going feedback to the group on what the cycling action plan delivery forum and the national cycling interest group are doing, and on whether those fora have raised concerns about road safety. I hope that that will provoke wider discussion of the issues and improved communication in the established cycling groups, without unnecessary duplication of effort. There are quite a number of players, so we should co-ordinate our activities productively. Funding has been mentioned. Over the next three financial years, £20.25 million will be provided for active travel projects, with a focus on cycling and walking infrastructure. That is in addition to £15 million for wider sustainable and active travel initiatives. Sustrans was also mentioned. Its budget will increase from £5.5 million this year to more than £7 million, £8 million then £9 million in the next three years. We are retaining the ring fencing of the cycling, walking and safer streets grant, which is allocated to local authorities to deliver active travel projects. Alison Johnstone made the point that we rely on local authorities to play their part. Some—not least, the City of Edinburgh Council—do that substantially.

It is true that, over a long period—certainly even when I lived in Edinburgh up to the 1980s—the council’s leadership role has been evident. Other local authorities might have different priorities and different opportunities, but the example that the City of Edinburgh Council has set is worth being looked at by other authorities. Some authorities around the country are doing great work. The roads budget was mentioned. Alison Johnstone might not have had a chance yet to see the detail of the M8 bundle that was discussed yesterday, which she mentioned. If she has the chance to look at that, she will see that it involves substantial investment in pedestrian and cycling activity, which have also been included in other projects, such as the M74 extension. The issue is always at the forefront of our minds.

The cycling, walking and safer streets grant will be just over £6 million in 2012-13. Our grant offer retains a request for at least 36 per cent, and preferably 50 per cent, of the grant to be spent on cycling. We are committed to meeting the world-leading Scottish climate change targets and are on track to do so. In 2009, emissions had fallen by 27.6 per cent from 1990 levels, which is almost two thirds of the way to meeting the target of a 42 per cent emissions reduction by 2020. Substantial progress has been and is being made. We are doing what we said in our manifesto we would do; we are developing the infrastructure to support electric cars, on which I said quite a deal at a conference yesterday. We are also increasing the proportion of transport spending on low-carbon, active and sustainable travel. We are investing £1 billion in public and sustainable transport. When I sum up, I will say more on current activity across Scotland. I am keen to hear others’ views. I move amendment S4M-02522.3, to insert at end: “, and reaffirms the Scottish Government’s target of 10% of journeys made by bike by 2020.”

We have heard a number of views on making cycling safer and more appealing. It is worth saying that we cannot insist that people cycle. We must do what we can to encourage cycling and focus on making it as easy and safe as possible—I understand that—but if people prefer to walk, for example, as Nanette Milne said, they are perfectly entitled to do that. I will return to some of the points that have been made in the debate and make some points that I did not get the chance to make earlier. We plan a refresh of the cycling action plan for Scotland following the first progress report from Cycling Scotland in June. At that point, we will update all 17 of the actions in the plan, completing some of them and, potentially, adding some more. Mention was made of the need for behavioural change. That is a crucial point. We just heard from Claudia Beamish about the Netherlands. The situation there, particularly in Amsterdam, has grown up over many years and benefits from a very flat environment, so a cycling culture exists. We must do all that we can to encourage such a culture, but that will not happen overnight; it will take some time to achieve. The behavioural change towards mutual respect that Alison Johnstone first mentioned must take place. Many cyclists come to speak to me because they are unhappy with the behaviour of other cyclists, just as drivers of vehicles sometimes do not show appropriate respect for more vulnerable road users. The need to improve the perception of the safety of cycling among parents has not been mentioned. If we want to encourage more children to take up cycling, parents must feel more able to say yes to children who want to cycle to school or cycle recreationally. There are some excellent examples of that happening in Edinburgh, but there is more that we can do on the matter. We must also develop awareness of cyclists and their needs on the road. That is why we will launch the give me cycle space campaign in May. We also try to reward organisations that promote safe cycling and safe driving. For that reason, we have the cycle-friendly schools awards and various employers awards, which result in certificates being awarded. We heard different examples of infrastructure being very good in some cases and not so good in others. That is often a matter for the local authority and its partners. The Scottish Government can be one of those partners and has tried to focus the funding that it has—as all members appreciate, there is not a bottomless pit—on ensuring match funding by local authorities and others. The investment that we plan over the next three years will allow more infrastructure to be developed. Everyone else has used a local example, so why should I not? The old Menstrie branch line in my constituency is now being used as a cycle path to good effect. There are events that recognise people’s efforts and encourage them to walk and cycle safely. A number of members mentioned the pedal on Parliament event. Unfortunately, I cannot take part in that, but I will take part in the pedal for Scotland bike ride, which will happen on Sunday 9 September. I invite John Lamont—if I can keep up with him—and anybody else who complained about having a bike secreted away in a cupboard to come to it. It is a chance to come into Edinburgh on a safe cycle route, which is a tremendous experience. I did it last year but only as far as Kirkliston, not all the way from Glasgow. I will try to extend that this year.

As I have said, we have tried to incorporate what the member has suggested into most of our major projects, including not only the M8 and the M74 but the Forth replacement crossing; indeed, that is how we intend to use the existing Forth road bridge. We have told officials that we should make what we are doing clear to the public. The Airdrie to Bathgate line has been mentioned in that respect but, in other road projects, the public might not have been made as aware of that aspect as they might have been and I will be encouraging that to happen. We also fund Sustrans, which, as has been mentioned, is rolling out with Fife Council 20mph zones in parts of Kirkcaldy and as part of its street design project is redesigning streets with the support of local communities. The same initiative is happening in Moray Council. There have been many references to the City of Edinburgh Council, whose road safety team launched its 20mph zone last Friday. At this point, I should make it clear that councils themselves can introduce—and have introduced—such zones. Alison Johnstone’s motion asks the Government to make that process easier; however, I am not sure that the Labour amendment quite addresses the same issue, because the “guidance” that it refers to is issued by the Department for Transport and is based on United Kingdom primary legislation. We are talking about Scottish Government-issued traffic regulation orders and, although we will look at how we can streamline that system, members must bear in mind that public consultation forms a large part of that process and we do not want to minimise any of that. We have said many times that we can best achieve this aim by working in partnership with others, including those involved in climate change, to push these particular policies. As the report on proposals and policies makes clear, this is not solely about Government funding; many other financial and non-financial contributions are needed from local authorities and—as John Lamont pointed out—business.

We cannot support the Conservative amendment, as it removes a substantial part of the Green party motion. Although the Labour amendment is well intentioned, it presents certain problems, in that the guidance that it mentions is not strictly applicable to the Scottish situation. That said, I am happy to support the motion.

We are very aware of concerns about the potential elimination of competition on Scotland’s services to Heathrow and the unwelcome impact that that could have on existing access and fare levels. Any deal must fully recognise those concerns.

Through representations from the member and others, the European Commission is fully aware of our concerns about the potential negative impacts of a monopoly situation. On 8 March, the First Minister wrote to the European Commissioner for Competition, Mr Almunia, to record our concerns, and I followed that up with a further letter ahead of the Commission’s first-phase investigation deadline, which is tomorrow. Last week in Brussels, I raised the issue in more general terms with the European Commission’s transport directorate-general. We are aware that the Commission is considering monopoly remedies. Those need to be sufficiently robust to offer protection to passengers, as the member suggests, although we do not want a sale to be delayed unnecessarily. The member raises important issues, but there are also issues to do with the current jobs and services.

I, too, congratulate Jim Hume on securing the debate and on the broad support that he has achieved for it. Every member who has spoken has recognised the important role that community transport groups and organisations play in providing transport services for vulnerable people throughout Scotland, and I echo that point. As we have heard, such services are often of particular benefit to people with mobility difficulties who cannot access conventional buses and people who live in areas where there are limited or no public transport services. Community transport can offer a more personal touch with trained drivers, passenger escorts, door-to-door transport by accessible minibus and volunteers who use their own cars. As a number of members mentioned, the users value those services highly. They help individuals to get out and about, to access services, facilities and health appointments, to go shopping—a point that Alex Fergusson made—and to visit friends and family. Being given the option of mobility is extremely important, as it can overcome the sense of isolation. That helps people to remain part of their community and improves their wellbeing. I applaud the employees and dedicated volunteers who give up their time to help to provide transport services. At least two examples have been mentioned: Teviot wheels and Tweed wheels. In my area, there is Dial-a-Journey Ltd, which I visited earlier this week. That long-running organisation provides a tremendous service and has opened fantastic new premises. Interestingly, it is resourced by and large by the three local authorities in its area but also benefits from substantial support from the Order of Malta, which is involved in many such activities. Talking of funding, it is true to say that the local authorities are provided with resources to support community transport services in their areas, but we do not ring fence those resources. Local authorities have flexibility on how they spend their funds. We encourage them—that is as far as we would go—to maintain and, where possible, extend spending on community transport services. We also encourage local authorities to consider community transport options in the provision of transport services in their areas, as well as more efficient and effective use of such services through partnership working and integrated services. The idea of school buses—a resource that was underused previously—being used for additional purposes was mentioned. More efficient use of ambulances was also mentioned. A great deal of work is being done on that, not least by the Strathclyde partnership for transport. When we have constraints on resources, it is right that we get the most out of the resources that we have. The concessionary travel scheme was mentioned. In case members do not remember, that has cost £180 million this year and is about to go up to £187 million. It services exactly the people about whom we are talking—older people and people with disabilities—as well as disabled veterans, who are a new addition to the budget line. As Aileen McLeod said, the main reason that that budget line is growing is the cost of fuel. That is a huge factor. It seems pretty obvious that it drives up the cost of transport. For example, CalMac Ferries needs an extra £14.5 million this year alone for ferry costs because of the increase in fuel charges. There is no doubt that there is pressure on budgets. Sarah Boyack mentioned BSOG. There is no question but that there has been a cut in the overall amount of BSOG, but many rural operators have welcomed the change that levels the playing field between rural and urban services. Three times as many operators will benefit from that change as will lose from it. That has been appreciated because some of the services that were previously under threat now attract more support. That includes rural community transport services. We have put £3 million into the bus investment fund, which is set up to enable transport authorities to make bus improvements in their areas. Details of that are still to be finalised, but we envisage that organisations will be able to access the fund for, among other things, the development of community transport. We will look at the system for issuing section 19 permits to community transport services that are not available to the general public. Elaine Murray drew that very distinction in her speech.

Yes. The main driver for establishing the support was the fact that a number of urban operators were losing out from the shift to rural areas. As a result, the funding will also be available to those in urban areas. Going back to Elaine Murray’s comments, I point out that we have agreed that we should make changes to allow for demand-responsive transport; however, they would have to be for services that were available to the general public. That is the further step that would have to be taken. Jim Hume suggested that the cost of extending the schemes would be about 3 per cent of the budget, or the not insignificant sum of £6 million or £7 million. That said, we will consider all the types of organisations that are able to issue permits and look at the crucial role of the traffic commissioner and the development of a community transport operator database. We have regular discussions with the CTA; after all, it is the main voice of community transport in the UK and works on behalf of its members to engage Government and to inform, influence and help to shape future community transport policy and development. It is encouraging more transport providers to be less reliant on public funding, which is crucial, and to engage in the social enterprise model of delivery. It is also encouraging providers to consider bidding for local contracts, allowing them to play a bigger part in local transport delivery. Community transport providers must consider how to integrate their services better with the commercial network and, as has been mentioned, ensure that there is no duplication of existing services. In conclusion, I should mention two points. First of all, the bus stakeholder group has been established and will meet next Tuesday. The CTA will be represented—as it should be, given that it forms part of the transport landscape. Secondly, I am pleased to announce a new £45,000 grant for the CTA in 2012-13 to allow it to continue its operations in Scotland. Meeting closed at 17:46.

As we know, the United Kingdom Government is making radical changes to the benefits system. We agree that reform is needed. We also agree that the system should incentivise work, that it should be simpler and, of course, that it must be affordable, but we believe that many of the changes will have a devastating impact on some of Scotland’s most vulnerable communities and households. As long as responsibility for the welfare system rests with the UK Government rather than the Scottish Government, there is very little that we can do about that. The figures relating to the housing benefit reforms are eye watering. The shared accommodation rate changes will affect more than 4,000 Scots, who will lose more than £85 per month on average. Some 95,000 households in the social rented sector will be affected by the Department for Work and Pensions underoccupancy restrictions and will lose between £27 and £65 per month. The benefits cap will affect around 4,000 adults in Scotland and between 7,000 and 8,000 children. The average loss will be around £250 per month. It is not only claimants who will bear the costs; there is also an impact on landlords. Currently, most social tenants who depend on housing benefit choose to have their rent paid directly to the landlord. That helps to keep a roof over their head, regardless of the many other financial pressures that they are likely to face. That will change through welfare reform. Most working age tenants will receive support to cover their rent directly to them, whether they want to or not. We support financial inclusion, but our stakeholders tell us that the UK Government’s approach is likely to increase rent arrears. That is a sledgehammer approach. The reforms cut right across our devolved housing policies and right through the workings of our social landlords. Local authorities, too, will feel the impact. Cutting support for some of our most vulnerable households will inevitably result in hardship—in some cases, severe hardship. When people are struggling to find their rent or are forced to move home, they turn to local authorities and registered social landlords. The underoccupancy penalties alone aim to save around £100 million a year for the UK Treasury. We have estimated that that will have a one-off cost of £87 million to the Scottish economy and will remove £54.4 million a year directly from the Scottish economy thereafter. Overall, the housing benefit reforms will remove more than £150 million a year from the Scottish economy. Those are the impacts of just the housing reforms. The Scottish Government and stakeholders are clear that the Welfare Reform Act 2012 will have a significant negative impact in Scotland. The current benefit spend in Scotland is around £12 billion. In evidence that was presented to the Health and Sport Committee by the DWP, it was estimated that the reduction in welfare benefit receipts in Scotland would be “about £2.5 billion” by 2015. We share our stakeholders’ concerns. We do not want those who cannot work as a result of ill health or disability to be relegated to a life of disadvantage, financial uncertainty and poverty. On the issue of protecting vulnerable people, it is worth noting the views of Mary Taylor of the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations. She said: “What we are worried about is the Government penalising some of Scotland’s poorest families”. Today, the richest in our society—those who earn over £150,000—have received a 10 per cent tax cut. That gives the lie to the UK Government’s idea that we are all in this together. We have worked tirelessly with our stakeholders to make the UK Government understand the problems that it is creating by making the cuts that it is making in the way that it is making them. We have argued consistently that it is moving too fast, that it is not providing enough detail, and that the most vulnerable should be protected.

If, as usual, Liam McArthur does not want to believe me, he can ask all the stakeholders, who say that there is a complete lack of detail about many of the reforms that the UK Government has proposed. He should listen to them if he will not listen to me. We know that the DWP is thinking about changes to supported accommodation and temporary accommodation for homeless people, but we do not know the details or how vulnerable people will be affected. As I said, we have argued consistently that the Government is working too fast.

We have published substantial information about the action that we have taken, including, for example, on the provision of additional resources to the hubs that have been set up throughout Scotland to help to mitigate the effects. We will put more information in the public domain about how we can best mitigate the effects of the changes. The reforms will mean significant changes for the way in which some of our most vulnerable people are housed, including women in refuges, older people in sheltered accommodation and people with severe physical and learning impairments. The organisations that provide that support need to know the detail of the changes and they need to know it in good time, but they say that they have not seen the detail yet. It is worth restating that we believe that the overall model of universal credit has some merits, but squeezing housing benefit for people in supported and temporary accommodation into that system without due consideration will inevitably cause problems. For example, a default position of direct payments of support for housing costs for users of supported and temporary accommodation is frankly wrong, and all the stakeholders agree. Of course, the question that arises is what an independent Scotland would do if it was to face the same pressures. I have conceded that the system needs reform. Our Tory and Lib Dem colleagues might suggest that an independent Scotland would be forced to do the same to make ends meet. It is not for me to say what the first Government of the shortly-to-be-inaugurated independent Scotland would do—it would be up to the Government of the day, elected by the Scottish people, to decide. However, I can say that many of the UK Government’s reforms will simply move burdens from the DWP to others. Remedying the impacts of housing benefit reform could cost more than preventing them in the first place. A Scottish Government, working with stakeholders, could decide where best to invest to get the most from our resources. There is a mismatch between housing policy, which is devolved, and housing benefit, which is reserved. A Scottish Government could make housing benefit policy support our wider housing responsibilities. A number of opportunities for Scotland’s housing system through devolved housing benefit are set out in the report that was launched last week by the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and the Chartered Institute of Housing. For example, at a fundamental level, what should be the balance between subsidising people through the benefits system and subsidising new homes through housing investment? We have an extremely strong housing sector in Scotland. The devolution of housing policy has allowed Scotland to make great strides, such as internationally acclaimed homelessness legislation. Once again, though, all the stakeholders would tell us that that has been made much more difficult by the welfare reforms. Despite those reforms, we are on track to meet our 2012 target, which is a testament to the determination of hard-working local authorities to end the misery of homelessness. Of course, we have the restarting of the council house building programme and the delivery of 30,000 affordable homes during this parliamentary session alone. We have innovative, groundbreaking approaches, such as our pioneering national housing trust initiative and our commitment to provide a guarantee to support a three-year mortgage indemnity scheme, which will help about 6,000 households. Yesterday I was at the opening of a housing development in the east of Edinburgh. One of our key partners, who also deals with the UK Government, mentioned how much more progress and innovation there is in Scotland compared with the rest of the UK. The things that we have done have helped to tackle homelessness. This year alone, 28 of the 32 local authorities say that they have had a reduction in homelessness. The reduction in Aberdeen has been huge. All that good work is being done in a process that started in 2003. Now, as we get to the end of the process, as if it was not enough to be hit by an international recession, the welfare reforms are making it much more difficult to get up the final part of the hill to reach the 2012 target. All the stakeholders whom we deal with have told us—and the UK Government—that the changes to benefits will have a huge impact on some of the most vulnerable individuals in our communities. That is why we oppose the changes and why we have lodged the motion. I am proud to work in a Government that is part of a dynamic shift to revitalise our homes and communities. However, it is clear that our ambitions for housing—for our people and for our communities—are being thwarted by the current constitutional arrangements. Again, it is not just me saying that—some of the responses from stakeholders point to the frictions that the constitutional arrangements have created. There is an easy way for the UK Government to deal with this. It can look again at the reforms. It was encouraged to do that by Liam McArthur’s colleagues in the House of Lords, but it did not want to listen. I hope that Liam McArthur’s contribution to the debate reflects more the concerns that were raised by the Liberal Democrats in the House of Lords than the opinions of Danny Alexander and others in the UK Government. The benefit cuts will have a huge impact. We should oppose them and we have opposed them. The Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, the Deputy First Minister and I have made representations to the UK Government, most of which have been ignored. Some changes have been made but not nearly enough. It is vital that the Parliament makes clear its opposition to the changes for the benefit of the people of Scotland. I move, That the Parliament notes the UK Government’s plan for housing benefit reforms that will have a devastating impact on tenants, especially in some of Scotland’s poorest communities, and, as a result, on social and private landlords, local authorities and support agencies; regrets that, despite significant, well-evidenced and considered lobbying by Scottish stakeholders against the reforms, the UK Government pushed through the Welfare Reform Bill largely unchanged; notes that the UK Government’s housing benefit reforms cut across devolved responsibilities, compromising the Scottish Government’s capacity to deliver on its housing ambitions for Scotland, and acknowledges that, now that the Welfare Reform Bill has gained Royal Assent, the Scottish Government, local authorities, landlords and others must work together to minimise as far as possible adverse impacts on some of Scotland’s most vulnerable people and to develop thinking on the Scottish delivery of housing support costs under any changed future constitutional arrangements.

Does John Mason acknowledge what appears to be an emerging anti-poverty strategy from the Tories and, perhaps more surprisingly, the Lib Dems that involves taking £150 million out of the Scottish economy and giving a tax cut to those who are on over £150,000 a year? Does he hear any support for that in his constituency?

Will the member give way?

I congratulate John Lamont on securing the debate, with the support of others. I do not want to be invidious, but I will mention Iain Gray and Paul Wheelhouse, who were involved in the previous discussions that I have had on the issue. I recognise their efforts on behalf of the campaign. My site visit on 28 February confirmed that, as members have mentioned, there is strong cross-party support for the reintroduction of local services from Edinburgh to Berwick-upon-Tweed and the reopening of stations at Reston and East Linton. The Scottish ministers recognise that the September 2011 feasibility study for enhanced rail services between Edinburgh and Newcastle, which was commissioned and paid for by Transport Scotland, demonstrates a positive business case, as has been said by several members, for new stations at East Linton and Reston together, to be served by Edinburgh and Berwick services. The point about the stations being provided together is important. However, the case is marginal. There is a benefit to cost ratio of 1.1 and an additional annual subsidy of £2.5 million. I take on board Iain Gray’s point that that perhaps emphasises one side of the issue, which is why we have agreed to have a further evidence call and further input from community councils and others on possible additional benefits.

I was coming on to that point. Because of when Laurencekirk was completed, the figures have not yet come through the machine to show how much in excess of the projected figures the actual figures are. However, in my area, with the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line, we estimated—because we were told to—that there would be about 80,000 users, but there turned out to be 400,000 users. However, I have a list of stations that have performed drastically below the projected figures. That points to the fact that predictions of patronage are not hard and fast. Transport Scotland, with which I have raised the issue, and the Department for Transport recognise that more work needs to be done on proper projections. The figures for Laurencekirk and the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line have been substantially above the projected figures, although that has not been the case for many stations. I will get back to the member with information on whether the nature of the BCR calculation has changed. We have encouraged local stakeholders to investigate whether other transport options might provide better value for money. SEStran is undertaking an additional study to complement the feasibility study. As requested, that will consider in more detail the main socioeconomic issues that affect the area, some of which Paul Wheelhouse mentioned, such as tourism. It will also provide a proportionate appraisal of the coach and local bus feeder options, following Scottish transport appraisal guidance. I know from experience that people who support new rail services often say automatically that buses are not the answer. I am just saying that we have to go through the process. We are duty bound to be diligent in considering additional investment. Therefore, it is important that we consider those options first and in a serious way. The study will establish whether options other than rail could provide a better value-for-money solution to the economic development, social accessibility and environmental needs of residents in the east and south-east of Scotland. It will help to build a robust business case for any option that is taken forward. A decision on the proposal for local rail services to Berwickshire and East Lothian is not a prerequisite for the letting of the next franchise, which will commence in 2014. John Lamont raised that point. As I made clear at the site visit, the proposal could be added subsequently as a franchise variation. Claudia Beamish said that the issue is not just about money. However, there is a real issue about money. I must be honest and say that there are at least 30 different cases for station reopenings throughout Scotland. If each one required £1 million or £2.5 million subsidy, the additional cost would soon add up. We are spending more on rail services—it is already about £775 million, for a service that is used by about 6 per cent of the population. Therefore, we have to consider carefully whether we make further investment. That is not even taking into account capital costs, but just the on-going subsidy costs. That is an important consideration, not least because—as members have mentioned—we have had a substantial cut to the budget and constraints have been placed on capital spend. Therefore, we need to consider money carefully. For that reason, ministers are not in a position to commit to new investments, especially in projects that would require significant on-going annual subsidy payments. Due to budgetary constraints, we must focus on the strategic investments that will deliver the greatest benefits at the national and local levels. We must prioritise funding for those key transport projects. Even though John Lamont is—to put it kindly—somewhat lukewarm about the Borders rail line, there is huge support elsewhere for that line. The Government is taking it forward and it will improve. Alex Johnstone mentioned that, when the station at Laurencekirk was opened, people asked why that had not been done before. I admit that, when I came into my present job, I kept asking myself why many things had not been done before. However, it is not possible to do everything that the Government would like to do at once for all modes of transport, not least because of the current budgetary situation. Nevertheless, we are keen to improve access to the rail network by local communities on existing routes through the provision of additional stations. New stations or services will be considered favourably by the Scottish ministers, subject to the STAG appraisal of other transport options and rail being identified as the best option. Where the surrounding population is sufficient to generate a high level of demand, whether through workplace or visitor needs, we will support new stations. However, even then any funding for the construction of the stations and the subsidisation of services would have to be identified and prioritised relative to other national and local investment priorities. Where local funding sources can be identified, that can greatly help in bringing a project up the priority list. The proposal for the local rail services to Berwickshire and East Lothian is progressing to the next stage of development, but I caution John Lamont about trying to get a definitive and conclusive response now. He should do that when the best possible case has been made for the additional services or stations. If the additional study can improve the business case and the affordability of the proposals, the Scottish ministers will be in a better position to consider whether and when the proposals can be implemented. We are keen to consider proposals for new stations where there would be clear benefits. As I said when I made my site visit, there is an awful lot of pressure just now—whether through the high-speed rail proposals or the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme—to concentrate on journey times alone, but I have said that we will not do that. Connectivity with communities that are not otherwise connected to the rail network should be taken into account, even if that is sometimes at the expense of journey times. A number of transport projects around the country are already shovel ready but, as I have said, if the promoters of the new stations and services can identify local funding sources to contribute to the project, that could help greatly in bringing them up the priority list. Meeting closed at 18:18.

We expect an announcement on the preferred bidder for the next northern isles ferry services contract to be made in April 2012.

It is probably worth underlining the extent to which what Liam McArthur has asked for has already happened. Over the past two years, in preparation for the contract, we have taken the views of the Orkney and Shetland communities. There was a consultation exercise in summer 2010, which had more than 400 responses from individuals and organisations. We also held a series of public meetings. During the initial phases of the contract a key stakeholder group was involved, with relevant local authorities and RTPs. External organisations have been involved in the tender, even up to the latter stages of the tender being let, which is obviously not entirely risk free. For that reason, some RTP representatives had to sign confidentiality agreements to protect the integrity of the process. It is my view that such people have been completely involved as far as is possible in a tender process. Our intention is that the new contract will mirror all the best aspects of the current contract, which attracts support of about £42.2 million from the Scottish Government. That is a commitment to support the economy of the northern isles. Would that commitment be mirrored by the United Kingdom Government, which is bleeding the Scottish economy dry through the fuel duties that it imposes? That would be a very good thing for the member to take forward with his colleagues in that Government. We will continue to provide our support. I have tried to reassure the member before about the extent to which we are involving local communities in the tender process, which we are doing as far as we can.

The island authorities have raised a number of concerns, not least about the extended nine-week dry-dock period that the member mentions. Unfortunately, I had no part in the current contract, which has led to that situation. However, I have said to the northern isles authorities that we will ensure that the next tender process does not allow such a situation to arise again.

Local authorities have not informed the Scottish Government of any landlords who have been fined by the courts for failing to register since 31 August 2011, when the maximum fine for that was increased to £50,000. Similarly, local authorities have not made us aware of any landlords who have been fined by the courts for not notifying their local authority of the appointment of an agent.

The housing benefit system is under substantial review and is undergoing changes at the behest of the United Kingdom Government, which controls it. At least currently, this Parliament does not control it. In relation to unregistered landlords, it is hard to say whether the absence of referrals is because the increased fine of £50,000 is having a deterrent effect. The measure was introduced only in August last year, so we will have to give it a bit more time. The member makes a fair point about landlord registration and behaviour. We have set up a short-life working group to consider the issue and what more we can do.

At the risk of repeating myself, I point out that we are working with members of the Scottish private rented sector strategy group on a consultative strategy for the sector, which is due for publication next month. As part of that work, we aim to seek views on the current tenancy regime that governs private sector lets and to consider what more can be done about the issue that the member raises.

The rights of private sector tenants across Scotland are protected by a robust regulatory framework. This year, the Scottish Government will improve the effectiveness of regulation in the private rented sector by producing a new strategy for the sector for the next decade, introducing one or more tenancy deposit safeguarding schemes, and launching a consultation at the end of the month that will help to clarify the law on premium charges that are levied on tenants by letting agents.

I have just said that we will launch a consultation at the end of the month that will help to clarify the law on premium charges that are levied on tenants by letting agents. It will address the problem that Kezia Dugdale identifies and, in particular, it will look at charges that tenants have no reason to expect. Nothing should be charged outside the rent and the tenancy deposit, which will be covered by the tenancy deposit scheme, but it is right that we consult first, and we will do so at the end of the month.

It is hoped that the small number of objectors who are opposed to the AWPR will be willing to accept the recent Court of Session judgment so that we can get on and build the road. Subject to no further appeal being lodged against the judgment, we will continue to work with our project partners to ensure that that vital project can move forward to construction as soon as possible.

We have had a number of conversations with the councils concerned, and they have been kept fully up to date on the progress that has been made. We have to take legal advice on what we can do during the current period, in which the legal process has not been exhausted, but we also have to go through the various design, procurement and construction processes. We will do that as fast as we can, as we want to be the Government that delivers the project, unlike previous Governments.

As the answer to the previous question dealt with the AWPR, in this answer I will concentrate on Haudagain. We have repeatedly given a clear commitment that we will progress the Haudagain improvements on the completion of the AWPR. That commitment remains firmly in place.

The nature of the commitment that I am willing to give was in the answer that I have just given. We will start the Haudagain improvements on the completion of the AWPR—for the best of planning reasons, and because of expert advice that we have received. However, as the member suggests, there are things that we can do in the meantime. We have started on them, and we will continue prudently so that, immediately the AWPR is completed, we can crack on with the Haudagain roundabout.

The Scottish Government and its partners in local government are committed to achieving the 2012 target. The latest statistical bulletin shows that we are making excellent progress towards the target, with 90 per cent of applicants assessed as homeless being accorded priority. That is a 3 per cent increase on figures for the same period in 2010.

I do not deny for a second that some more work needs to be done, but it is worth taking a bit of time to recognise the effort that is being put into the issue by local government in particular. The figures are the lowest recorded homelessness figures for a decade. That is a tremendous achievement, not least because, as Jackie Baillie said, we are having to deal with the early consequences of welfare reform, particularly changes to housing benefit. It is the case that COSLA and different ministers in the Scottish Government have made a series of representations to the United Kingdom Government on the issue. We have also provided additional funding so that the housing hubs, which have been the source of some success on homelessness targets, can undertake work to mitigate the effects of welfare reform. Given welfare reform and where we are in the economic cycle, our progress towards the homelessness target underlines the strength of the achievement so far, albeit that there is more to be done.

I am more than happy to do that. The 56 per cent reduction to which the member referred was a remarkable achievement by Aberdeen City Council and was the highest figure in Scotland in that regard, although great work was done in many other local authorities as well. The member is right to point to the work of the homelessness hubs, which were established by my predecessor as minister, Alex Neil, now the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment. They have really helped councils, but in particular Moray Council, which has a particular issue. Having the target has been very important and we are all signed up to it, but the prevention work has brought real dividends for the councils that have grasped it. I hope that that good work and best practice will be exemplified across the rest of the country during the course of this crucial year of 2012.

Stena’s move to Cairnryan has provided the opportunity to refocus rail services to better meet local needs. The December 2011 timetable goes some way towards that, with some quicker direct rail services. The recently formed Stranraer waterfront task force will look at local priorities to further promote Stranraer and the surrounding area as a destination in its own right to help grow passenger numbers and help deliver social and economic benefits to the local area.

I think that we would generally welcome the establishment of a strategic rail partnership such as the member described. The wider the engagement that we have with the railways, the better the services that will be provided. Indeed, the “Rail 2014” consultation explores options for third-party involvement in the operation and management of stations—I know from a meeting earlier with the member and one of his colleagues that he and the group are interested in that—and in the development of service provision. In addition to the working group that I mentioned, which is chaired by the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, a rail sub-group has been established by the Stranraer waterfront task force to explore issues around service provision and how to increase patronage. I am sure that the member will be interested to know that that group includes key stakeholders such as ScotRail, Network Rail, the south of Scotland transport partnership, Dumfries and Galloway Council, South Ayrshire Council, Wigtownshire Chamber of Commerce, the Stranraer to Ayr line support association—SAYLSA—VisitScotland and Transport Scotland.

That is just one of the issues that is being explored by the cabinet secretary through the task force and the rail sub-group that I mentioned. I was in Stranraer quite recently to talk about that very issue and other issues to do with the future of the station. The issue will be taken up by the cabinet secretary, who will receive the rail sub-group’s report.

For a second, I was worried. The Scottish Government is committed to improving rail services in Scotland, including the west of Scotland, and our record on delivering improvements is undeniable. Those improvements include the substantial completion of the £169 million Paisley corridor improvements programme, the forthcoming £1 billion Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme and the west of Scotland strategic rail enhancement programme, which will offer better opportunities to enhance connectivity for the heaviest rail demand patterns in and around Glasgow. As I mentioned earlier, we have also established the Stranraer task force, which will explore local priorities for the future of Stranraer through improved connectivity.

Despite the extra capacity that the member mentions, there are a number of competing demands. He will be aware that through the “Rail 2014” consultation, which has just concluded, a number of representations have been made about capacity. I am happy to say that a definitive response will be given as part of our response to the “Rail 2014” consultation, and I will be happy to provide the member with more information on that, if he would like.

We have been clear that we aim to deliver at least 30,000 affordable homes during the next five years, despite the tightest budget settlement since devolution. Funding for our 30,000 homes is sufficient and on track. We will be able to report on our progress in the first full year of this parliamentary session when the official statistics for 2011-12 are published, towards the end of May.

The Scottish Government welcomes Grampian Housing Association’s ambitions for the development of community renewables projects and in particular the recent partnership agreement with the Huntly Development Trust. The member will be aware that around the country there are tremendous examples of work being done by housing associations, for example to provide homes that are adapted for people who have particular needs and in relation to energy efficiency, which is crucial. I will be delighted to join Mr Robertson on a visit to Huntly to find out how the partnership plans to invest in the area are going.

In two advanced national housing trust projects, which were initially met with scepticism of the kind that Elaine Murray described in relation to her area, the experience has completely transformed people’s views. The approach will contribute to the delivery of affordable homes. Our target of 30,000 houses includes 5,000 council homes and at least 20,000 socially affordable homes, and I am confident that we will achieve the target. The national housing trust is an important part of that and we will continue to develop it. I know that there are qualms about the approach, but I think that we are overcoming them.

Can Richard Baker point to where in the consultation document it is proposed that stations be closed?

I am pleased to have a chance to reiterate once again the Government’s position. It is important to bear it in mind that the process was a consultation and that there are no plans to close stations in Glasgow or anywhere else in Scotland. We finished the consultation only on Monday this week, so it is only right that we respect the people who responded and take time to consider what they had to say before we come to conclusions. The consultation rightly raised a number of issues, including how to contract for services and how to pay for them, and how to get the best use out of the rail network. There is no question but that 2014 is a crucial year for a number of reasons, including the fact that there will be a new funding package for Network Rail and a new contract for rail passenger services. We must consider all the options in preparation for 2014. Had we not done so and had that not been evident in the consultation document, I am pretty sure that the Opposition parties would have demanded that we do exactly that. Richard Baker’s motion implies that there has not been full and adequate consultation, although he also seemed to suggest that we rule out certain things rather than consult on them. I assure members that there has been considerable debate across Scotland in the past three months. There were detailed presentations and discussions with regional transport partnerships; presentations were given for stakeholders in each of those regions, to which all members of this Parliament, council leaders, members of the United Kingdom Parliament, business groups, local interest groups and the rail industry were invited. We also held public events at railway stations across the country. Self-evidently, the consultation was not a paper exercise. All the views that were expressed at those events will be taken into account. It is surprising that Richard Baker, who clearly has an interest in the matter, did not take the opportunity to find out more about the issues that were raised at some of those events. We have made it clear throughout that the consultation process has been about options. Richard Baker continually used the word “proposals”, even though it does not appear in the consultation document. He will find that the paragraph from which he quoted does not contain the word “closure” at all. It says: “We do not intend to reduce the size of the Scottish rail network, or reduce the number of stations”. However, Richard Baker manages to take from that a proposal to close stations. Perhaps he can elaborate.

It is a distortion of the English language to say that that is a proposal for closure. The word “closure” is not in that paragraph. The first part of the paragraph states: “We do not intend to reduce the size of the Scottish rail network, or reduce the number of stations”. That is fairly self-explanatory.

I will make progress, then I might come back to Mr Harvie. We have made it clear throughout the consultation period that we are talking about options and not proposals. We have also been clear that one aim of the consultation is to provide information. We all acknowledge that the rail industry is fragmented—the legacy of previous Governments of various hues. It can be difficult to find out information on how the industry operates and what it costs. The consultation was an opportunity to address that gap in knowledge and has, in that regard, been a tremendous success. We have received more than 1,200 written responses. We now need time to review them to help to inform the way forward. Everybody’s response is important in that, including the views that we will hear today. We have no plans to close stations in Glasgow or anywhere else in Scotland.

No. Richard Baker talked about a request for information on which stations are under threat, but that was not the nature of that request. People asked for information about the 11 stations that have been mentioned in respect of footfall and their location. It was not a request for information about which stations are under threat. As he has done on several occasions, Richard Baker misrepresented completely the background to what happened. We recognise that footfall and location are only two of several factors in determining a station’s importance. Several Opposition members might be interested in Airbles station, which is of particular use for Motherwell FC’s ground and for workers at the Department for Work and Pensions pensions centre; and in Paisley St James station, which is of particular use for St Mirren FC’s ground. Our track record on stations is that we have opened five new stations since 2007: Alloa station in my constituency, which I proposed as leader of Clackmannanshire Council back in 1999; Laurencekirk station, the opening of which has proved to be extremely successful; and Blackridge, Caldercruix and Armadale stations. Seven more stations are due to open as part of the Borders rail project. We have an extremely good track record on opening new stations. In addition, Dalmarnock station in Glasgow is benefiting from an £11 million refurbishment programme, which is supported by a range of funders. There will be £426 million of investment in rail infrastructure this year—the highest level of investment since devolution. We will also provide substantial support for passenger services; since 2007, we have invested in the provision of 30,000 extra seats a day. The Airdrie to Bathgate link opened last year, and we have a fleet of new trains running in Ayrshire and Inverclyde. It will be interesting to hear from Labour members what Labour’s vision for rail in Scotland is.

I do not know on how many occasions we have said that we have no plans to close those stations. However, we must listen to what people have said in the consultation. This is the difference between us and the Labour Party: when we say that we have “no plans” to do something, the Labour Party thinks that there is an agenda, because that is the way in which it operated. We are saying that we will listen to the consultation responses that we have received. I look forward to hearing members’ genuine views, which we will seek to take into consideration, and I look forward to reading all the responses to the consultation. We are making a genuine attempt to improve rail services in Scotland. Our track record—whether on Borders rail, the Airdrie to Bathgate line, the new stations that we have opened or our record levels of investment—speaks for itself. It is in that vein that we intend to continue with our proposals for rail services in Scotland. The consultation process has been what consultation processes should be: it has been genuine, it has laid out options and it has let people come forward with their own views. It is only right that we take time to consider those views. I hope that members will ask for a copy of the consultation responses so that they can see them. Richard Baker and Elaine Murray might be surprised by some of the proposals on station closures and the quarters from which they have come. They should come to an informed view, once they have had a chance to look at the consultation responses. That is what we are doing. Regardless of that, we will continue to invest in rail services. We have seen a substantial increase in patronage, in the number of stations and in the investment that is being put into the infrastructure and passenger services. The Government intends to continue to invest in our rail services, which in the past have been fragmented, to improve them further for everyone. I move amendment S4M-02086.1, to leave out from “the concerns” to end and insert: “that Rail 2014 – Public Consultation gave members of the public, communities, businesses and organisations an opportunity to set out their aspirations for Scotland’s railways; notes that the Scottish Government will give due consideration to all responses to the consultation; acknowledges the repeated assurances of the Scottish Government that there has never been any intention, nor are there any plans, to close railway stations in Glasgow or indeed elsewhere in Scotland, and welcomes the Scottish Government’s record of investment and improvement in Scotland’s railway by including, for example, the reopening of the Airdrie to Bathgate railway, major improvements to Dalmarnock station, improvements to the Paisley corridor, new class 380 electric trains for Ayrshire and Inverclyde, the ongoing improvements to Waverley steps, additional services on the Highland Main Line, increased accessibility at stations across Scotland, the forthcoming Borders Rail project, the Edinburgh-Glasgow Improvement Programme and the commitment to invest a minimum of £50 million in new sleeper trains.”

Will the member take an intervention?

I am sure that members will agree that the level of interest in the consultation and the number of responses that we have received are such that we should allow adequate time to review those responses before we make any proposals for the way forward. One of the Opposition parties honestly admitted to “hysteria” in the response to the initial publication of the document. It would be interesting to know whether Ruth Davidson thinks that she was hysterical in her response—it would be interesting to know whether it was just one person in the Tory party, Alex Johnstone, or members across the Opposition parties who were hysterical. Alex Johnstone, who made some salient points, said that we should respect the commitment to the consultation process and asked us to rule out further consideration of some of the responses. It is not possible to do both. We must listen to what people said in the consultation. Ruth Davidson made a point about a “Yes, Ministeresque”—if that is a word—response in respect of any plans. That may be how the Tories have done things in the past, but that is not how we do things here. This is a genuine consultation process. They should not judge us by their own standards. We have a genuine commitment to the consultation process. We noted, of course, the points that were made about a hysterical response to the consultation. Not for the first time, there was enthusiastic applause from Labour for a Tory speech on railways. How often are we seeing that these days? It is quite clear that there has been scaremongering, but I do not deny that there is doubtless genuine concern. Whenever there is consultation on an area of major public policy that is of interest to the public, there is bound to be concern, but a number of SNP back benchers have made the point that that concern has been exploited and blown out of all proportion for party-political ends. That is evident from this debate.

If I get this right, the Labour Party wants to set a benchmark by which we will choose to close a station. We will not do that. We will listen to what the people have to say. [Interruption.]

We will take time to consider the consultation responses, and I will be interested in seeing Patricia Ferguson’s and Richard Baker’s responses. Part of the problem that the Labour Party has is that scaremongering is not an alternative to a vision. That is a simple fact. We have heard nothing about a vision. I cannot say how disappointed I was to hear, for example, Ruth Davidson saying how pleased she was that so much of the debate had been taken up by what she referred to as the “threat” to stations. The Opposition parties have missed an opportunity to talk about the vision for Scotland. That should be contrasted with the contributions by members such as John Mason, Bob Doris and Humza Yousaf, who talked about things that they wanted to see, such as an increased number of stations and improved services. We have had a massive cut to our budget—£1.3 billion. A third of our capital programme has been decimated by the UK Government. I do not deny that those improvements are, therefore, difficult to put in place. We are putting more money into the railways than the previous Scottish Governments did. That is difficult to do, but it is right that we at least have that vision. We have some positive things to say with regard to new stations. We will carefully consider the responses that talk about new stations and ways in which we can grow the network. Unfortunately, we have heard little about that from the Labour Party. There has been a recognition of the growth in passenger numbers. Even the Labour Party must admit that there must be a correlation between the approach that we have taken—the increased investment, the new stations that we have opened, the new lines that we have opened and the investment in Borders rail, which will continue into the future—and increased patronage. The Government has grown the rail network in Scotland and has put a substantial amount of money into it. As was mentioned earlier, a report that was published a couple of weeks ago said that Scotland’s rail is the most heavily subsidised in the UK. That was condemned, but that is a sign of our commitment to the railways—greater commitment than has been shown by previous Governments. Members should not forget that many of the points of concern that were raised by Labour members and others are the result of the railway infrastructure that we have and how the railways are organised, which Labour did nothing to change over 13 years. If it wants a co-operative to come forward for the franchise, why did it not change the legislation to allow that to happen? Labour had 13 years in which to do that, but it did nothing. It is essential that we continue to work towards a railway that meets the needs of Scotland. We know that there are constraints, such as questions of public finance and the increasing cost of rolling stock. It would have been nice if the Opposition speakers had acknowledged them. The issue of fares was mentioned. What was not mentioned is the fact that we have kept the increases in Scotland to a much lower level than those in the rest of the UK, including the increases that took place during the time when Labour was in control in the UK. That was not mentioned at all, but it is a measure of our commitment to the railways.

No. If Mr Baker goes back and checks his figures, he will find that that was not the case. The increase south of the border was not 5 per cent. Again, as earlier, he has got his figures wrong. Perhaps he would have been better informed if he had gone to some of the consultation events and engaged in the consultation process. We are going to listen to the 1,100 responses that we have had so far, as well as the points that have been made in today’s debate. We should be listening to those views. It is absolutely right that the Government listens to the consultation responses. It is also absolutely right that we set out options, which have continually been referred to as proposals by the Conservative leader and others. They are not proposals. That was made clear. However, there is obviously a political imperative to dress them up in that way. We will continue to invest in our railways and we will oppose the negative scaremongering that is going on. We will see who has been right all along when the determinations are made.

I confirm that that link exists and that it is quite right that we publish the information that we have been asked to provide; it was asked for and that is why we provided it. Given what Anne McTaggart said about the increased patronage, why does Elaine Murray think that the stations concerned are at risk? What is the risk to them?

I understand the point that Elaine Murray is making about other peoples’ points of view, but I am anxious to get to the Labour Party’s position. Is the party against RET, as it was in 2007; is it, as it was in 2008, in favour of RET for individuals but not for hauliers; or is its position as it was in 2011: that everybody with a car in the Western Isles should get £400?

We welcome this debate on what is, as I think Elaine Murray said, a vital issue for our island and rural communities. I am sure that everyone here recognises the significant benefits of the road equivalent tariff scheme, although I reiterate that it was opposed by the Labour Party—as Elaine Murray will discover when she checks the newspaper cuttings and previous comments from, in particular, Des McNulty.

I want to get started—I will let the member in later on. Elaine Murray should also look at the comments of a Labour candidate in 2011 who advocated scrapping the entire scheme and giving £400 to everyone in the Western Isles with a car. I have the transcript of the interview, and I am happy to give it to Elaine Murray afterwards. I am simply interested in knowing the Labour Party’s position on this matter. If Labour members wanted RET to be continued for hauliers in the Western Isles—and, I presume, the rest of Scotland—when did they make that representation in the budget process? For example, can they tell us how much they think such a measure would cost? I would be interested to know.

The amount being spent on this was made clear in not only the budget, but John Swinney’s autumn statement. We also subsequently made it clear to hauliers what we were doing. Given that Labour was silent about proposals for additional expenditure on the issue, I do not think that we can treat with much seriousness any proposal that it comes forward with now that would massively increase expenditure. Moreover, the idea that the Labour Party put forward in 2011 of giving £400 to everyone with a car would have cost £70 million. Of course, that measure would not have touched hauliers at all. The RET pilot has boosted car journeys by up to 31 per cent, hugely benefiting tourism and local businesses.

I find it very interesting that, as seems to have emerged today, that particular rebate will not apply to hauliers. I wonder whether we will hear more about that in the debate. With regard to increasing fuel costs, which Elaine Murray also referred to, the member should ask herself whether it is right for the Scottish Government to continue to pour money back into the Treasury as a result of the fuel duty escalator, the price of fuel and increases that the Treasury itself has caused.

No. I have already taken an intervention from the member—and it was not a very good one. The additional costs to CalMac alone—[Interruption.]

The additional petrol cost to CalMac alone is around £14 million. There have been cost increases, and there is no doubt that everyone is having to bear them. When I met the hauliers, I acknowledged the increasing cost of insurance and the fact that fuel prices were higher on the islands. Those are costs over which the Scottish Government has no control and RET was not designed to address them. It was meant to make the cost of travelling by car equivalent to the cost of travelling by ferry. We made a commitment to continue RET on the current routes and we would be keen to hear what Labour has to say about our proposal that RET should be rolled out throughout the network, because it has not said much about that so far. We are looking to roll it out to the Argyll and Clyde islands, in light of the Western Isles pilot—it was a pilot—the aim of which was to find out the consequences of RET. As has been mentioned, the result was hugely successful from the point of view of individuals and in terms of increasing tourism. It was not as beneficial to individuals on the islands, as the reduced costs to hauliers were not fed through to customers. We have gone beyond what was originally proposed. We recognise the real benefits that RET can bring and we believe that it is right that all ferry users in Scotland should benefit from the scheme, which is why we announced our intention to roll it out across the ferry network. In the northern isles, we have said that it is our intention that in future the fare structure should relate to RET. That does not mean that everyone pays RET, but that the cost of travelling by car and by ferry should be equivalent. However, if we were to roll out RET to Shetland for example, that would in many cases result in an increase in costs, which is one reason why we have not done that there. Although RET for larger commercial vehicles made up around 40 per cent of the cost of the scheme, evidence shows that only 7 per cent of hauliers and businesses were able to pass the full savings on to customers.

I have already acknowledged some of the fixed costs that hauliers have to contend with and that increase the pressures on them. All that I would ask is whether it can be right that we continually feed moneys back to Westminster, which increases fuel duty, for example? We give that back by subsidising those costs. [Interruption.] The Labour Party has the opportunity to bring its position to the chamber and I would be interested to hear its views. We have acknowledged from the outset that the removal of RET from commercial vehicles on the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree routes will have an impact, but those are the only routes in that position. That is why we have come up with the transitional scheme in which, despite what Elaine Murray says, there will be no increases of more than 50 per cent and most will be substantially less than that. As with many issues, especially in relation to rail, which we discussed earlier, the Labour Party has talked about commitments. Over the years, it had a chance to do this and it did not. This SNP Government has brought RET forward, often in the face of opposition from the Labour Party. It would be interesting to hear the Labour Party’s position. Does it now support RET? Does it support RET for individuals or for hauliers? Or is its idea, as one of its candidates said in 2011, to give a £400 cheque to every car user in the islands? There was no mention of hauliers.

The member has had a chance, and Labour will get another one when it sums up to say whether that is its position. Our clear objective since announcing the roll-out of RET has been to listen to, to discuss and, where we can, to agree with hauliers and businesses on a more flexible approach that will reduce the impact. Hauliers have queries about the Halcrow study, which Elaine Murray mentioned. We said that we will have a further study on that. They have also said that they want the study to be much more broadly based so that it takes into account the economic impact on the entire islands. We have said that we will do that. We will work with them on the remit for that. We have also extended eligibility for RET to vehicles up to 6m in length. That was not the case previously, and it is a huge benefit to people—

I am sorry, but I still have a fair bit to go and I have already taken two or three interventions. We want to alleviate the impact of removing RET from hauliers who previously benefited from it. We have announced plans to extend RET—people who were not getting it before are getting it now. That will ensure that smaller commercial vehicles of up to 6m will benefit from RET from spring 2012. There are real benefits to people. We are also trying to make the scheme more equivalent. In the past, the discount scheme benefited larger hauliers at the expense of smaller ones. We are trying to ensure that that does not happen in future and we are working with the haulage industry to make the scheme worth while. As has been mentioned, we had a useful and constructive meeting with key hauliers and stakeholders, which has allowed us to discuss further ways to reduce the impact on hauliers and businesses. Following that meeting, I announced the new transitional rebate scheme. That involves additional funding. It would be interesting to see whether other parties support that additional funding or want to go further, despite the fact they were silent on the matter during the debate. I move amendment S4M-02087.2, to leave out from “is of the view” to end and insert: “welcomes the decision to roll RET out to other Clyde and Hebrides routes, including the Sound of Harris and the Sound of Barra; welcomes the investment of £5.3 million next year on the routes to Western Isles, Coll and Tiree; welcomes the increase in journeys to those islands of 30% that has resulted from the RET pilot, particularly in tourist journeys, notes that RET for large commercial vehicles made up around 40% of the cost of RET and that evidence from the pilot study showed that only 7% of hauliers passed the full benefits on to consumers; notes that, following discussions between the Scottish Government and local companies, investment of £2.5 million in a transitional scheme will support all hauliers regardless of the size of their business; welcomes the inclusion of vans of up to six metres in the RET scheme and the Scottish Government’s commitment to a six month study of the costs faced by island hauliers, including fuel duty and insurance costs, and the impact on the local economies and households of the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree, and looks forward to the review of ferry services that will put RET at the heart of an equitable system of fare setting.”

Will the member give way?

Tavish Scott mentioned that there are other ways of tackling the issue. I think that one of his party’s preferred approaches is through the 5p fuel derogation scheme. Can he confirm that that would not apply to the very hauliers he professes to be concerned about? Will that change?

What about the hauliers?

The scheme is in the current trunk road programme and will be taken forward at the earliest possible opportunity when funding allows. When Transport Scotland is in a position to confirm a start date, discussions will continue with the local authority to ensure that any impacts are managed and mitigated wherever possible.

I am afraid that I cannot confirm that the bridge will be kept open. It will be shut simply because there will be a large gap that cannot be bridged by any vehicle. The gap is inevitable, as it is necessary for the works. I understand the member’s point on the impact on the village of Kincardine, not least because of the Higgins’ Neuk roundabout, which will have great pressure on it from one side but very little countervailing pressure from the other. That is why I reiterate that there will be proper consultation with the local authority. If the member wants further information on that, I am happy to give it to him.

There is currently regulation in the bus industry. We want affordable, innovative, good-quality bus services and a competitive marketplace that delivers such services, with appropriate but not burdensome regulation.

The member can correct me if I am wrong, but I am fairly sure that when the company wrote to him it did not ask for further regulation in the bus industry. We provide substantial investment and support for the bus industry—around £0.25 billion—through concessionary travel and the bus service operators grant. We will continue to do that, despite requests from Opposition members to reduce the concessionary travel scheme.

The Scottish Government is investing nearly £250 million per year in promoting the use of bus.

I repeat the point that the bus service operators grant equates to about £50 million of support. Similar support has been completely taken away in many parts of England in the past couple of years because of budget pressures, but we have maintained that support of £50 million. We have also maintained the level of the concessionary travel scheme, despite the suggestions that I mentioned from Opposition parties that we should reduce it. Therefore, there is substantial support. Setting fares is a matter for individual bus operators. The bus service operators grant cannot account for a 9 per cent increase in fares, given the proportion of bus service operators’ income that it provides. There is an issue in Lothian, because we are trying to stop encouraging increased fuel use. The previous Administration’s approach encouraged fuel use, but we are trying to provide the bus service operators grant in a way that helps to reduce fuel use, which is important. However, there is a transitional period in which Lothian Buses, for example, will have to make that change. We have therefore announced a £3 million support package for that. We will of course continue to discuss with bus operators the pressures that are on them. They have a reasonable point, but they have been told and have accepted that we must move to provide further support for operators in rural areas, where there are pressures from fuel duty costs, which are imposed from elsewhere. We are doing what we can to support the bus industry, but it would be good if Westminster did the same thing.

This Friday is the closing date for bids for our second Scottish green bus fund. The green buses that are purchased with the support of that £2 million fund will add to the 48 green buses that were purchased through the first Scottish green bus fund. We intend to run further rounds of the fund in future. In addition, the low-carbon vehicle incentive in the bus service operators grant, which I have just mentioned, further encourages operators to invest in green buses through a payment rate that is double the rate for standard diesel buses.

The project is making good progress since construction commenced in 2011 and it remains on budget and on time to be delivered by 2016.

I will be happy to look into specific instances if John Park would like to write to me about them. However, the project has been extremely successful thus far. Perhaps some of the past week’s headlines have missed the fact that the tender came in at around £400 million below budget, so that £400 million will now be available for other things, including job creation. We have been successful in ensuring that business goes to Scottish subcontractors and suppliers, although I am more than happy to look into the issue that John Park has raised.

The Scottish Government is continuing to make record levels of investment in transport projects right across Scotland, including in Aberdeen and the north-east. We remain committed to delivering the Aberdeen western peripheral route and the Balmedie to Tipperty project, and we have recently completed the £31.5 million A96 Fochabers and Mosstodloch project. On rail, we remain committed to service improvements between Aberdeen and Inverness.

If Richard Baker looks at the case on the Haudagain roundabout that was made by the north east of Scotland transport partnership, he will realise that the benefits from the roundabout rely on the AWPR and the Balmedie to Tipperty project being in place. He should really read that case because it explains why we have always said that we will start the improvements to the Haudagain roundabout once we have completed the AWPR. It is also true to say that the member got it wrong last week when he talked about the Balmedie to Tipperty project. Construction is not starting there, but design work is. We are doing that work in the same way as we are now doing the work on the Haudagain so that, as soon as the AWPR is finished, we can start work on those projects without further delay. We know the reasons for the delay; Richard Baker also knows the reasons. They are not just because of the on-going court cases, but are because of the delays of previous Administrations in getting started on the project in the first place.

We have listened to representations from a number of interested parties, including Ms McInnes’s council colleagues, and we are bundling together the AWPR with the Balmedie to Tipperty project. There are good reasons for doing so. What we announced last week will ensure that we can start the design work on the Balmedie to Tipperty project in anticipation of a positive outcome for the AWPR in the courts. We will then be able to start on that with no delay. That approach has the full support of Aberdeenshire Council and Aberdeen City Council, and that is how we intend to proceed.

The Scottish Government is aware of the issues affecting householders living in homes without cavity walls, and we are also conscious that that property type is more prevalent in rural parts of Scotland. Advice is provided through the energy saving Scotland advice centre network, which has advisers who are specially trained in dealing with such properties. The Scottish Government also provides an interest-free loan scheme for householders. Local authorities can include within their bids for support under the universal home insulation scheme special programmes aimed at dealing with properties without cavity walls.

Nigel Don makes a valid point. We have highlighted issues relating to remote areas of Scotland to the United Kingdom Government, and we have encouraged other stakeholders to highlight such issues in their consultation responses to the Department of Energy and Climate Change. At the same time, we are investigating a number of innovative finance options that might support delivery of green deal finance in rural and urban areas of Scotland. Yesterday, we announced a fund to assist certification bodies to become accredited and pass on the benefits to installers and assessors to ensure that Scotland can provide skilled people to deliver at the time of the green deal launch, particularly in remote and rural areas. I encourage Nigel Don to make his views known also to the UK Government.

It is fair to say that those issues have to be considered at the same time as the green deal, and how that takes things forward. As I have mentioned previously, that is still a matter of consultation with the UK Government. We will continue to examine that area and will take a decision on it at the right time.

The Borders railway project remains a priority for our investment in the Scottish Borders transport infrastructure.

It is perfectly clear from the statements that were made prior to the election that the Selkirk bypass was not supported in the strategic transport projects review. We do not have plans for a bypass in Selkirk. [Interruption.]

We are spending several hundreds of millions of pounds on the Borders railway, which was not taken forward by previous Administrations. That underlines the commitment that we have to the Borders. Spending that amount of money on transport infrastructure in the Borders obviously takes us well past the commitment of previous Governments. Of course, we could spend even more, were it not for the fact that the Government that Mr Lamont supports has withdrawn £800 million of funding from our budget.

We will do that. We have seen the letter that the member wrote, which seemed to concern one particular household being omitted. We have reiterated to the relevant agencies that they should make people aware of work in advance. That will happen in the future.

In 2011-12, local authorities received more than £67 million in their capital and revenue grants to assist home owners, including in relation to maintaining and repairing properties. Although it is for the local authority to determine what assistance is provided, it can include providing advice and guidance, practical help or financial assistance by way of grants or loans.

I am aware of the case that the member mentions. The tenements in question need repairs because of water ingress. I understand that Argyll and Bute Council and Argyll Community Housing Association have been working with tenants and owners to try to resolve the issue. I encourage Argyll and Bute Council and Argyll Community Housing Association to continue working with the owners who are affected by the matter and advise any owner who is concerned about the cost of the work to speak to the council, which will be able to tell them what help is available in their circumstances. It is worth noting that Argyll and Bute Council has a care and repair service, which provides free, independent and confidential advice and assistance to older home owners.

That suggestion and the suggestion of a loans fund have been considered. However, we believe that it is right that local authorities, with the resources that they are given, should take the lead in the matter. It is for local authorities to consider these issues and provide whatever assistance they can.

I met the Scottish road works commissioner on 17 January 2012, along with the national joint utilities group and the Scottish joint utilities group. I met the commissioner again last week to review the report on the impact of utility works on Scottish roads.

As part of the Scottish roads maintenance review, the Scottish road works commissioner was asked to consider the use of existing legislation that has never been invoked to ensure that utility companies contribute to the cost of making good the long-term damage that can arise in the way that the member describes. The commissioner presented his report to me at the end of 2011. The Government is considering how such a contribution scheme might operate and intends to bring forward proposals that will then be the subject of public consultation.

Last September, City of Edinburgh Council agreed to allocate £445,000 for 2011-12 to its open for business fund to assist businesses affected by the project, with a further £455,000 allocated for 2012-13. The council announced last week that it is considering allocating a further £100,00 for 2011-12.

I am aware of the member’s concerns and the work that he has been doing in this area. I assure him that both I and the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, Alex Neil, have made it clear to those involved in the trams project that they should be as sympathetic as possible to the long-standing issues affecting businesses. However, the Scottish Government has no locus to intervene in the Scottish assessors’ decisions. The Scottish assessors are solely responsible for determining rateable values in Scotland, and in doing so they are independent of the Scottish Government.

The member mentions the consequences of the cut. Does she realise that such cuts are the consequence of the cut that we have had from Westminster and of the situation that the departing Labour Chief Secretary to the Treasury described when he said that there was no money left? Will she confirm that, if she thinks that the cut is wrong, she will move an amendment to the budget to reinstate the money?

I was surprised by the tone of Labour’s motion, not least because the Scottish Government supports the bus industry. Our annual funding for the sector still stands at nearly £0.25 billion, which is a generous settlement when one bears in mind—as I have mentioned already—the swingeing cuts to our capital budget. It is interesting that Elaine Murray rightly identifies the other side of the issue, which is what local authorities can do. In England there has been a 28 per cent cut in local authority budgets, which has not been reflected in Scotland. I will say something positive about our plans for bus, which we will work closely with stakeholders to develop. I will start with a bit of context. Why do we value bus? Well, it is flexible, it carries a large number of people, it promotes sustainable economic growth and it helps with our climate change targets. What do we want from bus in return for our investment? As Elaine Murray said, we subsidise things to achieve a public good. We want affordable, innovative, good-quality bus services and a competitive marketplace that delivers such services, with appropriate but not burdensome regulation. There is currently regulation in the bus industry.

The largest part of a fare is comprised of labour and fuel costs. Elaine Murray talked about the cost of fuel; Labour’s fuel duty escalator has added to the burden over the years and the 15 per cent increase in diesel costs also adds to it. The reduction in the bus service operators grant would justify an increase in fares, if any, of about 1 per cent, not the 7 or 8 per cent increases that are happening elsewhere. That is a decision for the bus operators. I will talk a bit more about our aspirations for bus. We want to improve connectivity, improve the quality of service, maintain the bus network and increase modal shift, through patronage growth. We can do that in part by maintaining global funding levels for the sector and in part by better partnership working. That is why I am bringing forward to March the inaugural meeting of a new bus stakeholder group. Members of the group will include the regulator, local authorities, operators, customer representatives and the Community Transport Association. We want to ensure that we move forward on partnership working. Some of the best innovations in the bus industry have been the result of close partnership working. I will talk about specific initiatives. We want to regulate—and we do regulate—service changes. I will take further advice from the traffic commissioner for Scotland and others on whether we should alter the short-notice period for service changes and the fact that such changes can be made throughout the year. We need greater stability of services. On radical service improvement, I want our commitment to, for example, £40 million for the Glasgow fastlink project to showcase what can be achieved when the public and private sectors come together to crack the infrastructure problems that often hamper growth and patronage of the network. On technical innovation, I want us to have a stronger low-carbon bus fleet in Scotland. Our green bus fund has delivered 48 new low-carbon vehicles and we recently announced a second round, to the value of £2 million this year. There will be more to come, thanks to the Scottish future transport fund. I very much welcome the associated investment by the operators. Elaine Murray talked about demand-responsive transport. We have been talking about doing some of the things that she mentions. We want better community services. As of April, I intend to allow demand-responsive transport services that are available to the general public to be registered as local bus services and thereby qualify for BSOG and concessionary travel. We will continue to work with the Community Transport Association on affordable bus services in more remote areas. We can develop the area further. A constituent of mine is quadriplegic and uses a wheelchair. He cannot access any bus or taxi that is available and he relies on a dial-a-journey service, which, because it does not provide a service to the general public, does not attract concessionary travel income. We are willing to look at that matter. I was surprised to hear that there is a proposal—if that is what it is—to take away concessionary travel from people over 60 who are in full-time employment, many of whom will be low-paid employees. Richard Simpson made such a proposal before the election, and I have asked in the past whether it is the Labour Party’s position. I understand the rationale and I am not suggesting that the proposal is not worth looking at. The Labour Government took such an approach in England. It is good to have clarity. The bottom line is that overall bus funding for the spending review period is about £248.5 million per annum. To put that in context, there is a reduction of about £7 million on the current figure. The bus service operators grant is paid as a direct subsidy to operators. For a number of years we have been discussing the need for change to the approach, and the changes that we are making this year reflect those discussions. The aim of the grant was always laudable. It was intended to help to keep fares down and support the bus network and community transport services. Why, then, are we changing the scheme? BSOG payments currently track the amount of fuel that each operator uses, and more fuel means more subsidy. So, we are removing fuel from the calculation and substituting route length. We are also taking away payment for dead mileage, when there are no passengers at all on the buses. We believe that those moves will incentivise greater fuel efficiency and emission reductions; they will also tend to benefit rural services, as Elaine Murray acknowledged, providing a degree of protection for our vulnerable rural communities. BSOG will also continue to provide additional incentives for low-carbon vehicles and for some biodiesel fuels. We are reducing the BSOG funding to £50 million, but we are adding a £3 million investment fund for bus infrastructure. The reduction therefore represents about 1 per cent of fare costs. It does not justify significant fare rises or withdrawal of services.

I am sorry, but I am in my last minute. However, I have agreed that for 2012-13 only the £3 million investment fund will be used to make a transition payment to operators who are most affected by the changes in May 2012. That will give them adequate time to adjust, which is fair, right and sensible The national concessionary travel scheme is of course the other main funding mechanism, which is rightly celebrated and retains—I think—cross-party support. We have seen its funding increase over the past three years, and we have maintained the annual cap at £187 million for the spending review period. That figure was reached in discussion with the CPT, and we will continue to work with the bus industry to ensure that the scheme remains affordable in the long term. I believe that the Government has worked hard to provide adequate funding for the bus sector. I look forward to continued partnership working through the new bus stakeholder group in the years ahead. I move amendment S4M-01824.4, to leave out from “is concerned” to end and insert: “welcomes the Scottish Government’s commitment to maintain funding for concessionary fares in 2013-14 and 2014-15, despite the public spending cuts imposed by the UK Government; approves the development of a more environmental focus for the Bus Service Operators Grant and the introduction of a new bus infrastructure; welcomes partnership working between the Scottish Government and industry to invest in hybrid buses; urges the bus sector to minimise the withdrawal of bus services and increases in fares, and urges the Scottish Government, the bus sector and local government to develop demand-led transport solutions such as community transport in rural areas and more effective use of legislation and partnership working through provisions such as statutory quality partnerships.”

I understand the points that the member is making. If they are true, they must lead to the logical conclusion that she intends to put more money into buses. Is she able to quantify that or to say what model of reregulation she would have, and how much it would cost?

I am struck by the substantial degree of agreement on many of the issues that have been discussed this morning, but I have to say that Alex Johnstone’s final point about resources is pertinent—indeed, crucial. Given Elaine Murray’s intervention late in the debate, I think that it would be useful to hear from either Ms Murray or Richard Baker exactly what is being suggested. Are they suggesting that we consider taking bus passes away from over-60s in full-time employment? Is that a suggestion or is it a policy proposal?

I take from that and previous comments—and indeed from the comment made before the election by Richard Simpson, who is not in the chamber, that he thought that it was wrong that he received a bus pass—that it is a suggestion that should be considered. There is nothing wrong with saying that such proposals should be considered. However, as Mark McDonald pointed out, these issues have been used in the past as political footballs and, sometimes, to strike fear into people that they will lose their bus passes. Nevertheless, I take the proposal in the spirit that Elaine Murray has suggested. We think that our funding of around £250 million a year demonstrates a real commitment to bus services. I did not have time to mention it earlier, but hard shoulder running on the M77, which Jackson Carlaw, who was in the chamber at the start of the debate, has mentioned in the past, is an extremely important initiative. I certainly disagree with Paul Martin’s comments about bus lanes. I believe that they tend to help bus services by making them quicker and therefore more attractive to people, more of whom then use the services. We want to look at what we can do to take that process further.

I am not sure that I get Paul Martin’s point. If he is saying that bus lanes should be created elsewhere, we can obviously consider that on a case-by-case basis. Tavish Scott asked for a review of the concessionary travel scheme, but we have had such a review. People often use the cliché that something is constantly reviewed. The scheme is not constantly reviewed—nothing is constantly reviewed—but we are looking at it on regular basis. That approach has led to changes. For example, the cap that kicks in when the budget level is reached, which was agreed with the transport operators, was one thing that came from the review. However, I give a commitment to Tavish Scott that we will continue to review the scheme. That is only right, because it involves a large amount of public expenditure. Elaine Murray’s suggestion could feed into that debate. Another change in the scheme is that it has been extended to make it easier to access for veterans who have been injured in active service—they can now access the scheme much more quickly and with much less hassle. We extended the scheme in that way before the Westminster Government did so, although it has now done so, too. That is a welcome change. Therefore, changes have happened to the national concessionary scheme and it has been reviewed. There are issues to do with the proper management of the scheme, which come down to matters such as driving out abuse of the system. A great deal of work has been done on that. It perhaps does not create headlines, but Alex Neil and I have done quite a bit of work with operators on that. As several members have mentioned—and not only those on the Government back benches—there is a drive to ensure that we get the maximum possible effect from the money that we commit. Obviously, the amount that we can commit is constrained. Jamie Hepburn made the important point that we are not the only players. We give money to local authorities so that they can subsidise bus routes. We provide the BSOG, but we do not subsidise bus routes. At local authorities’ request, the money is no longer ring fenced. Some local authorities have been good at ensuring that the money is passed on, but others have not. That is where responsibility lies. It is not always down to the Government when the service that might be expected on a particular route is not in place. The local authorities and, sometimes, the regional transport partnerships have a role in that. There has been fairly general agreement on the need for further consideration of demand-responsive transport. As I said, we have considered that already and we will continue to do so, particularly in relation to the example that I gave earlier about allowing voluntary organisations that cannot currently access the concessionary travel scheme—even for people who would otherwise qualify for concessionary travel—to do so. That is entirely right. The motion mentions the SNP’s 2003 manifesto, which must have made a big impact when it was produced. Equally, we could refer to Labour’s 1983 manifesto commitment to abolish nuclear weapons and various other things that have gone by the board. Our 2003 manifesto was three manifestos ago, but we are still discussing it. Paul Martin rightly mentioned fundamental problems in his constituency. Those are deep-rooted and long-standing problems. Between 1997 and 2007, the Labour Party had the chance to do something about them. It was in power in this Parliament for eight years. Labour members concede that the problems started before then and lasted right through that period. That is just another issue on which the Labour Party thinks that the long-standing problems that it has left subsequent Governments to deal with are all the responsibility of the current Government. The Labour Party must take some responsibility for those problems. As Jamie Hepburn said, we must see the issue in context. We have maintained local government expenditure, whereas in England it has reduced by 28 per cent, which produces knock-on effects including, in some areas, the abolition of concessionary travel. We have not done that. We have stuck by the bus industry and, in particular, the bus passenger—that is who we are trying to help in all this. The measures that we are taking and will continue to take demonstrate that. Therefore, I ask members to support the amendment in my name.

Given what he has just said, will Richard Baker say whether he is committed to reinstating that cut during the budget process?

Contracts for 614 homes have been signed under phase 1 of the national housing trust initiative and a further deal is being pursued. The first 16 homes are already complete in Stirling and have been let to tenants.

The first piece of evidence is that more than half of Scottish councils have expressed an interest in going forward to phase 2. There is also the fact that the 600-plus houses that are being built under phase 1 are supporting about 1,000 jobs. As John Swinney said yesterday, for an investment of about £2 million by the Scottish Government, more than £100 million has been spent in the construction industry. That seems to be a productive use of Scottish Government resources. Given councils’ interest in phase 2, the initiative is likely to grow in the future.

We are making a great deal of progress on homelessness. I think that seven authorities have reached the 2012 target and that many others are close behind. We intend to push forward with that. There is no doubt that there are affordable housing supply issues. Of course, the Labour Party’s track record locally and nationally on building council houses shows why we face some of the problems that we face. We have committed to building 5,000 new council houses in the next five years. That is starting to help to alleviate some of the problems and we will continue to build those houses. We will also continue to build affordable housing and affordable social housing, which will total about 30,000 homes over the next five years. That will certainly help to deal with the situation that Elaine Smith describes.

As I have given the figures for the entire project—around 1,000 jobs will be supported—I will be happy to provide Colin Keir with the detailed figures for Edinburgh. I will also provide any other members who are interested with figures for the councils that are involved in the scheme in their areas. Against the background of a £1.3 billion cut in our budget, we must find other ways of ensuring that we provide those houses. The scheme offers an innovative way of doing that, and it is providing real houses for people who are now starting to use them, which must be a good thing.

It is worth pointing out that many of the houses that are built under the national housing trust initiative will have rents that will be set well below housing benefit levels, which will be available to people on lower incomes. However, it is true that we must do more on social rented housing. I have mentioned some of the constraints that we face, such as a £1.3 billion cut this year, and a 32 per cent cut over the next three years. As was mentioned in the debates earlier this morning, it is useful to keep that context in mind in considering what the Government is able to do. Against that background, I think that 30,000 affordable houses over a five-year period, including 5,000 council houses, is a pretty good start.

Will the member confirm that there are no plans in that document to close any stations and that it contains no such list of stations?

Will the member take an intervention?

At the start of her speech, the member mentioned plans to close the stations. Can she say what those plans are and who has put them forward?

Is the member aware that his own Government—the Government that he supports at the United Kingdom level—has put in place an 18-month long franchise that includes improvements to 140 stations along the line in question?

I reassure Patrick Harvie that, if he reads the entire document, he will see reference to not-for-profit organisations possibly taking over railways and opportunities to expand the rail network. The consultation is a list of options, and he still has time to respond in that vein.

Will the member take an intervention?

First, I return to a point that Patricia Ferguson made: I will certainly review the correspondence to which she referred and, in any event, I am more than happy to meet her to discuss her concerns about station closures in relation to rail 2014. I will ensure that such a meeting is arranged as soon as possible. I am pleased to have yet another opportunity to reiterate the Government’s position. I will be as clear as I can be: the Government has no plans. Patrick Harvie said that we should say what our true intentions are. That is our intention: we have no plans and no intentions to close stations in Glasgow.

No—I will get started first. We have no intention of closing stations anywhere in Scotland. We do not have those plans; they are not in the document. A number of members referred to a list of stations. John Pentland mentioned the list that he asked me for in the Parliament. The other list, which related to Glasgow, was asked for by someone at a station in Glasgow during the consultation exercise. It was not Transport Scotland, nor was it me; someone asked for that list, and the factual information was provided. It is not part of the rail 2014 consultation document. It was provided in response to a request that was made, as I provided the information to John Pentland. That is where that list comes from. That person gave the criteria for what they wanted, which was information on stations close to each other and on the patronage numbers. It is clear that we are in the midst of a consultation. We have no plans to close stations, but I well understand the cynicism that attaches to that phrase, because for years and years Governments have said, “We have no plans to do this,” when the real intention was something other than that. For example, the consultation that the UK Government recently launched asks about questions for a referendum on independence when the UK Government has made it perfectly clear that it has no intention of entertaining the idea of a double question.

No, not at this point. I understand that there might be cynicism about that, but the consultation ends next month so we will find out fairly shortly whether the cynical view is the right view, or whether I have been sincere in what I have been saying. A number of members—Paul Martin, Bob Doris, Patrick Harvie and Jim Hume, who, strangely did not mention Borders rail—mentioned that the consultation should be about ways in which we can expand the railway network. To give some more weight to the idea that we have no plans to close stations, members should look at our track record. Contrary to what some members have suggested, we have a good track record. The level of subsidy in Scotland is greater than it has ever been. It is greater, as I understand it, than the subsidy for any other train-operating company in the whole of the UK. The fare box is smaller, but the subsidy is greater. The EGIP involves around £1 billion of investment in the railway infrastructure in Scotland. We are delivering the Borders railway, which the previous Administration did not get round to even looking at delivering. It talked about Borders rail for many years, but it did not deliver it. We have started that process. We managed to get the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line, which I was involved in when I was a council leader, through and completed. We are committed to looking at other stations in the north of Scotland. Dalmarnock has been mentioned, as, quite rightly, has Glasgow, where there has been additional investment in the subway and in fastlink. There is a huge commitment to public transport in Glasgow from this Government, which is demonstrated by what we have done. That does not support the idea that we have some kind of agenda to cut back on transport. What we have here is a consultation document. It is right that we should consult, and the document is open and inclusive. Some of the things in there are not the Government’s views, but things other people have suggested. For example, Jim Hume made a point about the length of the franchise, but the suggestion to which he referred came not from the Government but from the trade unions, which wanted to look at that. There are other reasons why they think that it would make sense to have a shorter franchise. Contrary to Jim Hume’s point, there is no evidence to suggest—as one might think and as, indeed, I did—that longer franchises encourage more investment or reduce fares. We have a very good record on rail, on public consultation and on support for public transport. It is right that we are consulting on these issues. We are at the stage at which we are looking for a new franchisee, and we are obliged to follow the franchising system. It is interesting that we are holding a consultation on a franchise, and yet there is no consultation at all from the UK Government on the franchise for the east coast main line, which starts in 2013. I have asked the UK Government when we will have a consultation, but there has been no response. Franchising is a very expensive business. It costs £4 million to launch a franchise bid—

I will make one last point and then come back to Patricia Ferguson. The Government is prevented from encouraging directly a not-for-profit scheme, such as Patrick Harvie mentioned. Of course, others can do that if they can demonstrate their experience in the rail industry, but we are not allowed to do so.

That consultation is being carried out by Network Rail. I have listened to the views that have been expressed today and in writing, and we are taking them into account. There is no proposal at this stage; the consultation is genuine. We will look at the issue and the implications of the option that Patricia Ferguson described, if it were to proceed. I have listened to the points that members made. The consultation ends at the end of February, so we will find out shortly whether what members said about secret plans to close stations is true or not. We will also have the benefit of considering the consultation responses and finding out whether anyone has come forward with a proposal to close stations. In Scotland we have stations—not in Glasgow or even the central belt—where nobody gets on or off. No mention has been made of the UK-wide McNulty report, which was commissioned by the previous UK Government and is being taken forward by the current UK Government. We have to look at that. Many members mentioned the increased patronage at some stations. That has not come about by accident. There has been a great deal of investment in the rail services. Why would we want to close a station when we have increased the patronage during the past few years? Of course, if people demonstrate that they want to use a station, they should have that station. That is consistent with what the Government is doing. Meeting closed at 18:11.

We continue to plan for and manage the risk associated with landslides across Scotland and we understand their impact on local communities. Transport Scotland is looking at protective netting, shelters and the potential for planting of the hillside around the Rest and be thankful. The improvement and strengthening of the parallel forestry road as an emergency alternative will also be investigated, and discussions were held on that before Christmas. Transport Scotland is also looking at the safety of the whole A83 trunk road, including the feasibility of removing pinchpoints and pedestrian safety in villages. Discussions have already started between officials and the local community. Transport Scotland has a programme of meetings, which I will not list in the interest of brevity, which I will pass on to the member. Further meetings with other local community groups are planned and I have kept in regular contact with the local member, who has also raised the issue.

Obviously, I do not accept the member’s latter point. We understand the strategic nature of the A83 and the need for people to use it, and we are very much aware of what happens when it is not open to local people. That is why we and Transport Scotland will do the various things that I have mentioned. The very thing that makes us a spectacular part of the country is what leads to landslips, and no Government can prevent landslips from happening. We can, however, try to mitigate the effects of those landslips either for the safety of individuals or for the convenience of people who are trying to move around the country, to which the member refers. Therefore, we will take the actions that I have mentioned. Capital expenditure will come into it, and that expenditure could be absolutely huge depending on what we want to do, which is a question for the Government.

I have taken the east end to mean the two local housing forum areas of east centre and Calton and Baillieston, Shettleston and greater Easterhouse. Current planned expenditure in 2011-12 for new social rented housing is £24.477 million, with 47 unit approvals and a possible additional 50 units for Scottish Veterans housing association. Support is being provided through a number of routes including the transfer of management of development funding, which, since 2003, has been managed by Glasgow City Council; Glasgow Housing Association new build; the Commonwealth games village; and Scottish Veterans housing association. Future years’ programmes have not yet been agreed but carry forward commitments from 2012-13 onwards for social rented housing in the east end and are currently worth in excess of £41 million.

I very much agree with that. That is why we have said that the huge cut in capital expenditure of around 32 per cent over the next three years will be detrimental to our efforts to create more jobs in the construction industry. We take that point on board, which has been underlined by John Swinney’s moves to try, where possible, to take money from revenue and put it into capital. Those projects—whether road building, transport projects or housing—create jobs so that, instead of having people claim benefit, we can give them wages and they, in turn, can pay tax. That seems to be a virtuous circle.

We have had discussions with the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations on that issue, most recently this week, and we know of its concern. However, we should consider the success of the innovation and investment funding of around £110 million, which will result in there being more than £400 million of expenditure on housing next year. We should also consider the fact that Shelter, which has made a similar point, asked for £610 million to be dedicated to new house building and we have provided about £600 million. From that, it is evident that we are doing as much as possible on affordable housing and, in most cases, almost as much as the stakeholders have asked of us. However, we have heard the concerns of the SFHA that the member mentions and we will continue to discuss those with it.

Two extra services each way were introduced on the Highland main line in December 2011. As the next step, journey-time improvements are expected for some services on the line from December 2012. Network Rail is examining a number of options to improve the Inverness to Aberdeen railway line, including reducing journey times by approximately 20 minutes, enhanced service frequency and possible new stations at Dalcross and Kintore.

The member mentions the 2014 rail consultation. Despite all the comments that have been made on that, some extremely productive discussions have taken place throughout the country when Transport Scotland officials and others have gone to railway stations to talk to people at first hand. That kind of consultation is absolutely essential when a major franchise is being let. I am not sure why the UK Government has not yet initiated such a consultation for the 2013 franchise, which begins before ours, but I am happy to look into writing to the UK Government as the member suggests.

The member will be aware that many of the improvements that we have carried out to railway stations along the lines of those suggested at Insch station come from a process and project that is managed jointly by us and the Department for Transport. As the member well knows, that has recently led to the improvements that have been announced for Dyce station. I am more than happy to meet the member to discuss the issue.

Clackmannanshire Council and Transport Scotland have employed Network Rail to install acoustic barriers by way of noise mitigation. Contractors have been appointed by Network Rail, and works have now commenced. As a result of noise and vibration monitoring and assessment, acoustic barriers will be installed at 68 properties. Network Rail manages the process of evaluating other claims for compensation, under part 1 of the Land Compensation (Scotland) Act 1973, for residents who consider their properties to have been devalued as a result of the reinstated railway.

Richard Simpson’s final point sounds like a sensible proposition and I undertake to look at it and discuss it further with him when we meet. The private bill committee was established when neither he nor I were in the Parliament, and it will have to answer to his points. He has made the point about the undertakings that were given previously and that he and I received when he was MSP for the area and I was leader of the council, and we have been through the discussion before. What is most important now is that we try to take the necessary action to address the concerns of local residents. Compensation claims are a matter for Network Rail, but I will keep a close eye on the situation.

I last met the chair of the new Scottish Housing Regulator, Kay Blair, on 22 August 2011. That was our first meeting since the creation of the body and Ms Blair’s appointment as its chair. At the meeting, we discussed the body’s preparations for assuming on 1 April this year its full responsibilities as regulator of Scotland’s social landlords.

I understand that the publication of information on activities surrounding the consultation will be a matter for the regulator, who, the member will understand, is independent of Government. However, I will be happy to take up that issue to see whether it can be resolved. I am well aware of some of the concerns that the member has referred to, which have been expressed to the regulator as a result of the consultation. The Scottish Government has made its own response to the consultation and, if the member likes, I will be happy to give him details of that response, some of which reflect the concerns to which he has referred.

Ministers published “Scottish Ferry Services: Draft Plan for Consultation” on 21 December 2011. The closing date for responses is 30 March 2012, which means that there will be a consultation period of 14 weeks. Following consideration of responses to the consultation, the final ferries plan will be published later in 2012.

I acknowledge that situation and have been in discussions with Shetland Islands Council and others about it, but it is not part of the ferry services plan. It is worth mentioning that the lengthy dry-dock period of nine weeks is a direct result of the tender process that was overseen by the previous Scottish Executive. I have undertaken to ensure that that does not happen again in the next tender period. We will continue to have conversations with people in the northern isles to see how we can get round that legacy of the previous tender process.

That is because that is what we said in our manifesto we would do. We will go further. The member will see in the ferries plan that we intend to base all ferry fares across Scotland on the RET. Although it is the case that there could be substantial benefits to people in Orkney from the inclusion of the Orkney Islands in the RET scheme, depending on the form that it takes, it is also true that inclusion in the scheme could result in increases in fares to Shetland. That issue is worth considering. We are following through on our manifesto commitment, which I think is the right thing to do.

We have been working with local authorities on blue badge reform since 2009. Last year, we held various workshops and issued a detailed code of practice. Legislation does not allow automatic renewal of blue badges. Badge holders have to apply for a new badge on expiry of their existing badge.

I am happy to look into the situation that the member describes, although the move that we have made is consistent with that which is being made in England and Wales, and with trying to get some consistency and uniformity into the process. As I said, however, I am happy to look into the issue.

Significant preparatory work has already been completed on the A75 Dunragit bypass. In spring 2012, we will commence the next phase of land purchase and preparation of contracts in readiness for procurement and construction. The Government intends to proceed with this vital link as soon as capital funds become available.

It is worth pointing out the gift that we were given by the Tory and Lib Dem Government at Westminster, which was a £1.3 billion cut, and a 36 per cent cut to our capital programme. That obviously limits the amount of work that we can do on capital projects. However, with the A9, the new Forth crossing, the M74 and the Borders rail link, we are making substantial progress on transport infrastructure in Scotland, which was let down for many years by Tory, Lib Dem and Labour Governments. We will make progress on the scheme. Six projects were identified in the route action plan for the A75 in 1997, but it is worth bearing it in mind that nothing happened in the five years following that. We have made progress with the four schemes that have been completed in the intervening period, and we will make progress on and complete the Dunragit bypass as soon as funds become available.

I think that I tried to answer that point. Elaine Murray said that we stalled the project. It is worth bearing it in mind that, for five years after the route action plan was agreed in 1997, nothing happened, so it is hard for her to accuse us of stalling. We will proceed with the Dunragit bypass. We are about to move towards compulsory purchase and we will proceed as soon as funds become available.

Has Lewis Macdonald not yet been able to read the document sufficiently well to understand that it is a consultation document? The example that he gave is not a proposal, and never has been. It is mentioned as an option for people to debate.

There have been ongoing discussions between Transport Scotland and Orkney Islands Council on the matter. They have focused on the £1.5 million grant that has been provided by the Scottish Government for the lengthening of the MV Shapinsay, which I am pleased to inform the member has now been paid for in full. Concerning the council’s on-going ferry-replacement programme, I wrote to the convener, Councillor Stephen Hagan, on 24 August agreeing to his request for a meeting and I look forward to his response.

Liam McArthur should recognise that Orkney Islands Council wants to run the services at its own hand. I acknowledge the point about the additional costs, but it is also worth pointing out two major differences between the Government and the council: Orkney Islands Council has substantial reserves, unlike the Scottish Government, and Orkney Islands Council can borrow, unlike the Scottish Government. He should take those differences into account, although I take the member’s point, despite that. Transport Scotland has been working with the council over a number of years on a prioritised and properly costed programme and earlier this year, as I have mentioned, John Swinney provided an extra £1.5 million for lengthening one of Orkney Islands Council’s ferries. It will be difficult for Transport Scotland and the Scottish Government to provide further funding in the next few years, particularly as investment is required for ferries on the whole range of routes. However, we will continue to have discussions with the council on the matter.

I think I covered that in the response that I have just given. It is worth reiterating that the services are provided by the council and that they are services that the council wants to continue to provide in the future. Given that, given the settlement that we make to local government and given the situation of the Orkney Islands Council in terms of having reserves and borrowing powers—neither of which is available to the Scottish Government—the matter has primarily to be the responsibility of Orkney Islands Council. However, I have made it clear that we will continue to work with the council and to discuss the issues that it faces in renewing the fleet.

Rob Gibson makes a very good point. I am sure that he will have noticed that the most recent order for two hybrid ferries went to the Ferguson shipyard and is the first shipbuilding there for over four years. Obviously, it gives a lot of satisfaction to Scottish ministers when that kind of result occurs, in so far as we are able to influence it within the law.

Yes, we have considered that. Rhoda Grant will know that many of our arrangements for ferries are leasing arrangements rather than outright purchase arrangements: that forms part of the tenders. Again, I have to say that the initiative for that really has to come from Orkney Islands Council. I am sure that it will be one of the things that it is considering, so it may well take that forward. We are happy to help the council with any expertise that we have in the area.

ScotRail regularly consults regional transport partnerships and Passenger Focus on proposed timetable changes, in line with its franchise obligations. In addition, ScotRail has a customer-contact centre and regular “meet the manager” sessions. Public feedback is taken into account for future timetable changes.

I understand the member’s anger, but I cannot understand her surprise because withdrawal of the service in question—an Arriva train—is a result of a change that the Department for Transport made under the previous Labour Government. Since then, ScotRail has tried to accommodate that change in service by providing additional services, which is not easy for it to do under its franchise obligations. [Interruption.] That is the case. My predecessor wrote to Lord Adonis to say that such changes were “unacceptable”—the very word that Helen Eadie used—and I, too, have written to say that they are unacceptable. In an effort to be as reasonable as I can be, I should say that ScotRail is to review the situation, but it is not easy to change. I will be happy to meet Helen Eadie to discuss the matter further. Such discussions should take account of the origins of the situation.

We are, of course, always looking to improve rail services. We have recently issued the “Rail 2014” franchise consultation. The improvements that John Scott mentioned are under consideration, but he will want to take advantage of the consultation process to reinforce his points, which I will be happy to discuss further with him, if he wants to do so.

I last met ScotRail’s managing director last week at the rail winter preparedness summit that was held at the Parliament, which was attended by the Office of Rail Regulation, Network Rail, ScotRail and cross-border passenger-rail operators. In addition, there has been regular engagement with ScotRail as part of the work of the Scottish Government’s resilience and multi-agency response team, which is in operation as part of the Government’s response to the winter weather.

In addition to the consultations that I mentioned in my response to Helen Eadie, the matter has been discussed in Parliament on a number of occasions, so I am not sure why Claire Baker appears not to have been aware of it, given her responsibility to her constituents. As I mentioned, the change in question has been imposed on us by the DFT. We have tried to accommodate it and to make representations to the DFT to say that what it has done is unacceptable. [Interruption.] That is simply the case. If Claire Baker had realised that the response from Lord Adonis—which was published—was the start of the process, she might have been in a more enlightened position. However, I am happy to discuss the matter with her. It is not necessarily the case that the new timetable must remain in place for a full year. The possibility exists of making a change in May next year. I will be happy to discuss that with her if she wants to do so.

The full cost of winter resilience on Scottish trunk roads and motorways will not be known until the end of the winter, but current estimates are that we will invest an additional £4 million to £6 million this winter, bringing the total cost of the trunk road winter service for 2011-12 to an estimated £14 million to £16 million.

First, I whole-heartedly agree with the member. Last year, staff in the sectors that he has mentioned, and across the wider public and private sectors in Scotland, played a pivotal role in getting Scotland moving again in the face of what we now know was an extremely severe winter, with many examples of individuals going beyond the call of duty. For that, I am very grateful. More investment has been made in the winter service this year but, when winter weather comes again, there will be disruption and we will once again call on gritter drivers and other winter service personnel to assist in getting Scotland moving. I mention also the army of active citizens in Scotland who help their neighbours and others in our communities.

The services provided by CalMac are defined in the contract between the company and Scottish ministers. Any reorganisation of CalMac will not lead to any changes to services defined by that contract. There is therefore no reason to suggest that there should be any negative impact on the communities that are served by CalMac. On the contrary, I would expect any reorganisation or refocus by CalMac to look at how its services to customers and communities can be improved to maintain the high quality of service that the company has been providing for many years.

With regard to the job losses referred to by Duncan McNeil, it is worth pointing out that there were no compulsory redundancies as a result of the previous tendering process. Discussions are on-going on the retendering of the various routes that CalMac is involved in. We will have to proceed with those discussions according to the requirements of European legislation. CalMac and the Scottish Government very much have an eye on the welfare of CalMac’s employees. Everything that can possibly be done to ensure their security will be done.

The member is absolutely right. What he says is borne out by the facts and findings of the pilot study that was carried out into RET as it applied in the Western Isles, which saw for example a 31 per cent increase in carryings. We are hopeful that this week’s announcement to provide RET across a range of routes around Scotland over the course of the next few years will have a similar impact on tourism and will provide an economic boost to those island communities.

It is fair to say that we very much share the concerns that have been expressed. Yesterday the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment and I met the chairman and chief executive of CalMac. We have undertaken to work closely with them to ensure that the improvement plan that the cabinet secretary has asked for is implemented and that the people of Argyll receive the standard of service that they expect and to which they have a right. We fully recognise that the service has not met our expectations, as the client, or those of our customers, and we are focused on improving it and making it work.

The cabinet secretary has not had meetings with North Lanarkshire Council officials in a ministerial capacity on the matter. I am the lead minister for such issues.

I am afraid that I have to advise the member that the situation has not changed since June this year. Network Rail has made passive provision for a future station at Plains. Obviously, if substantial housing development occurred, that would help the case for introducing a new station there. The member may have noticed that we have just launched a rail consultation exercise, which gives opportunities to communities throughout Scotland and councils. Councils can come forward with packages of support for stations in their areas. That has happened in West Lothian, and is proposed in East Lothian, I understand. It is perfectly open to North Lanarkshire Council to come forward and say that it wants to contribute towards a station. If it does so, I undertake to consider that issue on its merits.

I met the leaders of Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council on 1 November to discuss major transport infrastructure projects in the north-east, and officials continue to meet regularly to discuss a number of topics.

I can certainly assure Kevin Stewart that trunk road maintenance will not be downgraded in the north-east in anticipation of new trunk road projects going ahead, such as the Aberdeen western peripheral route and the A90 Balmedie to Tipperty route. We are keen to crack on with those projects as soon as possible. The existing A90 and A96 in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire will continue to be maintained as part of the trunk road network until the opening of those projects. Following completion of the Aberdeen western peripheral route and the A90 Balmedie to Tipperty route, responsibility for all detrunked sections of the A90 and the A96 will revert to the relevant local authority, which will be best placed to manage those roads in accordance with local policies.

The Scottish Government has had regular discussions with train operators and British Transport Police, which have included the raising of passenger complaints about antisocial behaviour on trains.

I am happy to provide that reassurance to the member. As he knows, that issue features in the rail consultation that we have just launched. I welcome all actions that decrease antisocial behaviour on trains. Those actions make the job of British Transport Police much easier and, crucially, improve the travelling experience of rail passengers. The Scottish Government will continue to work constructively with British Transport Police and train operators to look at the options to improve the travelling environment for rail passengers.

The obvious sources of information on that are British Transport Police, which has said that it is an issue, and the train operating companies. I mentioned that I recently met the leaders of Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council, who raised that issue with me. Perhaps there is no such behaviour on the particular route that Alex Johnstone uses, but it is certainly an issue in the north-east of Scotland.

Given the franchise environment, the responsibility for dealing with that matter must rest with train operating companies. However, individual responsibility must also be to the fore. A lot of people who consume alcohol manage to behave perfectly well on trains; however, some do not and they ruin the environment for others. As I have said, although the train operating companies and British Transport Police are primarily responsible, individuals also have a responsibility in this regard.

We wrote subsequently to the UK Government, especially in relation to Liverpool, but our fundamental point is that had the Clyde coastguard service been retained, it would not have been necessary to comment on what was happening in Liverpool, because we would have retained that service, but that is not happening.

Somewhat perversely, Tavish Scott has seen a Lib Dem cut as an opportunity to attack the Scottish Government. Before Jamie Hepburn gives up on the idea of cross-party support, I ask him to note what other former Lib Dem leaders have said. Charlie Kennedy said that the proposals “flew in the face of all common sense”,—[Official Report, House of Commons, 22 November 2011; Vol 536, c 166.] Jim Wallace said that it is too important an issue “to let the local knowledge and expertise ... be lost”, and Ming Campbell said that the proposals are “profoundly mistaken”. There is Lib Dem support for our position.

Neil Bibby said that he would consider devolution of the coastguard functions only if it was in the Scottish interest. Does Rhoda Grant agree that the prospect of losing the jobs and expertise that she mentioned cannot represent a better service to the Scottish interest than would devolution of the functions to us?

I thank all members who have spoken in the debate. Whatever their political party, they have highlighted a number of key concerns; obviously some are more concerned about certain issues than others but, given their local connections, that is only natural. However, the fact that this is the third debate on this matter shows the strength of feeling in Parliament and the weight that it is giving the issue. Maritime safety is a matter of great concern to me and my ministerial colleagues. Members will no doubt be aware that in October Richard Lochhead and I sent a joint letter to Mike Penning to draw his attention to our formal response to the coastguard consultation and to express our on-going concern over the future of emergency towing vessels. I take this opportunity to offer my continued thanks and admiration to all those involved in ensuring that users of our maritime environment are kept safe, whether they be volunteer coastguards, lifeboat and Royal National Lifeboat Institution teams or MCA employees. It is a tribute to MCA employees that they can continue to provide a professional, first-class response to incidents occurring around our shores at a time when their own future employment with the MCA is uncertain. Duncan McNeil, in particular, made that point, and I am sure that everyone in the chamber will agree that their attitude is very much to be admired. On Rhoda Grant’s response to my intervention, I accept that the Labour Party’s position is that we need an integrated UK maritime safety network. However, now that that network has been put in such jeopardy, would she prefer to have those functions devolved to Scotland or to lose those jobs, services and local expertise? We would certainly prefer the functions to be devolved.

I certainly understand the member’s point, but we have to face what is happening. A number of members have made the point that things will happen fairly soon. People’s safety and the security of people’s jobs are at stake, which is why we have to take positions, and our position is that the functions should be devolved. The Scottish Government values the important role that all the MRCCs that are located in Scotland play, and it recognises the important work of MRCCs beyond our borders, where there is an obvious overlap that covers complex areas of our seas. That overlap is natural, and such work happens between other countries. For the most part, we restricted our comments in our response to the consultation to the Scottish MRCCs, but we are extremely aware of the need to continue an appropriate level of cross-border cover. As I said, such cover exists in many places around the world.

I was extremely impressed by the points that Maureen Watt made, which I will come on to in a few moments. I will cover that point if I can. The Clyde station is in an existing pairing of UK stations, and it is difficult to see how the existing high level of local knowledge can be maintained under the new structure, particularly when we consider the complex combinations of traffic. For example, I think that it was Stuart McMillan who said that the west coast traffic includes ferries, commercial vessels and leisure and military traffic. I have often sailed recreationally in those waters, and I know that the military traffic is constant and that it has its own dangers. That is why we must have the cover and local expertise that have been mentioned. I stress that I am not in any way criticising the work and professionalism of the Belfast operation; rather, I am reflecting our concern that the revised structure that the MCA has proposed does not provide sufficient resilience. I return to a point that Lewis Macdonald and Maureen Watt raised. There cannot be resilience by having the MOC function on the south coast of England, hundreds of miles away from the crucial area of the North Sea—Lewis Macdonald mentioned that—and especially oil and gas operations. If the back-up is a non-staffed function on the south coast of England, that is not resilience or the right way to serve those interests. That is why we are firmly of the view that the Scottish MRCCs should be retained. We have not said that there should be only one centre in the UK; rather, we have said that there should be one in Scotland, and it should be in Aberdeen.

I would like to make a bit more progress. If I have time at the end, I will come back to the member. A number of members have mentioned the Forth station. The Clyde and Forth stations play vital roles and cover vast and complex areas of coastline, and it remains the Scottish Government’s view that they should be retained. Unusually, two references were made to the constitution. Neither was made by Scottish National Party members. Tavish Scott made a somewhat limp reference to constitutional referenda. It is interesting to note the number of accusations that were made in the previous session about the SNP being obsessed by constitutional referenda, but such references are increasingly being made by the Lib Dems. I completely agree with Lewis Macdonald that an MOC should be retained at Aberdeen, but he made the point that doing so would have been part of a union dividend. We must consider what that is if it is not a union dividend. The tax changes for the oil and industry and the loss of expertise from Aberdeen represent anything but a dividend to Scotland. We must consider whether such functions are best served by the involvement of the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government, or by the involvement of the UK Government. There is almost a former Lib Dem leaders club commenting on the issue. Charlie Kennedy said that the “suggestions flew in the face of all common sense”.—[Official Report, House of Commons, 22 November 2011; Vol 536, c 166.] Jim Wallace said that it is important to keep local knowledge and expertise—he did not just mean in the northern isles—and Ming Campbell thinks that the proposals that have been proposed this week are “profoundly mistaken”. As far as I am aware, we have not yet heard from the current Lib Dem leader, Willie Rennie, on whether he supports the closure of the facility on the Forth, which is in the area that he represents. We can contrast the comments of those previous Lib Dem leaders with what Tavish Scott said. As I have said previously, he really sees the matter as an opportunity to attack the SNP Government rather than take to task proposals that have been made by the Government at Westminster that he supports. It is difficult to see how, in the structure that the UK Government has announced, the areas that I mentioned can be adequately covered without significant loss of vital local knowledge, as members have said. I think that it was Alasdair Allan who, in a previous debate, made the point that even the mispronunciation of place names can cause confusion and potentially endanger vessels and lives. The concerns that Lewis Macdonald expressed about the Aberdeen MRCC cannot be overstated. Although the MCA has assured us that it intends the current role in relation to oil and gas liaison to continue, it is difficult to see how that will be managed in the context of a significant reduction in staffing levels. As a number of members, including Rhoda Grant, said, although terms and conditions will be improved for the people in the service who keep their jobs, many people will lose their jobs as a result of the changes. That must be of concern to all members. We will continue to press the UK Government on that point and others, and we expect the MCA to provide early advice and support to staff at all affected stations, to ensure that people are aware of the options that are available to them in the new structure. We urge the MCA to avoid compulsory redundancies. We welcome the three-month reprieve for the ETVs that was offered at the last minute and the attention that the Scotland Office is now giving the matter. Marine Scotland is formally part of the ETV working group, and officials from that agency and Transport Scotland have provided information and advice to the Scotland Office to help in the search for a solution that ensures that our seas continue to receive the required level of protection. Only last week, Richard Lochhead met David Mundell MP to discuss the matter with him and his officials. Richard Lochhead was able to press on Mr Mundell the importance of having adequate provision in place and of guaranteeing that there will be no break in cover prior to the implementation of a suitable long-term solution, which is crucial. We are confident that that message was put across and that at that point the Scotland Office was in agreement with our view. It was also highlighted that the terms of the devolution settlement under the Scotland Act 1998 are clear. Funding for ETVs is a reserved matter and the Scottish Government cannot and will not provide funding to compensate for cuts that Westminster imposes. As members said during the debate, it is simply not sustainable for us to continue to pick up and provide funding for functions that were previously financed by Westminster. As I have said before, a much better and more sustainable approach would be to devolve the function and the budget. In conclusion, I reiterate two key points.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Lewis Macdonald knows that fire and rescue services currently have the power to respond to incidents, should they feel that it is necessary to do so, and that they can charge for their services. The Scottish Government is considering the future delivery of fire and rescue services in Scotland. It is unfortunate that the UK Government did not discuss its proposals on firefighting at sea with us in advance of making its announcement. That is an important point, given what was said last year about the respect agenda. It is important that we continue to consider the matter and we will do so in the context of our review of fire and rescue services. However, the primary responsibility and the responsibility for the withdrawal of funding lie with the UK Government. It is clear to us that devolution of MRCCs to Scotland should take place, alongside devolution of the funding, by which I mean the funding that is currently in place rather than the post-cut funding. That is the only way of ensuring that the current structure is preserved in a way that will allow the people who use our seas and coastline to receive the level of cover that they currently receive. As Richard Lochhead said, we estimate that the proposals would realise savings of about £3.6 million—a sum that is recouped in taxes from North Sea oil and gas in three hours of production.

I am sorry, I am in my final half minute. We must consider what we will lose in jobs and in safety for the sake of savings of £3.6 million. Given the wide-ranging list of downgrading measures in relation to maritime and marine safeguards, whether we are talking about MIRG funding, aircraft provision—we heard about the Nimrods—or uncertainty over ETVs, it is clear to us that there is a lack of a coherent, strategic approach to the issues. I assure members that the Scottish Government will continue to press the UK Government and to work alongside all affected stakeholders to resist the cuts and push for joined-up thinking, to keep our seas as safe as they can be.

The Aberdeen to central belt rail enhancements are included in the STPR recommendations. We have already seen improvements since 2008, including faster journey times and service frequency enhancements along the route. As I indicated in June, we have asked Network Rail to re-examine the proposals for the route to deliver additional incremental improvements. It will report next year.

The member refers to the report of that committee, but I would like the same commitment to be made by the United Kingdom Government. Currently, the UK Government has given no commitment to have high-speed rail come to Scotland, although we are working with our colleagues in the Scotland Office and at Westminster to ensure that it does. The line could produce massive benefits not just for cross-border services, but for services right through to Aberdeen. As I said, we are seeking to improve the route; indeed, we have improved it already. However, further major improvements could come through high-speed rail, and I welcome the member’s support for that position.

I do not want to prejudice any consultations that might be on-going, of which the member is well aware. The idea has been raised of whether stopping services there could improve services that are not cross-border services, so that we could have improved services between Edinburgh and Aberdeen. However, it would not be wise to downgrade an existing very good service in order to improve another service. I hope that that helps the member with the point that he is making.

My guidance would be that they should read those parts of the document that refer to the possibility of enhancing the sleeper services. I reassure the member that patronage of the sleeper services has increased substantially in recent years, which shows that there is a demand for those services. Nevertheless, as I am sure he will agree, there are ways in which the services could be improved. We are equally open—perhaps more open—to the idea of enhancing the services through the consultation to which he refers.

Monitoring and evaluation of the smarter choices, smarter places programme are on-going. The impacts that the programme has had on encouraging active travel will be reported in the final evaluation by the end of 2012.

Yes, I am aware of the rising number of cyclists in Edinburgh. I take this opportunity to praise City of Edinburgh Council members and officers for their commitment and leadership in making the city such an active travel success story. I recently had the chance to cycle into the city on an excellent cycle route. To my mind, the other local authorities should look closely at what Edinburgh has done and try to follow suit. Last week, I attended the Cycling Scotland conference in Glasgow and took questions on the draft budget from delegates, including one from a Spokes representative. However, I am happy to meet the member and the two constituency interests that he mentioned.

I congratulate Christina McKelvie on securing this important debate on the veterans of nuclear tests. The health and welfare of Scotland’s veterans are at the centre of the Scottish Government’s policy thinking, as has been demonstrably the case for a number of years and was evidenced in the recent parliamentary debate on veterans. The speeches in today’s debate, including Christina McKelvie’s supportive and passionate speech, illustrate clearly that there is a groundswell of good will and support across Scotland for the surviving veterans of the UK nuclear test programme. The motion indicates that around 70 such veterans live in Scotland, but the figure might not be entirely accurate. We know that 70 Scotland-based veterans are involved in the litigation that is before the UK Supreme Court, but there might well be many more. We just do not know, and there is no way of verifying the true figure. I should say that I took advice and double-checked it before my speech and that although I will refer to the legal case I will not do so in a way that jeopardises it. That we owe the nuclear test veterans and, indeed, all veterans a debt of gratitude is not in doubt. All the service personnel served with honour and distinction, and we applaud them for that. A member—I cannot remember who—made the point that veterans’ families should be equally in our minds, which is true. I think that Mrs Jessie Munn from East Kilbride, who is the widow of a man who served during the tests, is in the gallery. It is often the families who pay a huge price for the activities that our service personnel are involved in. We show our gratitude across the country: it is never as poignantly demonstrated as it is at the impeccably observed remembrance Sunday commemoration services, which took place earlier this month. The Government tangibly demonstrates its support by putting veterans’ issues at the heart of policy making, for example by ensuring that veterans can access the best possible medical care and support services. I think that we have delivered on that, and I have not yet heard of any case in which less than the best medical attention was provided to veterans by the national health service in Scotland. On whether veterans of nuclear testing should be financially compensated, I fully support the position that where ill health is proved to be a result of service in the armed forces, wherever and whenever that service took place, it is right that the UK Government provide adequate compensation. Ultimately, however, that is a matter for the UK Government and the Ministry of Defence. I understand that the UK Supreme Court sat for 3.5 days from 14 November to hear an appeal by the veterans, and that the court’s decision will be handed down in the new year. Should the case that the veterans brought before the UK Supreme Court prove to have been successful, that will not mean that they are entitled to compensation. Rather, it will mean that their case will be returned to the Court of Appeal in England and they will be required to win that particular battle. It would be inappropriate for the Scottish Government to comment on the validity or otherwise of the veterans’ cases. For a start, we have not seen all the evidence that has been put forward by the veterans’ legal team or, indeed, the case that has been made by the MOD. In any event, were that evidence to be made available to us, the Scottish Government does not have access to the necessary expertise in the field to evaluate it thoroughly. I am not going to defend the MOD’s position; that is a matter for UK ministers. I am aware, however, that it is the MOD’s contention that the veterans and their legal team cannot prove a causal link between the tests of the 1950s and 1960s and the majority of the conditions and illnesses that are now being experienced by some veterans. Nevertheless, compensation through the mechanism of war pensions is being paid to some veterans who have been able to demonstrate that their specific illness is directly linked to exposure to radiation as a result of the tests. Listening to the debate, it occurred to me that it would be interesting to examine the links between what was experienced by those who underwent the nuclear tests and the training that has been provided subsequently, since a few years after the tests to all armed forces personnel for nuclear, biological and chemical warfare. It must be the case—it cannot be otherwise—that lessons were learned from the tests that were incorporated into subsequent training. That bears further examination. I will say no more than that. The MOD and the UK ministers hold the line that the link is not proven in the vast majority of cases. Many people can and do point to academic studies and research that have been carried out overseas, but none of those papers appears to have moved the UK Government. As members have mentioned, other countries have also offered compensation, although it is the MOD’s case that that is not always what it seems. That is its case to make. What we must do is ask how the Scottish Government can help. As many members have, I met on 17 August Ken McGinley, who is a leading light in the veterans’ campaign, as well as representatives of the veterans group and Mr Neil Sampson, who is a partner in the legal firm that is acting on their behalf, to hear for myself details of their fight for compensation. I think that they would agree that we had a very productive and useful meeting. I was very much moved when I listened to their stories. The veterans and their legal team fully accept that the matter is wholly reserved to Westminster and that it is for the UK Government to resolve. At that meeting, however, I offered to pass on to the appropriate UK minister any evidence that they have in support of their claim. That offer was made because the veterans felt that some of the data that they had gathered were being blocked by MOD officials and were not, therefore, reaching the appropriate UK Government minister. So far, I have not had that information passed to me by the veterans, but that may be because they are still suffering from that blockage. I remain intent on honouring the commitment that I made to pass on that information to the relevant UK Government ministers. Before concluding, I offer an apology to Kevin Stewart. At the earlier debate that we had on veterans, I said that I had written to Andrew Robathan on the issue. I had actually written to him on a different issue to do with the Atlantic convoys. I apologise for that. As I have just said, however, we remain committed to writing to the UK minister on behalf of the veterans when we receive the further information that they themselves are seeking. My view is very much that the issue demands to be resolved. It reflects badly not only on the UK Government but on society as a whole when veterans of our armed forces feel let down, ignored and aggrieved—especially when they feel let down enough to go to court to try to resolve a dispute. I hope that the veterans get a verdict on their appeal to the Supreme Court as a matter of urgency. If it is proved that those people have experienced, and continue to experience, conditions and illnesses as a result of their service and participation in the nuclear testing programme of the 1950s and 1960s, the UK Government is morally bound to pay compensation. I also hope that, whatever the outcome, the decision is open, transparent and, above all, fair. Those who have served this country in whatever capacity deserve nothing less. Meeting closed at 17:58.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. First, I congratulate Alex Johnstone on his elevation to his new post, which I think gives him the title of the official spokesperson for the Conservative and Unionist Party, although during the leadership contest he might have wanted a different title. Alex Johnstone acknowledged the pivotal role of the housing market in the economy, as well as the severe challenges facing the market and the consequences for the economy as a whole. It would have been far better, however, if Alex Johnstone had acknowledged that cutting Scotland’s capital investment by 36 per cent over three years, as his United Kingdom Government has done, has at the very least compounded the problems that we face. Of course, the welfare reforms, including the housing benefit reform, have done a great deal to hinder the future supply of housing in Scotland and it would have been better had he acknowledged that. It would also have been better had he acknowledged that the Scottish Government has been doing everything in its power to support the housing market. I will make up for Alex Johnstone’s oversight. The Scottish Government has accelerated capital spend on affordable housing, kick-started a new generation of council houses—much though I know that that annoys Alex Johnstone—and continued investment to help first-time buyers access home ownership through our shared equity schemes. We recognise the scale of the challenge that we face, so we have been encouraging and supporting innovative solutions, including the one in East Lothian that Alex Johnstone mentioned, which we think is a commendable innovation in how we fund affordable housing. There is also the example of the widely acclaimed and successful national housing trust. As a result of all that, it has been possible for us to deliver a total of £460 million to be invested, which will deliver around 4,300 homes. That is not the be-all and end-all of what we will do this year, but just one part, although Alex Johnstone seemed to interpret the 4,300 homes as the total for this year. That will not be the total, but it will contribute towards our commitment to deliver 30,000 affordable homes during the life of this Parliament. It is also unfortunate that Alex Johnstone chose to overlook all that we are doing to counter the effects of ill-conceived Westminster policies. It is even worse that his own solution to the problem is more of the right to buy at more generous discounts—talk about confused thinking. He offers a partial assessment of the impact that right to buy has had on our communities and ignores the problems that it has caused, for example, in managing blocks of flats when some flats have been bought but others continue to be owned by social landlords. Above all, though, he overlooks the impact that right to buy has had on the amount of housing that is available for social rent and the impact that that has had on those in housing need. Certainly, in my area in Clackmannanshire we saw the council’s housing stock reduced by half over a period of time, which has produced huge constraints for people looking for social housing. Indeed, it was the recognition of the harm being done by the right to buy that resulted in almost universal support for the previous Administration’s proposals under the previous housing minister to reform the right to buy and to end it for new-build social housing and for new tenants in the sector. Those proposals became key elements of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2010, which the previous Parliament approved overwhelmingly. The idea that a year later we might contemplate overturning such popular legislation is at best fanciful, although not perhaps as fanciful as thinking that more generous right-to-buy discounts would give social landlords more money for new build. If Alex Johnstone and the Conservatives could drop their obsession with right to buy and perhaps even recognise the damage being done to the economy by Westminster’s policies, we might be able to have a much more productive debate about how we achieve fairness and equity in the allocation of social housing, an objective that everyone in the chamber probably shares. We all know from our constituency experience that that is a pressing problem and one that ultimately arises from demand constantly outstripping supply. The long-term solution is to build more of the houses of all tenures that people want and can afford in areas where they want to live, and that lies at the heart of our vision for housing.

The member can rest assured that I will always argue for more funding for housing, but both housing and transport are central to the Government’s policy of economic growth because the construction of such projects is very labour intensive. We face a challenge and, essentially, requiring landlords to strike a difficult balance between the legitimate claims of one group of prospective tenants over another is one element of that. We are committed to consulting on that and other matters, such as toughening tenancy rules to deal with antisocial behaviour, and plan to do so early next year.

I do not have time for more interventions; I apologise to Mr Brown. I look forward to working with Alex Johnstone and others on devising legislation that works for tenants and those in housing need and for landlords and the communities that they serve. It is important to recognise the work that is being done by the Government on housing across the piece. There was a large degree of confused thinking in Alex Johnstone’s speech, particularly if we go back to his point about East Lothian Council. He fails to recognise that buying those houses helps engender more interest in the local market, because once the houses have been sold their owners will look to buy elsewhere. He also conceded that he did not know that much about what was going on with this policy, but he should know that East Lothian Council has worked very hard with private sector developers and has a version of the Scottish Government’s national infrastructure loan whereby they will forgo or defer capital costs for infrastructure elements of new housing projects in order to go ahead as quickly as possible. There has been a great deal of innovative thinking.

I will take an intervention, although Alex Johnstone refused to take any.

That would be true if it was an either/or situation. If the member went to speak to East Lothian Council, he would find that it is doing a great deal, despite the particular constraints in that area, to try to encourage further housing development. That in itself will encourage further housing development and add to the council’s housing stock in an area where supply is hard-pressed. I recommend that Alex Johnstone looks in more detail at what is going on in East Lothian Council, as he should at Scottish Government policies, which have been extremely useful in starting to increase the available housing stock. In conclusion, my amendment acknowledges the points that I have made and recognises the folly of much else in Alex Johnstone’s motion. I move amendment S4M-01346.2, to leave out from “is concerned” to end and insert: “notes the Scottish Government’s recent announcement that £460 million will be invested to build 4,300 homes as part of its commitment to build 30,000 affordable homes during this parliamentary session, including 5,000 council houses in spite of significant cuts to Scotland’s capital budget by the UK Government; recognises the Scottish Government’s progress in modernising the legislative framework for housing, and calls on the Scottish Government to continue with an innovative approach to housing policy and invest in all types of houses to meet the demands and needs of the population.”

The member mentioned election commitments. Is the Labour Party’s position that which has been put forward by a contender for its leadership, Tom Harris: that allocation by need should be ditched in favour of allocation by virtue? Young people in particular would be put above older people, as they might have a job. Is Labour’s policy what Tom Harris described or what Lewis Macdonald described?

I will ask Lewis Macdonald a question that I have asked before. If he believes that the housing budget should be increased, can he say by how much and from where that money should come?

I will use my closing remarks to say more about the strategy for tackling the problems that Alex Johnstone’s motion describes in part but, unfortunately, appears to have no solution to. His reference to “homes fit for heroes” after the second world war was at least 20 years out of date, as that initiative took off after the first world war. However, the fact that he was 20 years out of date seems to reflect the nature of the proposals in the motion. I will also focus on action that is being taken to increase supply across all tenures. There is, rightly, an understandable emphasis on the inputs—how much money is going in. However, we must focus much more on the outputs—the number of affordable houses that are being built. That is the direction taken by Government policy. We recognise the connections between different tenures—how they can impact on one another—and the critical importance of supply to Scotland’s economic recovery and future growth. Reference has been made to the challenges that exist in the construction industry and how much money is in the economy. It is interesting to note that more than £100 million will be removed from the economy generally as a result of the changes to the local housing allowance. The Conservatives and Liberal Democrats are responsible for that but made no reference to it in any of their speeches. It is our job to make our funds work harder and deliver more affordable housing at lower cost and for greater value to the public purse. To that end, we have tried to encourage housing associations, developers and local authorities to work together to deliver housing that meets their communities’ needs; to make better use of the existing housing stock to improve choice and quality for households; and to help to deliver our ambitions for tackling climate change. John Lamont talked about meeting local needs and allowing extra weighting for local connections. We have listened to that point and will start consultation in January on allocations. Nevertheless, I agree with Derek Mackay that we must be aware of the dangers of such an approach. A recent trend has been to ensure that veterans do not require the same number of points for local connections, as they do not establish those during their time in the service. There are difficulties with that approach, and some of the points that Derek Mackay raised are well worth bearing in mind. We will consult on the issue. Increasing the supply of affordable homes remains our top priority. However, we could be so much further down the road in terms of the money that is available to us had successive Labour and Conservative Administrations, when tenants decided to keep their stock with the council rather than transfer it, treated both types of debt equally. Addressing homelessness and affordability issues is a vital part of our effort to build a better and fairer Scotland as we continue to regenerate our most deprived neighbourhoods. Our target—which I have set out several times—is to deliver 30,000 affordable homes, completed by the end of the current Parliament. As one of the SNP speakers said, that is a challenging target. We understand that—it will not be an easy target to achieve. However, I am a bit puzzled by the different versions of what happened in the previous eight years.

Just a second—I am just going to mention Mr Hume. He talks about the building of 40,000 housing association houses in those eight years. However, yesterday, Patricia Ferguson told us that fewer than 32,000 were built, which is fewer than 4,000 a year, with just over 3,000 of those being for social rented accommodation. There seems to be some doubt about the numbers. Perhaps we will get some clarity and consistency on that in the future.

In a minute. We are working towards our target, despite the cut in capital spending. It is rich to hear Mr Hume talk about a 25 per cent cut to the housing adaptations budget. Can he not refer to the 36 per cent cut in the capital budget? Does he not recognise that that produces pressure in all our budgets? He says that we have gone looking for those cuts, but that is not the case. We are having to adapt to the cuts that have been imposed by Westminster.

I will take an intervention from Mr Macdonald.

Unlike Lewis Macdonald, who did not answer my question about whether Labour was about to ditch allocation on the basis of need, I have answered that question here and in committee on a number of occasions, as has Mr Neil. It is up to Lewis Macdonald whether he chooses to listen to those answers. Along with the commitment to more affordable housing—30,000 affordable homes over the five years of this session—I have been able to announce a doubling of investment in new affordable homes through the investment and innovation fund. Through an input of £111 million, we are producing more than £400 million of investment in our housing stock. That is the kind of result that we want to see, and it means that local authorities in Scotland are building almost as many council houses as the rest of the UK combined—5,000 over the next five years. Lewis Macdonald should compare that to his Government’s record and then think about whether he should criticise what we are doing on council house building. Private developers are taking advantage of opportunities that are offered through the national housing trust and our support for shared equity. A great deal is being done. As I said, one of the major elements that affect the issue that we are talking about is the housing benefit changes that have been announced. We have conducted a detailed analysis of the impacts. We know that housing stakeholders will have to deal with the reforms and that there will be major pressures on landlords. We have tried to deal with that. Accordingly, I am happy to announce today Scottish Government support for three strands of activity. This year, we will spend £100,000 through the Chartered Institute of Housing, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the housing options hubs. That money will be spent on the development and sharing of best practice across the social rented sector, adding to the capacity of those at the sharp end at a critical time. We are taking positive action to try to deal with the cuts that have been imposed by Westminster and I would like the other parties to come forward with positive suggestions. I hope that that will happen in the next housing debate, because it has not happened today.

The draft road equivalent tariff evaluation report, which was published in March this year, shows illustrative RET fares for all Scottish Government-subsidised routes, including Orkney routes, and the likely impact on passenger numbers. It also shows that, on balance, most local authority-run ferry services have fare levels that appear to be set below or at around the level of an RET fare.

The decisions were based on our manifesto commitment to have a pilot in our first term in government and to roll it out to other areas in the Clyde and Hebrides in our second. There was no manifesto commitment to roll it out in the northern isles. However, we provide £38 million of subsidy for ferry services to the northern isles. The implementation of RET would result in higher fares for many northern isles trips. Islanders currently receive a discount of around 30 per cent; the same discount is available to families and friends on those crossings. If Liam McArthur wants more to be done in this area, it would be useful for him to address fuel prices and the cuts by the Westminster Government, which are reasons why it is becoming more and more expensive to subsidise the northern isles services. Despite that expense, we will continue to support them in the ways that I have described.

I am aware of the council leader’s comments. If the member refers to the study that I mentioned, he will see the extent to which the pilot has resulted in increased traffic to, and increased tourist numbers on, the islands that are benefiting from the scheme. There is very little evidence of any displacement from other islands. In relation to the other islands that the member mentioned, there is the commitment that I referred to earlier, on which we will make an announcement in due course.

The Scottish Government is responsible for trunk roads and motorways. Individual local authorities are responsible for setting policies that are relevant to local conditions on their own road network. Transport Scotland and its operating companies have been in contact with local authorities throughout the summer and are co-ordinating the management of the Scottish salt cell to monitor salt supplies.

Clearly, such behaviour is abhorrent. The acts are also criminal, and I am sure that the council and the police will take action as appropriate. As the member suggests, it is somewhat surprising that—from what has been said—discussion appears not to have taken place. I call on everyone to acknowledge the crucial role that gritters, and others who clear the roads, play during severe weather. I encourage North Lanarkshire Council and Strathclyde Police to work together to eliminate any and all criminal activities and to respect and support public sector workers in carrying out their essential tasks. Of course, all local authorities have a statutory duty to keep the roads clear, as far as is practicable.

British Waterways Scotland works in partnership with local authorities and others to maximise the wider benefits of our canals and to stimulate the regeneration of the canal corridors. Speirs Wharf in Glasgow, Edinburgh Quay and the Falkirk wheel are all examples of such partnerships delivering safe waterside environments providing quality places for people to live, work and play.

The reopening of the Forth and Clyde canal 10 years ago had, as the member noted, a significant impact on areas in Glasgow close to the canal. The Glasgow canal regeneration partnership has had great success in revitalising the canal and engaging local waterside communities. British Waterways Scotland’s key projects include new social and affordable housing at Maryhill, the regeneration of Maryhill locks and a new cultural quarter by the Forth and Clyde at Speirs Wharf. The master plans for Speirs locks and Maryhill locks were both recognised as being exemplary by the Scottish sustainable communities initiative, reflecting not only the quality of the design and master planning but the successful and well-considered community engagement underpinning them. There are many other developments to which I could refer, but I will write to the member with details of them.

Transport Scotland is responsible for motorway gantry signage. Through its Traffic Scotland service, it uses variable message signs to provide advance warning to drivers of emergencies, incidents and road closures. It endeavours to communicate what it knows when it knows it by as many means as possible. When the signs are not required for those purposes, they are used to promote road safety, network operations and related campaigns. The background messages have been developed in consultation with a number of stakeholders, in particular the police authorities.

Yes, and over and above that, on routes such as Edinburgh to Glasgow, there will be real-time information about how long journeys are expected to take, which is a significant enhancement of the service that is provided.

We are addressing young driver safety through our commitments in Scotland’s road safety framework to 2020 and by taking forward the recommendations in “National Debate on Young Drivers’ Safety”, published by Transport Scotland in March 2011.

Alison McInnes makes a good point about the number of accidents involving young drivers. However, some misconceptions surround road casualties. In 2010, road casualties in general in Scotland were at their lowest level in 60 years, and if we look at the number of drivers killed and seriously injured in the period to 2009, we see a 48 per cent reduction in the 16 to 24-year-old age group compared with a 47 per cent reduction for all other ages, so there has been substantial progress. From the recent debate on young drivers, the member will know the action that the Government is taking, including on the accreditation scheme that she mentions. If she would like, I can write to her with more details. We are also taking forward other recommendations, as well as some of the outcomes of the national debate with young drivers, which was carried out by Atkins.

We are supportive of the aims of the campaign for a graduated driving licence. As the member knows, we have written to the Driving Standards Agency. I acknowledge the work that the member has done in that regard. I am aware of the event in Inverness that he mentioned. If he sends me the details of that we will look into whether we can send some words of support.

I think that the member has asked me to get into the mind of a minister at Westminster, which I prefer not to do. I do not know exactly the reasons for that block. I think that the member would acknowledge that it is not a straightforward change to make. However, he rightly said that the Parliament supports the reduction that he mentioned. We will continue to press the Westminster Government to achieve that.

A geotechnical study of the A9 at Berriedale braes has recently been completed. The purpose of the study was to investigate whether realignment or a widening scheme could be constructed at that location. The study concluded that the ground conditions are reasonably favourable for both options and recommended that further ground investigation and a topographical survey be undertaken. The cost of the realignment option is estimated at £2.3 million. Road safety will continue to be monitored at Berriedale braes, with any further design work that is required for a longer-term project being taken forward when resources are available and priorities allow.

As I know the member is aware, there are substantial and competing pressures in prioritising road improvements throughout our trunk road network. However, he makes a constructive suggestion and we are happy to look at how we could, if possible, leverage in funding from other sources to move the project on. We will certainly do that.

Where is your evidence?

As Dave Stewart did, I congratulate Liam McArthur on securing time to debate this important issue. My colleague Alasdair Allan, who would have liked to be here, sends his apologies—he is at a British-Irish Council summit elsewhere. It is fairly obvious from the speeches that we have heard so far that we do not have consensus on the exclusion of business-related travel from the air discount scheme. I had hoped that those who had been opposed to the Scottish Government’s position—as they have every right to be—would understand, even if they do not appreciate, the rationale for exclusion. I also hope that they agree that I have given due time and consideration to them and to the concerns emanating from the eligible areas.

No. I am just starting off. Since we confirmed the more active exclusion of business-related travel, I have met Mr McArthur and other elected representatives from Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles and I have clarified our position with a number of local organisations. Our submission to the European Commission reflected on some of those representations. I have listened carefully to the speeches this afternoon—not all of which were positive and constructive, I have to say—and I will continue to listen to any representations that are made to me. I am aware that Liam McArthur and Tavish Scott wish to present the findings of an Orkney and Shetland business survey to ministers, so I would be happy to meet them to take delivery of it. A number of points that have been made deserve to be responded to. Clearly, the more active exclusion of business-related travel has impacted on some businesses—a point that I accept was made by a number of members—as well as on public sector and third sector organisations. We have maintained that the ADS was not designed for such use. That does not mean that we do not recognise and value the vital contribution that those businesses and organisations make in our remote communities.

I am coming to two rebuttals to that point. We have reflected the vital contribution that businesses and organisations make in the level of resource that was allocated in 2011-12 to transport in the Highlands and Islands. We have allocated funding of £35 million for air services, £109 million for ferry services and £32 million for roads. Our support for local government and the third sector also needs to be considered in this context. Despite UK funding cuts—it is a rich irony that the parties that are telling us that we have to cut our budget by £1.3 billion come up with an ever-growing list of demands for what they want to spend money on—local government’s share of the 2011-12 Scottish budget was preserved at previous years’ levels following on from the previous increases. For the next three years, local government’s revenue funding will be maintained and its overall share will still be higher in 2014-15 than it was in 2007-08. Over the next three years, we will provide the third sector in Scotland—a major part of this debate—with nearly £74 million compared to funding of £62 million in the final three years of the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration.

I want to make more progress. If I have time at the end, I will come back to the member. These are undoubtedly testing times for the public and third sectors in Scotland, but the figures illustrate that we are doing as much as we can to help. To address Dave Stewart’s point, members will be interested to hear that within the past 48 hours we have received the Commission’s informal view on business-related travel under the ADS. Clearly we need time to consider the full implications, but the advice on “undertakings”—that is, organisations that are involved in economic activity—is absolutely clear and unequivocal: they should not profit from a scheme that was introduced under the Commission’s mechanism for aid that is of a social character . Although that would apply to private businesses, both large and small, we need to consider how it would apply to other bodies for which economic or commercial activity is not their raison d’être, but which could be considered to have economic or commercial interests. That is the Commission’s view. That is what it has told us. It has said, as it often does, that the advice is informal at this stage and it will have to come back to us. There will have to be further dialogue. Members will also wish to note that the Commission has stated that member states are free to restrict support under aid of a social character schemes in a variety of ways, including for the purpose of travel. Indeed, the Commission has indicated that there is a precedent for this in another member state. Our position on business-related travel therefore appears to cause the Commission no concern whatsoever and I have to say—this is an important point—that this is completely in tune with the discussions that Scottish Government officials had with their Commission counterparts in 2006 when it was clear that businesses were not to be included under the scheme. The idea that this was, to quote the various adjectives used, “spurious”, “untenable”, “specious” and “not consistent with EU rules” is wrong. That is the EU position: we asked them for their view and that is what they have come back and said to us.

Mr Stewart has made more of a speech in this final contribution than I have. We have to consider carefully what the Commission has said. Maybe that will clarify some of the points that Dave Stewart raised and how the matter will impact on the scheme. I am trying to keep my mind as open as I can, unlike some previous contributors. I understand that there is a real desire in the eligible areas to draw a line under the issue in general terms and I share that desire. We will therefore give timely consideration to what we now have and will report back shortly to all the scheme members and their representatives who are present here today. I hope that we can then begin the process of moving on in the interest of concentrating on this important issue. We are very concerned about business, whether it is in the northern isles, the Western Isles or other parts of rural Scotland. That is why, as Jean Urquhart rightly said, we have provided millions of pounds in support for businesses under the small business bonus scheme and the various other things that I have mentioned. Our intention is to make sure that the air discount scheme, for its part, is as well used as it should be by those who are resident in our most remote communities. Meeting closed at 17:37.

Annual remembrance Sunday commemorations will be taking place the length and breadth of Scotland, and will be marked by thousands of Scots in honour of those whose lives were lost in times of war and other conflicts. At this time, it is appropriate also to reflect on that section of society who have served and, thankfully, returned to civilian life—namely, Scotland’s veterans. Scotland’s veterans community is much bigger than one might expect. That is in no small part due to the fact that Scotland contributes to the armed forces of this country more people per head of population than any other part of the United Kingdom—around 400,000, according to Veterans Scotland, which is the umbrella body that represents organisations that work on behalf of veterans. Veterans live all over Scotland, although there are concentrations in particular areas, as one might expect. Veterans are much more than the stereotypical elderly man in a blazer, wearing his medals and carrying a flag at a parade on remembrance Sunday. That veteran exists, of course, but veterans in Scotland have served in world war two, Korea, Aden, east Africa, Suez, Northern Ireland, the Falkland Islands, the Balkans, Iraq, Afghanistan and in many other places around the globe, from the Rhine to Hong Kong and from Belize to Cyprus. There are veterans in their 80s and 90s, but they are also in every other age group down from that; we have veterans who are only 19 and 20 years old. Veterans are predominantly men, but women have also served and have done so with distinction, just as men have. When we talk about veterans, we talk about everybody who has served in the armed forces, including those in the Territorial Army and reserve forces. Those veterans live and work among us. They are an integral part of Scottish society. They make use of public, private and voluntary services in the same way as every other member of Scottish society, as is absolutely right. They access healthcare at the point of need, they live as owner-occupiers or as tenants of private landlords and social landlords and they have their children educated in our schools. They are part of our workforce. They put their skills and expertise to excellent use. Many are retired, and are making the most of their lives in the ways they wish to do so. Do we owe these people a debt of gratitude? Of course we do. Each of them has put their life on the line. They have experienced and seen the best and the worst of human nature. Many of them have been to war—the worst possible resolution to international dispute and disagreement. Others have been international peace keepers who have faced bombs, bricks, stones and hatred—sometimes, tragically, very close to home. In the face of all of that, they have put duty before self interest so that we can live in peace and enjoy the freedoms that we sometimes take for granted. Yet, by and large, the veteran does not expect a great deal in return. The veterans whom I have met and know are unassuming. They do not want to make a fuss; they just need their special circumstances recognised and acknowledged. That is very little to ask and that is why the Scottish Government has put veterans at the centre of our policy thinking, development and delivery. We have recognised that, sometimes, it is important to design and provide services and support in a way that is tailored to the specific and unique needs of the veteran. We have done well in that regard and will continue to deliver more as time goes on. We will, of course, plan for the future. Our commitment to the veterans community in Scotland is a matter of public record. We have taken action in support of the words that we have spoken in favour of veterans and their interests. The agenda that we have followed and the results that we have achieved are widely acknowledged by the veterans community and by the other United Kingdom Administrations. What is in place for veterans? What does the Government’s record look like? Does it stand up to scrutiny? I believe that it does, so I will give some examples from that record. We have added policy responsibility for veterans’ issues to a ministerial portfolio. We are the first Administration to do that since devolution. We have appointed an armed forces and veterans advocate at director-general level to co-ordinate the delivery of Scottish Government policy as it impacts on veterans, and we have created a Scottish veterans fund with resources since 2008 of more than £300,000, which has provided grants to more than 30 projects in support of veterans. We have created a steering group that comprises the Scottish Government, the Ministry of Defence and senior officials of veterans organisations to examine issues around policy development and to facilitate direct access to Scottish ministers. Veterans organisations frequently tell me that they appreciate the access that they have to ministers. We have established quarterly meetings between Veterans Scotland and me to discuss priorities for action and we have established armed forces and veterans champions in national health service boards and local authorities as points of contact as well as for dispute resolution and signposting in relation to public services. Beyond getting the administration right, we have delivered a range of direct services to Scotland’s veterans. We have made tremendous progress in health and housing. For example, in healthcare, we have given priority NHS treatment to veterans who have service-related conditions. With NHS Lothian, we have set up a £300,000 prosthetic-limb project to provide state-of-the-art prosthetics to veterans. In 2009, with NHS Lothian’s Veterans First Point project, we created a one-stop shop for veterans that is based around mental health services. We have provided £1.7 million to Combat Stress for specialist mental health services in in-patient care and an outreach service. We have published leaflets such as “Have you served your country? Taking care of veterans”, which draws attention to the support packages that are in place for veterans. Considerable progress has also been made in relation to housing.

That is a good question. Substantial work is being done in that area. When a veteran presents to a GP, it is often difficult to get to the issue, because an awful lot of shields can be put up. Some additional support might be needed to encourage GPs to realise that that is the case and that they might have to delve a bit deeper. Of course, that can happen with any patient—as I am sure Dr Simpson would confirm—but it is a particular trait of veterans. We are working on that. It is a question of rolling out advice and guidance to GPs, and that is continuing within Government. On housing, we have published a housing guide for service leavers and more than 14,000 copies have been distributed so far. We have revised the social housing guidance to landlords to highlight the flexibilities that landlords have in allocating accommodation to ex-service personnel. We have made it easier for ex-service personnel to establish a local connection when they seek social housing and we have developed a national housing options advice leaflet with Veterans Scotland. We have abolished means testing for disabled veterans who need adaptations, which removes compensation payments from the means-testing process. There have been other initiatives more generally. For example, we have provided grant funding to Veterans Scotland to develop an e-portal that will contain a raft of information that can be used by the service provider and the veteran alike, and it is about to go live.

Kevin Stewart makes a pertinent point, but I point out that the court process is continuing and will come to a crucial juncture on 14 November. Although responsibility lies with the UK Government, I have met the veterans and listened to their case and I told them that I am interested in hearing the outcome of the court case. I have written to the UK Minister for Veterans, Andrew Robathan, on their behalf and raised some of the points that the member has raised. As I said, we have taken a number of other initiatives. We took part in and supported financially armed forces day, which was a national event in Edinburgh this year that proved to be a resounding success, with the veterans’ village in particular proving to be very popular. We have made it clear to the Ministry of Defence that the Scottish Government will be interested in hosting an MOD hospital unit, should the decision be taken to continue with that model of treatment when the current contracts expire in 2013, and we have met and visited a range of veterans’ organisations up and down the country to hear first-hand about the issues that matter to veterans. We have made a clear commitment to the firm base forum, which is the armed forces led forum that encourages collaborative working between the three services, strategic service delivery bodies and the veterans community. Further, on collaboration, we have not taken policies forward on our own, so I record my appreciation of those who help to inform our thinking. Veterans Scotland has proved to be an invaluable ally, especially because—unlike such organisations in the rest of the UK—it is able to bring together many of the relevant bodies, which makes communication and representation much easier. Another such organisation is the cross-party group on supporting veterans: I am delighted that there is cross-party consensus and willingness to work together to develop ideas and proposals because the welfare of veterans is not, and should not be, a partisan issue. I will welcome ideas and proposals on what further actions are needed. Kevin Stewart mentioned the new military covenant. It is worth saying that what we develop in the future will be consistent with it. I announced at a recent conference on the NHS and the armed forces community that the Scottish Government will produce a road map on the way forward, which will set out our agenda, objectives and priorities for developing the best public, private and third sector support for the armed forces community, including veterans. It will complement the UK military covenant. We will deliver the covenant in Scotland, but we also aim to go further. [Interruption.]

Thank you. We have an acknowledged track record in delivering the service personnel command paper commitments in Scotland, and we will build on that to provide a range of support services that are as wide as possible and that meet the needs and aspirations of Scotland’s veterans community. We will continue to engage with our strategic partners in the NHS, local authorities and the voluntary sector as well as, crucially, with veterans, on what needs to be captured by the road map. We will listen to those people, in particular the veterans, and we will consider any ideas that are suggested. No door is being closed. We have a few ideas of our own already. We are planning a review, in particular to improve information technology systems so that veteran status is better recorded on patient records when the veteran so wishes, and there will be more conferences on sharing best practice among armed forces and veterans champions. We will consult on changes to the legal rules that councils and housing associations must use when deciding who should have priority for their houses, with the aim of giving them greater flexibility in determining their approaches to meeting housing needs in their areas. We will also consider the development of specific support programmes for veterans who are in prison. We will aim to have the road map ready for spring 2012. It is an ambitious programme and it will be testing, but we are determined to drive the agenda forward. Veterans are an asset to Scotland. They have given so much and they still contribute so much in so many walks of life, so they deserve our thanks and gratitude in return. The support and advice services that have been put in place by the Scottish Government, the NHS in Scotland, local authorities and the voluntary sector, and which are specifically designed for veterans in Scotland are good—in fact, they are very good. They continue to improve and to evolve as the dynamic of the individual veteran changes. More needs to be done, and we acknowledge that. It can be done if there is willingness to work together in a spirit of partnership. Second best is not an option for our veterans: they deserve nothing less than the best. This debate is the right one to have and this is the right time to have it. It is useful to hear the views of other people on this subject; it is worth thinking about the words of Maya Angelou, who said: “How important it is for us to recognise and celebrate our heroes and she-roes”. It is important that we remember, but it is also important that we do things. Our actions should back up those words, and that is crucial. John F Kennedy said: “As we express our gratitude, we must never forget that the highest appreciation is not to utter words, but to live by them.” That is what the Scottish Government is seeking to do with veterans. I am delighted that this debate is taking place and I look forward to hearing members’ speeches. I move, That the Parliament notes that, as the annual Remembrance Day commemorations take place across Scotland and as the ultimate sacrifice of those who fought and died in times of war in defence of the country’s freedoms and way of life is remembered with respect and honour, it is also fitting and appropriate to reflect on the needs and aspirations of Scotland’s veterans community, many of whom are injured mentally and physically; notes the initiatives and programmes developed and introduced by the Scottish Government to plan, co-ordinate and deliver support and advice services from the private, public and voluntary sectors for ex-service personnel, including a number of initiatives to strengthen the provision of and access to health, transport and housing services, and welcomes the UK Government’s commitment to the Military Covenant, a commitment that the Scottish Government fully endorses and the principles of which it will continue to build on for the veterans community in Scotland.

I assure Margaret McDougall that we are supportive of that to the extent that we have already asked the UK Government for that kind of consideration. In particular, the armed forces and veterans advocate has met the surgeon general to discuss that point and received some assurances. We are interested in making progress on the matter.

As Mark Griffin said, the debate has been excellent and some very good speeches have been made. It has given us a chance to record our support for veterans and the organisations that support them. Members’ speeches have given colour, texture and voice to that support through the anecdotes and personal experiences that have been related. That has been valuable. I will concentrate on points that were raised in the debate rather than go over the ground that I previously covered. It is worth returning to Richard Simpson’s point about the Government’s response in relation to supported employment and Remploy. He will not find the Scottish Government’s official response on our website, but I assure him that the Deputy First Minister met Maria Miller, who is the UK Minister for Disabled People, to discuss the matter in September. She followed that with a letter to Maria Miller in October, although that covered other issues for vulnerable individuals, too. I assure Richard Simpson that we have responded.

I am happy to look at that statement. We have opposed the cuts to Remploy and the closures of its factories that various Governments have proposed, so I am sure that doing as the member asks will not be a problem. However, if she will forgive me, I will wait until I see the statement before we sign up to it. I am glad that Mark Griffin talked about SaBRE, which no other member mentioned. It is a very worthwhile organisation that does exemplary work to support employers and those who want to serve in the Territorial Army or other reserve forces in relation to the time off that they need. We have had some interesting speeches in which I have received invitations to travel round the country. I am happy to accept the invitation from James Dornan to go to Cathcart old parish church. I was particularly interested in his point about the work that is being done on behalf of former and serving Royal Marines. I am also happy to accept the invitation from Dennis Robertson to visit the charity HorseBack UK, which I think also has a strong Royal Marines connection through its founder. As Dennis Robertson requested, I will write to the DWP on the issues that he raised. Some extremely important points have been made. Derek Mackay and Linda Fabiani talked about the fact that other people often recognise the efforts of those who are close to us before we do. That is an important point and one that I will certainly take on board. We sometimes see that in campaigns for new memorials, such as the one in Plean in my former constituency. Elaine Murray talked about the pardons campaign, in which I was heavily involved as a councillor in the mid-1990s. I was pleased that it achieved some success, although it did not achieve everything that we asked for, not least in relation to commemorating on war memorials those who were shot. However, it is a good step to have the pardons granted. Members—particularly new members—have rightly asked about what more we can do. Part of the purpose of the debate was to consider that issue. Much work has been done by my predecessors, particularly Stewart Maxwell, who was the first minister to have a remit for veterans. In 2007, none of the budgets that we have today existed. There was always support on the issue in the Parliament prior to 2007, but it is difficult to argue within Government for new budgets and activities. The current budgets are a testament to the work of Stewart Maxwell and Alex Neil. It is inevitable that we will go through a developmental process in providing and assisting with services. Part of the purpose of the debate was to get members’ suggestions and to find out what more can be done. It is always difficult for charities to have to ration their support because they have to live within their resources, and the Government is no different.

I am happy to take that on board—we will consider that. More active support is now being given at devolved level, although it can be difficult—it is sometimes a bit like trying to catch fish and having to put the net everywhere. One reason that I perceive for that is that we are not in control of when veterans appear or the nature of the support that they receive prior to that. Several members commented on resettlement in the armed forces, which has been pretty poor for a long time, although it is improving. A big difference can be made by properly preparing people for the move from an institution to civilian life and providing the additional support that they need as a result of experiences that they have undergone in the military. For someone in that situation, many decisions suddenly have to be made, such as those on healthcare and accessing housing services. The process of accessing services can be intimidating for somebody who has had such things taken care of for a long time. I accept that there is more for us to do, and I take on board the points that members have made. Tavish Scott spoke interestingly about his experience and that of his family, and Liz Smith’s point was spot on. My children go to Alva academy in Clackmannanshire, and as part of a project pupils are going to the battlefields of Europe. I watched the video of my children’s visit. Some people have said—and perhaps sometimes with justification—that young people can feel removed from something that happened so long ago. However, when young people see the ages on the gravestone, it moves them and drives home the issue. As well as the 17-year-olds, we know that 16-year-olds served in the great war. Some were even younger. Schools take an open approach. They not only teach the history but try to make it meaningful. As a result, there seems to have been a cultural change. For many years in the United States, we have been able to see a difference in their way of treating their veterans. We can go down Veterans Expressway in Florida, for example. If veterans want, they can go to all the various theme parks at reduced rates. They can access all sorts of facilities, public or otherwise, if they have a veterans card. Americans always seem to have been able to make the mental distinction that Jamie Hepburn mentioned. To put it mildly, conflicts such as the one in Vietnam have not enjoyed complete public support, but Americans seem to be able to separate the ideas. Politicians send servicepeople to wars, and those servicepeople have no choice but to go—and they deserve support for what they experience. A number of people have mentioned Erskine. Derek Mackay, the First Minister and I had a very interesting visit there—especially our conversation with a former Royal Marine in his wheelchair. I do not want to obsess about the Royal Marines, but the new chief executive of Erskine is an ex-Royal Marine himself, and I extend to him a word of warning and sympathy. As I have learned since being appointed as a transport minister, people can expect ex-marines to have superhuman powers to deal with all the problems that can arise. I wish him the best of luck. Erskine is a superb organisation. Recently, Christina McKelvie and I were able to go to the Erskine ball. Through the generosity of the people who turned up, more than £100,000 was raised for Erskine’s work. If anyone talks to people from Erskine for any length of time, they will realise how much the organisation has to raise every day from charitable contributions to continue its work. Its work is valued and it deserves support from all members. It has attracted such support: in the previous session, Trish Godman, Hugh Henry and others were involved in receptions in the Parliament. The changing footprint of the armed forces in Scotland over the next few years will have repercussions for the way in which we organise services. More service personnel will return to this country from overseas, bases in Germany will close, and there will be the effects of the strategic defence and security review. Having more serving personnel here in Scotland means that more people will become veterans in due course. In my experience, many serving personnel who come here from elsewhere in the UK stay and make their lives here. Why not? We offer such a wonderful place to live. However, greater demand will be placed on our infrastructure, services and communities—but I welcome that challenge. We can and should continue to improve our planning and delivery of support and advice to veterans. Most will access goods and services in the same way as everyone else, but a few will need a little extra helping hand. We owe them that. To add to the roll call of people who have done sterling work, I would add Dundee City Council—and this relates to points made by Elaine Murray. In its allocation process for housing, the entire length of time that somebody has served in the military counts towards points. Other councils are also considering such a system. Perhaps that is testament to the changing culture around those who have served in our armed forces. It is important that we mention the idea of remembrance. As I have said in a previous debate, for people in the armed forces who may face the ultimate peril, when that fear becomes acute the idea that what they have done will not be forgotten is very important to them. Nor should it be forgotten that they defend the freedoms that we sometimes take for granted—a point that a number of members have made. In recognising that, I asked myself the question put by George Canning: “When our perils are past, shall our gratitude sleep?” The answer to that question of course has to be no. If that idea informs the way that we support veterans and if all members think in that way, I am sure that we will do right by veterans in future.

I acknowledge the member’s long-standing interest in the issue, which began long before he was elected to the Parliament. I assure him that the Scottish Government wants an expansion of direct ferry connections from Scotland to mainland Europe and we are therefore keen to engage with any operator that proposes a new ferry service between Scotland and Norway. However, any such service would have to operate on a commercially viable basis, and that is a matter for any prospective ferry operator to consider.

I assure the member that we are aware of the reported interest in establishing a Scotland-Norway passenger ferry service and we are keen to work with any ferry operator that wants to introduce a new route. However, we have not to date received an approach on that. We are interested in increasing direct ferry connections from Scotland to mainland Europe, but any decision would be a matter for the commercial ferry industry, based on commercial viability. Fuel costs and vessel configuration would be key factors to be considered. The strict European Union state-aid rules limit any possible funding by the Scottish Government to freight mode-shift grants, which are subject to budget availability. Grants are dependent on the transfer of freight from road to water, which is unlikely to be significant on a Scotland-Norway route. However, VisitScotland would certainly be prepared to work with any ferry operator to ensure that a new service was marketed to potential customers who were looking to come to Scotland.

Lewis Macdonald’s question is disingenuous. He knows full well why that fund could not continue and what the issues are in terms of European regulation. I note what he says about the viability and increasing popularity of travel between Norway and Scotland, which is testament to the resilience of the Norwegian economy and shows what an independent country can do for its people.

The Scottish Government wrote to the UK Government in December 2010 expressing deep concern about the cumulative impact on Scotland of the cuts in housing benefit, providing a comprehensive impact assessment. Although only 100 or so households in Scotland will be affected by the four-bedroom cap, overall the first tranche of reforms could lead to 55,000 people in Scotland losing on average £40 a month. Subsequent cuts in housing benefit for the social housing sector could adversely affect another 95,000 people. The Scottish Government has repeatedly expressed its concern to the UK Government about these matters, and will continue to do so.

As Fiona McLeod suggests, landlords will still be expected to comply with overcrowding legislation, regardless of the levels of housing benefit that are paid. The UK Government reforms, however, will make it more difficult for families to manage on reduced benefits in appropriately sized accommodation. We estimate that the four-bedroom restriction and cap will have a severe impact on about 100 or so households in Scotland with average losses in excess of £200 a month. Councils will find it very difficult to provide alternative accommodation of the right size, so we will continue to work jointly with councils and other stakeholders through our advisory group to identify households and groups that are at risk.

In December 2008, the Edinburgh-Fife-Aberdeen timetable package introduced an hourly service between Inverurie and Aberdeen, which improved capacity along the route. In addition, as part of its franchise obligations, ScotRail monitors passenger numbers to ensure that it utilises its train fleet and resources to minimise overcrowding. We have commissioned Network Rail to examine the feasibility, cost and deliverability of the options that are contained in the Aberdeen to Inverness rail improvement study to accommodate the anticipated growth in passenger numbers on that route.

As I explained previously, it is down to ScotRail to ensure—within the franchise agreement for which it is responsible—that it provides sufficient capacity to accommodate the service demand that exists. That would, as Alison McInnes rightly says, include increases in growth. The issue is worth thinking about as we enter the consultation process for the next franchise, in order to ensure that the points that Alison McInnes raises are considered. It is for ScotRail to address the issue, but I am happy to take it up with the company and get back to Alison McInnes.

The regional transport partnerships have the ability to lobby with regard to the rail industry, and they can lobby Scottish ministers to improve rail services to and within their own areas. They have a role to play in responding to rail consultations and in providing a regional strategic view, and they can, at their own initiative, undertake research and appraisals. On Dennis Robertson’s second point, we are very conscious of congestion in the north-east. He mentioned the A96, and he will be aware of the consultation that is soon to begin on the A96 Inveramsay bridge scheme, which involves upgrading the A96 trunk road to accommodate the free flow of traffic. The scheme will remove the need for existing traffic signal controls, remove congestion and reduce delays for road users. It will also—to return to rail—reduce the likelihood of bridge strikes by increasing the headroom. The Government is taking those initiatives seriously as part of a long-awaited project that we are progressing.

Following the Scottish Government’s announcement of spending plans for the next three years, funding allocations to local authorities are being considered, and discussions are taking place with stakeholders on the best way to operate a comprehensive affordable housing supply programme. When local authority allocations are known, City of Edinburgh Council’s strategic housing investment plan, which is due in February, will specify a planned number of homes by tenure over a five-year period and will be used to plan the number of social rented homes in the city.

To be perfectly honest, on both those questions it is not possible at this time to specify that level of detail. I have said that funding allocations to local authorities are being considered and that process should be concluded relatively soon. Our commitment on council housing is for 5,000 council houses across Scotland over the next five years. Edinburgh is obviously free to make a bid in that process. Sarah Boyack is right to say that there is a challenge for the city of Edinburgh, as there is elsewhere. However, I think she will know that the level of investment that she mentioned—if it was to be for 16,000 houses—is not nearly possible with the allocations of money that we receive from Westminster, nor is it possible for the Government to address long-term issues overnight; that has to be done over a period of time. However, as the cabinet secretary made clear, we are investing around £600 million over the next three years. In the course of this year, with the money that will be added to by other sources, we are talking about more than £400 million being invested in housing across Scotland, which shows that we are serious about trying to address some of these long-term issues.

Of course, it was for housing associations and others to make bids for the innovation and investment fund. It is true that we have given the commitment that two thirds of the 30,000 houses that we intend to build over the next five years will be social housing. We have made that commitment and it is a very strong commitment, given the budget situation we are in. Obviously, there will be further detailed discussions with the City of Edinburgh Council. As I have just said, it has to produce its strategic housing and investment plan, which is due in February and will specify tenure as well as the number of socially rented homes in the city over a five-year period. Perhaps I will be able to give the member more clarity once that has happened.

In 2011-12, the Scottish Government will allocate £7.458 million to local authorities for investment in cycling, walking and safer streets projects. However, it is up to authorities to prioritise investment to meet local needs.

We do not hold that information centrally, as it is up to local authorities to determine how to meet local needs and to invest accordingly. However, councils currently receive a ring-fenced cycling, walking and safer streets capital grant from the Scottish Government. We ask that they spend at least 36 per cent and preferably 50 per cent of that on cycling projects and cycling promotion. In 2011-12, around £2.68 million should contribute to achieving the 10 per cent vision in the cycling action plan for Scotland. Local authorities may also access funding that is allocated to Sustrans and Cycling Scotland for safe cycle routes, national cycle network links, bikeability Scotland cycle training, and awareness-raising campaigns for drivers to look out for young cyclists, especially during school-run times.

This debate provides us with the opportunity to update members on the many measures that have been put in place to enhance Scotland’s resilience for the forthcoming winter. The winter of 2009-10 was the most severe for more than 30 years, and December 2010 was the coldest for more than a century. Since then, agencies across the public, private and voluntary sectors have taken significant steps to improve their resilience and that of the people who live and work in Scotland. Whatever the winter brings, building Scotland’s resilience to the consequences of severe weather is a key priority. Our approach to resilience is to identify and assess the risks and, where possible, to take or to encourage preventative action to reduce their impacts. We can hope for a mild winter, but we must prepare for a severe one. More than half the people in a survey by the British Red Cross this summer said that they were more concerned about the impacts of severe weather than they were about any other emergency, and that they did not feel that they were adequately prepared. The Scottish Government is responding to that by offering better guidance and support in the lead-up to winter, and a higher-than-ever level of preparation across the public sector. Last year, the people of Scotland mucked in and helped out. I have no doubt that that spirit will be there again this year if it is needed, but we must prepare by doing more than just asking for that. We, as a Government, and all the public sector agencies must be prepared. On Monday, the Scottish Government began its ready for winter public information campaign. Individuals and communities are stronger when they help themselves and each other. This year, we are making it easier for people and communities to take their own actions to prepare. Our first national resilience campaign has been developed in partnership with the British Red Cross and a wide range of other organisations. Statutory agencies have a duty to respond, but they cannot be everywhere or do everything. Winter—no matter how prolonged or severe it is—should be no surprise to us, in Scotland. Everyone can take small, low-cost and sensible actions to be more resilient in their workplaces, at home, in their cars, in their neighbourhoods or wherever they happen to find themselves in the winter. The range of activities and resources that make up our ready for winter campaign, coupled with the relaunch of the ready Scotland website this week, will help to raise awareness of the simple steps that people can take and of the support that is available to them. The Scottish Government has put in place significant measures to help households that will struggle to heat their homes this winter. They include the £12.5 million that was recently announced to fund insulation schemes across Scotland; the £30 million investment this year in the energy assistance package; £2.5 million to help households to replace inefficient boilers; and our commitment to extend to carers eligibility for our fuel poverty programme. An additional £5 million will ensure that the EAP delivers support for hard-pressed households through the cold weather that we might face in the coming months. Overall, our energy assistance package has offered advice to more than 200,000 households, has helped to reduce annual fuel bills by almost £12 million since 2009, and has delivered heating measures to more than 21,000 homes. Since last winter, the Government and responders have prepared together, planned together and worked together to ensure that we are as ready as we can be to minimise the impact of severe weather. The winter weather review group, which the Scottish Government convened in the summer, published its report on Monday. It lists a series of actions that have been taken across the public, private and voluntary sectors and a range of services to improve resilience—particularly that of our critical national infrastructure. For example, the Met Office has improved its national severe weather warning service and we have invested more than £500,000 to launch the Scottish Environment Protection Agency floodline warnings direct service to help to improve information to the public with updates on various platforms. We have improved the operation of the Government’s emergency arrangements by reviewing the experience of last winter. That has included revising the staffing and training arrangements for the Scottish Government resilience room and developing a new approach to sharing information between strategic co-ordinating groups and SGoRR, when it is active. I stress that, although we are more prepared than ever, some disruption might still be unavoidable if severe weather hits. Disruption can happen at any time—we have just to look at the M25 today for evidence of that. The challenge for us is how we respond to severe weather incidents and how quickly we recover from them. I will outline some of the key steps that we have taken in that regard. Transport Scotland has prepared for the coming winter with additional equipment and improved information for people who are on the move. From 1 November, 23 additional gritters will patrol the most strategically important routes before and during the morning peak when there is a risk of snow or ice and will add to our ploughing capability during snowstorms. Specialist equipment—an icebreaker, footway snowblowers and inverted-V ploughs—is being brought to Scotland to increase our winter capability. Salt stocks are obviously fundamental to a successful winter on our roads, so as of 1 November more salt will be stocked in Scotland than was used over the whole of last winter. Transport Scotland will publish, on the basis of the daily forecast, the gritting plans for trunk road operating companies. We also have 70,000 litres of alternative de-icers that work in the severest conditions—for example, below 7° below freezing—when road salt becomes less effective. Next week, Traffic Scotland will launch the trial of an internet radio service, which will provide 24/7 national traffic and travel information bulletins about the strategic motorway and trunk road networks. Information will be updated three times each hour during peak travel times and twice hourly off-peak, and the frequency of updates will be increased when there is extreme winter weather. The service will be available on computers and mobile devices, and via an automated message service on the traffic customer care line. We have also set up the voluntary strategic alliance on winter tyres. This year, the industry has agreed to ensure an increased supply of winter tyres. The freight industry has rightly expressed concerns about its portrayal last winter as being the cause of many road closures. Since then, we have worked hard with the police and freight partners to develop procedures for proactive management of heavy goods vehicles and other vehicles during severe weather conditions. Guidance has been developed, which will be supplemented by a freight Scotland hotline, so that HGV drivers can inform Traffic Scotland of traction problems that they experience on the network. That will help to inform the operating companies’ treatment priorities. A similar service will be developed for bus operators. We have secured a £2.2 million package of investment by First ScotRail for winter improvements to the railways. There will be investment in modifications to trains, and there will be equipment improvements to make trains more reliable; for example, in the purchasing of additional plant and equipment, including improved gritting equipment for platforms and car parks; and in the provision of more permanent facilities for de-icing carriages, such as the train skirts—or kilts, as they were called last year—the polytunnels that were developed last winter, and high-pressure hot water de-icing equipment at nine main depots. Network Rail has also enhanced its infrastructure by, for example, improving the moving points at key junctions, using remote monitoring of points heaters and providing protective blankets for points on rural lines, and investing in more four-by-four vehicles for operational and maintenance staff. Perhaps the road and rail difficulties of staff in getting to work during times of severe weather are not commonly appreciated. The trunk road operating companies and Network Rail have taken action to ensure that staff can get to work.

There has been strong collaboration between Network Rail, ScotRail, Transport Scotland and the Government. The £2.2 million investment is by First ScotRail, and there is different investment that will help winter resilience, some of which is from the Government and some of which is from Network Rail. However, that has all been done at Network Rail’s own hand. The rail industry recognises the importance of accurate and timely information, and we have worked with the rail regulator to raise the bar for the quality of passenger information: members will recall that that was an issue last year. Furthermore, Network Rail, in conjunction with rail freight hauliers, has committed to maintaining clear rail routes for critical freight-train movements to ensure that sufficient priority is given to the movement of vital commodities, including fuel and food, by rail. Airports are a vital asset in our transport connectivity. Earlier this year, I met airport operators to review the response to last winter’s severe weather. They have all taken steps to strengthen their preparedness. That has included investment in new equipment. I had hoped to go to Edinburgh airport to see that yesterday, but people there have had one or two other things on their minds, so the meeting did not go ahead. However, I met a previous managing director of Edinburgh airport, Kevin Brown. Obviously, that airport faces the same question that the Scottish Government and others face: whether to invest substantially in new capital equipment that might not be used—which can attract criticism—or to ensure that there is enough resilience. It has taken the latter course, and it is right to have done so. We have liaised with ports throughout Scotland to ensure that they have built on their well-established plans, which helped them to play a key role during last winter. The majority of our ports have invested in early maintenance or have purchased equipment to ensure that they can repeat that role. Most notably, they have invested in the import and onward shipping of strategic salt supplies and the running of lifeline ferry links to our island communities. As I mentioned, we expect to have as much salt in stock by the end of this month as we used during the whole period last year. Obviously, as the transport minister, I have a role in relation to transport, but winter resilience does not respect portfolio boundaries. The continued provision of essential services to those who need them most must remain our top priority. This year, we are working with care providers and suppliers to ensure that those who are in need are brought quickly to the attention of those who can provide assistance. In consultation with our resilience partners, we are developing a protocol that outlines the steps that local authorities and service providers should follow when considering persons and customers who are at risk, especially those who are at risk of being cut off from electricity or gas supplies or of running out of heating oil. The protocol will direct activity primarily at the local level, but it will inform a wider Scottish response, if that is required. Many sectors played vital roles in keeping communities running last winter and in supporting essential services. Here in Edinburgh, for example, the military helped nurses and care workers to reach people who were cut off by snow, and mountain rescue teams did the same in other areas. Land Rover lent four-wheel drive vehicles to the Red Cross, which enabled it to reach and help vulnerable people, and neighbours checked up on those who needed a bit more help. We will continue to support such partnerships where we can. We have published new advice for community groups that wish to work together to build resilience in their areas. We have developed a national directory of third sector organisations that can provide help and support when major incidents occur. Our ready for winter campaign sets out the simple steps that we can all take to be more prepared. To ensure that members are kept up to date, Transport Scotland is today writing to members to invite them to a presentation by representatives of the trunk road operating companies—Amey, BEAR Scotland and Scotland TranServ—on Wednesday. That will happen in the Parliament, in room P1.02. Transport Scotland has worked closely with the operating companies to ensure improved winter preparedness. I attended the same presentation from the trunk road operating companies yesterday. It is impressive to hear about the amount of work that those companies have done and the lessons that have been learned since last year. At a time of severe economic challenges and environmental change, we must demonstrate that Scotland’s infrastructure and services are ready to withstand severe winter weather. Obviously, such weather can affect people’s personal plans and lives, but it can also have a major impact on the economy. We want to ensure that we limit that impact as much as possible. We believe that through our preparations we are ready for this winter and that the people of Scotland are, too. We believe that they have taken heed of the idea that we should hope for the best, but plan for the worst of severe weather. We all want a ready and capable Scotland. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the major winter preparedness campaign launched on 24 October 2011; commends the Red Cross, responder agencies and the broad range of partners involved for working together to stress the importance of planning ahead for winter; supports the activities that are taking place during Ready for Winter? week, which highlight the simple steps that people can take to be more prepared; acknowledges that, although Scotland’s weather is unpredictable, government, responders and a range of public, private and voluntary sector partners have taken significant steps to be more prepared for severe weather this winter, including holding a major winter planning exercise, Polar Storm, last month and that improved winter planning is captured in the report of the Winter Weather Review Group, and acknowledges that preparedness will be an ongoing process and that everyone must be resilient in preparing for winter.

I completely agree with the member. However, one way of getting round incurring needless expenditure to meet potential eventualities is to make best use of existing plant. The member might be interested to know that much of the plant that is used to cut roadside hedges is being adapted this winter for snowploughing and other activities. Instead of spending a lot of money on new equipment, we are making the most of the equipment that we have.

I can reassure the member that, last year, there was not a single case of a local authority that needed salt not being able to take it from the national reserve. It is up to local authorities—they must make their own decisions on the priorities in their area. We have ensured that that reserve is always there, so no local authorities should run short of salt, especially given that we have more salt in stock this year than we had last year—in fact, we might have more in stock than we used during the whole of last year.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is worth pointing out that, last year, we did exactly what the member wants—far from passing the buck, we passed £15 million from our hard-pressed budgets to local authorities. The budget that councils have been given this year represents a higher share of our total budget than was allocated under the previous Administration. That demonstrates that we are aware of the pressures on local authorities and are trying to help them with those.

It is worth pointing out that the salt that local authorities hold is entirely a matter for them. They procure it as they see fit, and they are right to procure it early if they can get it for a better price. We have worked with local authorities on what is called the salt cell, which is a strategic reserve that can be used to help out if they happen to fall short. However, the matter is one that is entirely for the local authority, as is the level of priority that local authorities attach to each individual road. The member can take some comfort from the fact that, throughout Scotland, local authorities and the Government have enough salt in stock already, bought at good prices in the summer—more than we had to use during the entire winter period last year.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. As I tried to outline earlier in the debate, Scotland is striving to be as prepared as possible for the severe winter weather that we may have. I have tried to describe some of the measures that have been put in place by the Scottish Government, responders and others in the private and voluntary sectors to help Scotland be more resilient should we face another winter of severe weather. I will try to outline one or two other measures, but I will also deal with various points that members raised during the debate. I think that Jamie Hepburn felt that exercise polar storm was too dramatic a title. We thought about calling it exercise snowy sleep, but that perhaps would not have got the same attention as exercise polar storm. It was a major winter planning exercise that took place in September and brought together nearly 200 delegates from the emergency services and the public, private and voluntary sectors to assess our ability to respond during prolonged severe weather. It was an extremely useful exercise. I think that there were four requests in Anne McTaggart’s speech for additional funding for various things, and Rhoda Grant made the same point. I take the approach that if an Opposition party member’s suggestion comes with an indication of where the money should come from, or even some idea of how much money is being talked about, we should take the suggestion seriously. If the suggestion is not made in that way, it should not be taken seriously. A member quite rightly made a jibe about cuts that are too fast and too deep, but it is worth pointing out that it was a Labour chancellor who said that we would get tougher cuts than we had under Margaret Thatcher, which is what we are experiencing. We cannot respond to every request for additional funding.

We will see how many times Labour spends that budget during the next five years. Time will tell. Lewis Macdonald made an important point about community councils. We are committed to supporting community councils so that they can make a full and active contribution to the communities that they represent. We will consider how best we can support them to operate in future, as part of the wider community empowerment agenda. As Lewis Macdonald said, community councils in the Borders, with support from the local authority, are developing community emergency plans, based on Scottish Government guidance, and are playing a key role in building community resilience. We will encourage such an approach. Lewis Macdonald raised a point about insurance. As he said, many community councils have their own insurance. We are working with the industry on the issue and we have reached an agreement with Zurich Municipal, which, as members know, is a large-scale insurer of public organisations, including a large number of community councils, that community resilience activity will be covered under the terms of its standard insurance. That should give comfort to community councils. Such activity is what we mean by Government support for community councils, because of course their primary relationship is with local authorities, through their schemes of establishment.

I reiterate that the primary link is between local authorities and community councils, as is set out in statute, although we will provide support and encouragement where we can do so. On Lewis Macdonald’s point about farmers, Transport Scotland is having on-going discussions and I think that tomorrow a meeting will take place in Perth at which we will hear from Moray Council on best practice in relation to working with partners. Transport Scotland will have further discussions with the National Farmers Union Scotland if authorities identify a need for national criteria. A great deal of work has been done in that regard. Rhoda Grant made a good point about the need to ensure that only properly-qualified people work the plant. Jackson—sometimes Jason—Carlaw made a number of points. I welcome his positive words. Indeed, I welcome the positive words from members of all parties, although I am under no illusion about how quickly they will dissipate if we have a cold winter and things do not go to plan. Jackson Carlaw said that he fears that given that we have had an election since last winter people might have taken their eye off the ball. It is worth remembering that since the election we have experienced the highest-ever winds in May and, in August, some of the heaviest rainfall that we have ever experienced. We have also had a volcanic ash cloud and the remnants of hurricane Katia. Therefore, all the people who are involved have had to stay very much on top of the matter—not that they would not have done so anyway, but the conditions have meant that we have continually needed to consider issues to do with resilience. Dick Lyle talked about the strategic placement of gritters and grit bins. He might remember that in the six-point plan that we adopted last year we addressed precisely that point in relation to our responsibilities on the trunk road network—one example is the rise at Harthill, which is not far from Dick Lyle’s area. We have put grit on site on the strategic trunk road network, so that we can get the roads gritted quickly. I take Dick Lyle’s point that local authorities might want to adapt the approach for their purposes. Someone said that there should be a minister for pavements, rightly drawing attention to the fact that pavements were a problem for many people last year. As I said, we have the salt stocks that we need. There are other materials, such as magnesium chloride and Eco-Thaw, which work far better than salt at low temperatures. It is open to local authorities to get those materials, although they are much more expensive than salt. The materials keep pavements clear of ice for longer periods; they also break up hard-packed ice. That is an option but, by and large, pavements are the responsibility of local authorities. Where they abut the trunk road network, we have provided community self-help kits to a number of local communities, especially in rural areas. The people will have their pavements cleared and those areas will be gritted, but that cannot happen everywhere at the same time, so community self-help kits have been issued, which have been very much welcomed. Margaret McCulloch raised the idea of working closely with local authorities. We are doing that. She mentioned South Lanarkshire Council specifically. Amey told us yesterday that it has a commitment with South Lanarkshire Council to enhance communications and supply and to provide mutual aid when required. That happens in Aberdeenshire, where some functions of the trunk road operating company are carried out by the local authority and vice versa, and it also happens in Dumfries and Galloway. That should continue. Last year, we made a number of offers of assistance even to the airports, and we had the trunk roads next to Edinburgh airport cleared. There were also problems with clearing the runway, but the plant that we have cannot be used on runways. We regularly ask ourselves how we can help other organisations. There was a lot of discussion about the threat of litigation if someone clears a path and somebody else slips. Ready Scotland advice makes it clear that that is extremely unlikely, as Graeme Dey helpfully mentioned. Even if someone were to be sued, the vast majority of household insurance policies would cover them for that eventuality. If people are insured, that should take care of that. One or two people were trying to put that story about last year, perhaps through their own self-interest or in the interest of the legal profession. However, it should never be a matter for legal reproach if someone takes action to help out a neighbour. I understand that that was a concern, but that addresses that. Jackson Carlaw spoke about the variable message signs that are mounted on gantries. The VMSs in Scotland can be used for other purposes when there are no emergency messages to put up. I do not know whether that is exactly what he was referring to. He made a good point about the need to ensure that the language that is used in VMS messages is as clear and understandable as possible. We do not live in a police state and cannot tell people not to go out, but we can make the dangers of going out as clear as possible and we will do that. This year, we have refined the language that we are using to make sure that that happens.

We are also making the information as consistent as possible with the Met Office’s advice. Although well intentioned, differing advice can be confusing. There are now some good leaflets, such as “Drive Safely This Winter”, which give good advice to drivers on how to go about their business. It cannot be expected that everybody will have that information. Also, as several members have mentioned, before the last two years we had a long period of mild winters during which people got out of good habits. The leaflet “Drive Safely This Winter”, published by Safer Scotland, should be extremely useful for that purpose. Many members talked about how much voluntary organisations and individuals did last year, much of which went unsung. For example, the trunk road customer care staff at Airdrie, who worked at the time for an organisation called beCogent, stayed behind late at night or worked through the night on a voluntary, unpaid basis on a number of occasions. They continued their jobs through the night because they were well aware of the predicament of some people who were using the roads. Such selfless dedication was evident across the piece and, as members have made clear, we should do everything that we can to encourage that. The last issue that I will address is that of my being a poster boy. I do not know whether I was surprised to be Helen Eadie’s poster boy or disappointed not to be Christine Grahame’s poster boy. However, these days, I am quite happy with anything that I am called that involves the word “boy”. It may not be evident to members that Kenny MacAskill played an important role in the resilience last year and convened many of the SGoRR meetings. The responsibility that he has for the police is central to resilience, as it is the police who close roads, which is why he and I are sharing the responsibilities. I completely refute the terrible accusations about his sartorial taste that were made by Jackson Carlaw. We will talk to him about that after the debate. Kenny MacAskill and I, along with the ministerial team, will do everything that we can to prepare Scotland as well as possible for the coming winter.

I am delighted to lead this debate on housing, which is my first such debate as Minister for Housing and Transport. I intend to use the debate to point out a number of challenges that face housing in Scotland; to set out the Government’s housing strategy; and to update the Parliament on the progress that we are making on delivering the strategy. Housing has been a cause and a casualty of the global financial crisis. Unsustainable lending practices by the banks and unsustainable promotion of outright home ownership, including the right to buy, contributed to economic volatility, put households at risk and undermined our objective of sustainable economic growth. The credit crunch and lack of mortgage availability for first-time buyers not only introduced barriers to home ownership but put housing developers out of business and people out of work. The Government has acted quickly by accelerating capital spend on affordable housing; kick-starting a new generation of council housing; expanding access to shared equity for first-time buyers; and introducing, through the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Act 2010, new protections for home owners who are at risk of losing their homes. Although private housing construction fell, the number of social housing completions was higher than in any other Scottish parliamentary session, which kept thousands of people in work and helped to house those in need. Following the financial crisis, we face a number of challenges. Demand for social and other forms of affordable housing remains high. First-time buyers face a tough challenge to save a deposit. Local authorities are making good progress on meeting the 2012 homelessness target, but our efforts to achieve that jointly with our partners are undermined by United Kingdom Government cuts in housing benefit. It is essential that we improve the energy efficiency of our stock if we are to meet our climate change targets and help those who have to pay large energy bills. Some people now pay more for their energy than they do for their mortgage or rent. A further challenge is that the number of households is growing every year and our population is ageing. Achieving the right mix of housing is essential if we are to meet people’s needs. Despite the UK Government’s drastic cuts of about 36 per cent over four years to Scotland’s capital investment, our strategy is to tackle the challenges by making our funds work harder to deliver affordable housing; encouraging housing associations, developers and local authorities to work together to deliver housing that meets their communities’ needs; and making better use of the existing housing stock and improving choice and quality for households. I believe that we are leading the way in developing new ideas. The award-winning national housing trust initiative is delivering hundreds of affordable rented homes and supporting hundreds of jobs for very little taxpayers’ money.

As I have said previously in the Parliament, and as the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has said to the Parliament and in committee, our target is to have 30,000 affordable homes over the next five years, 5,000 of which will be council houses and at least two thirds of which will be socially affordable housing. That is not a final figure, of course—we hope to exceed it if at all possible. The innovation and investment fund allowed housing associations and others in the sector to develop alternative approaches to the funding and delivery of new affordable homes. Those initiatives are evidence of the progress that we are making in implementing our strategy. Increasing the supply of affordable homes remains our top priority and is a vital part of our efforts to build a better and fairer Scotland, to address homelessness and affordability issues and to continue to regenerate our most deprived neighbourhoods.

I am not sure that I agree with the premise of the question that the supply of socially affordable houses is plummeting. I have just said that at least two thirds of the 30,000 houses that we intend to have over the next five years will be social rented housing. That is vastly in excess of the figures that previous Administrations delivered. The supply of those houses is not plummeting. The supply of affordable homes is increasing, it remains our top priority and it is a vital part of our efforts. I have no doubt that we will deliver our target to have 30,000 affordable homes completed by the end of this session. To come back to the other part of Malcolm Chisholm’s question, despite the cuts in capital spend for housing, we have prioritised more than £600 million for new housing over the period in question. That commitment enabled me to announce a doubling of investment in new affordable homes through the investment and innovation fund. The £111 million that we are committing through that fund will lever in more than £283 million in additional investment. Combining that money with the equivalent provision through Glasgow City Council and the City of Edinburgh Council will deliver 4,310 new affordable homes, more than 70 per cent of which will be for social rent. Many people doubted housing associations’ ability and capacity to deliver that kind of housing at £40,000 grant per unit, but the sector has risen magnificently to the challenge, and has drawn on its ability to tap into new sources of funding. Local authorities in Scotland are now building almost as many council houses as the rest of the UK combined, and private developers are taking advantage of guarantees offered through the national housing trust and our support for shared equity, which are providing lifelines for construction businesses throughout Scotland and homes that Scotland needs. I underline the point that, as a result of the drastic cut in the capital budget, we are forgoing employing more people who would pay taxes rather than receive benefits. Investing now in capital in housing and transport means creating economic assets for the future at a cost that will be hard to replicate when the economy picks up again. This is the time to invest in capital. Our record is there for all to see. Under the four years of the first Scottish National Party Government, more than 27,000 affordable homes were completed. That is a third more than the four-year total under the previous Administration. More than 19,000 of our total of 27,000 affordable homes were for social rent. As we look ahead, we are confident that, together with our partners in the housing sector, we have the ideas, capacity and commitment to keep Scotland building. Obviously, investment in new supply dominates the discussion about housing, but we also need to make better use of existing homes. We have already said that we will look to limit further the right to buy to preserve social housing stock, and we will soon consult on proposals to allow councils to charge a council tax levy on long-term empty properties. Empty properties are a wasted resource. We aim to introduce legislation next year to allow councils to charge the levy from April 2013 to help to provide more revenue for them to use for affordable housing. The levy will also help to reduce homelessness by releasing more houses as owners rent or sell their empty properties. Our focus on alleviating the causes of homelessness stands in stark contrast to the actions of the UK Government and its swingeing housing benefit cuts, which—make no bones about it—will force people out of their existing homes. I have made my concerns about the reforms crystal clear to UK ministers, as the cabinet secretary has on a number of occasions. Prevention and planning are important in preparing for the challenge of an older population. The Government supports older people’s aspirations to live independently in their own homes for as long as possible, but significant demographic and financial challenges mean that we must find new ways to achieve those aspirations. I plan to publish a national strategy for housing for older people in December that will set out a clear vision for housing for older people and what needs to be put in place to achieve it. With the challenge of reducing greenhouse gases and the rise in energy prices, it is essential that we build houses to the highest standards of energy efficiency. Progressive increases in our rigorous building standards are ensuring that new houses will be near zero carbon but, with the expectation that more than 80 per cent of current housing will still be in existence by 2050, improvements to the existing stock are also vital. We are tackling fuel poverty head on with an increase of more than 30 per cent in funding to support fuel poverty and energy efficiency programmes.

Those points were well covered yesterday in the statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment. Our programme is progressive and it matches the need that is out there. Given some of the things that are causing difficulties, such as the energy price increases by different companies and failure to get support from Westminster, I think that the programme of fuel poverty support is realistic and ambitious. I was about to say that we are also providing £50 million over the course of this session for a warm homes fund, so Patrick Harvie should consider in the round all the actions that we are taking to support communities that are affected by fuel poverty. We saw very big increases in energy prices over the summer, which is why the First Minister has called for a summit with the energy companies. The UK Government’s green deal and energy company obligation will change support for energy efficiency measures, which is why the cabinet secretary announced yesterday a review of our fuel poverty strategy. I have made clear our commitment to deliver 30,000 affordable homes during this session of Parliament. It will be interesting to see whether other parties would match or even seek to exceed that commitment by changing budgets. Our commitment is to deliver 30,000 affordable homes during this session. Our approach and our priorities are shaped by the fact that Scotland is facing a period of almost unprecedented austerity as a result of the spending cuts imposed by the Westminster Government. Councils, housing associations and developers should be congratulated on rising to those challenges and using their creativity and innovation to deliver much-needed affordable homes. I move, That the Parliament recognises the difficulties that the current economic climate presents for those in need of affordable housing; believes, in light of the severe constraints on public expenditure, that this challenge can be addressed only through the development of innovative and creative measures to provide a range of high-quality sustainable homes that people can afford and that meet their needs; notes with approval initiatives such as the National Housing Trust and the Investment and Innovation Fund; welcomes the willingness of local authorities, registered social landlords and developers to participate in these initiatives, and congratulates them on working together innovatively to deliver the maximum number of affordable homes in these testing circumstances.

Will the member give way?

First, I point out that Shelter asked for around £610 million in the budget and just over £600 million is being provided. Lewis Macdonald said that he will be tiresome and go on about this. I have no doubt about his ability to do so but, with regard to his consistent point that the budget is too low, can he tell us how much he would put into the housing budget and where he would take the money from? It is a fair question and people deserve an answer to it.

On that last point, will the member acknowledge that our shared equity initiatives do exactly that by freeing up housing stock that can be used by other people? Can he also say in what sense we are asking RSLs and councils to do our job for us and how that criticism fits with his ideology? I presume from that that he wants the Government to build houses, which is a strange idea for a Conservative.

Perhaps Hugh Henry would like to say what level of grant he would allocate to housing associations. He asks which budgets will be cut, but we have laid out our budgets exactly. Is it not dishonest and disingenuous of him not to tell us what he would do?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

It is too early to assess the full benefits, but traffic volumes on the M8 between Ballieston and Charing Cross have already dropped by between 19,000 and 26,000 vehicles a day since the opening of the M74.

There is no question but that housing remains a priority, as we have just heard in the previous debate. We have made a commitment to build 30,000 affordable houses in the next five years, which is about 10 per cent more than we built in the previous session. That demonstrates that, in the teeth of a recession and the 36 per cent cut to our capital budget, we are committed to improving and expanding the housing stock in Scotland.

The Scottish Government is committed to bus services in Scotland. In the past few years, overall bus funding has been maintained, and that will continue during the spending review period, despite the challenges of real-terms Westminster cuts to Scotland’s budget.

The member correctly describes the dramatic and sudden cuts to bus services in England. Obviously, that is obviously a matter for the authorities there, but we have no intention of having similar dramatic cuts here. Of course, we must live within the envelope of the money that is provided in the spending review, but that allows us to continue measures such as the concessionary travel scheme, which is deteriorating in England, and the bus service operators grant, which has been scrapped in England but which we continue to support. The strong support for the bus industry in Scotland will continue.

It is odd that we have just heard demands from Jim Hume for more money for housing, and now we hear demands for more money for transport. We will defend the budget that has been provided. We are reviewing how best to deploy not just the national concessionary travel scheme moneys but the bus service operators grant, which provides substantial subsidy and support for the bus industry in Scotland. As with every other budget, discussions continue on how we can use the money to best effect for people in Scotland.

The consultation on the first Scottish social housing charter opened on 1 August this year and it closes on 1 November. To date, we have received 16 responses.

That is a very sensible suggestion, which we will consider. We are looking at the general issue in any event, but it is only right that we consider all the responses in the consultation. I would not want to give a commitment before the consultation closes, but I reassure the member that we are looking seriously at the area.

The Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment and I last met SPT on 14 July to discuss various matters, including the fastlink project. Our officials have also been in regular contact with SPT officials recently, as SPT worked on finalising the fastlink business case.

As announced in the spending review yesterday, the Government’s capital programme makes funding available to meet the Government’s commitments to implement the core phase of the Glasgow fastlink proposal. The next key stage will be the acceptance of the business case, which my officials are reviewing as a priority and on which they will report to me shortly. We welcome the close work between SPT, Glasgow City Council and Transport Scotland officials, which resulted in the delivery of the final fastlink business case on 31 August. We also welcome the signing of the memorandum of understanding between the two parties, which details their respective responsibilities. We are also pleased with the progress on the creation of a further memorandum of understanding between SPT and Renfrewshire Council, which outlines further regional intentions to extend fastlink to provide access to Braehead. Those are the next key stages.

We have reviewed the report and supplied it to the Public Petitions Committee for its on-going consideration. The report provides a more informed preliminary estimate for developers and other stakeholders of the scale of the investment that is required to construct a grade-separated junction or junctions at Laurencekirk.

There are various stages to go through before the stage that Nigel Don mentions is reached. The cost refinement exercise, the purpose of which was to give more certainty to potential developers and the council about the ultimate cost, has been produced. Members will remember that the original cost was between £10 million and £30 million. We thought that, in response to the point that the petitioners made, we had to give a bit more certainty about that. Having done that, it is now up to the Public Petitions Committee and others with an interest in the matter to make their views known. As the member pointed out, the matter is intrinsically related to potential development and therefore to the development plan for the area. If there is a new burden on the road—we expect that there will be if 880-odd houses are built in the area—that will obviously have an impact on the road and on developers’ contributions. Those matters must be considered together. We have reached the stage of having particular engagement on that with the interested individuals—with protesters, local members and others.

I have listened to the calls for action, not least from the protesters and people with a concern in the area. I have also listened to Mike Rumbles, who asked us to carry out a cost refinement study. We have done that. We have taken action, and that allows us to progress matters. Alison McInnes is therefore not right to say that the Government is not taking action. She did not mention the role of the council or future developers in making further progress or the progress that has been made through the safety changes that are still being implemented on that stretch of road. We have taken action, and we will continue to see matters through as the debate continues after the cost refinement exercise.

This year we allocated almost £5 million to the open market shared equity scheme. The grant has now been allocated to potential purchasers, allowing them three months to find a property to buy. We recognise the need for Government support for the growing number of people who are priced out of home ownership. That is why we will continue to support home ownership in a balanced and sustainable way, which includes the growth of innovative products such as shared equity.

I, like others, very much welcome Rob Gibson’s motion, in which he recognises the bravery, professionalism and selfless sacrifice and service of all those who participated in the various convoys to Archangel and Murmansk during the dark days of world war two. I also recognise the work of other members, such as Mary Scanlon, on the cross-party group on supporting veterans in Scotland. I know that you were previously involved in that group, too, Presiding Officer. I was about to become involved when other tasks were presented to me. I am delighted to support the motion, which thoroughly deserves the endorsement of everybody in the chamber. The bravery, gallantry and achievements of all those merchant seamen and members of the Royal Navy and the Royal Air Force must not be ignored or forgotten and must certainly not be just lost to history. Some members might have seen the recent programme, which I think was on the BBC, about the Arctic convoys. It was evident from watching that programme how young and inexperienced some of the people were who were asked to do things way beyond their years. It also gave a very good representation of how cold it was, which is probably hard to imagine. When I saw some of the conditions that those people had to endure, I thought that it was remarkable what some of those very young seamen endured. To fail to acknowledge their sacrifice and selflessness in securing the freedoms that we now take for granted would be to do them an enormous disservice. It is right and fitting that we remember and mark the incredible bravery of those who served on the Arctic convoys. Many of those who took part in them were ordinary young men drawn from throughout the British empire and beyond, but they undertook an extraordinary task. They sailed through a deadly gauntlet of Arctic weather, ice, German U-boats and planes on what—to add another Churchillian reference—Churchill called the “suicide run” to carry essential supplies to the Russian people in the ports of Murmansk and Archangel. Their dedication, bravery and professionalism ensured that much-needed provisions were available to the Soviet Union and were a crucial component in supporting the red army in its ultimately successful fight against German forces on the eastern front. We heard a moving speech from Chic Brodie. I confirm to him that I have read “HMS Ulysses”, which is a combination of heroism and tragedy, although it is more than 30 years since I read it. The novel would give members some idea of what conditions may have been like for those who served. The Arctic convoys had the highest sinking ratio of any of the second world war convoys: 85 merchant ships and 16 Royal Navy ships were lost between August 1941 and May 1945. Around 20,000 Royal Navy and merchant navy sailors served in the 78 convoys that braved the Arctic Ocean, with more than 3,000 losing their lives. The number of remaining veterans of the conflict sadly reduces with each passing year, but those who endure wear their Atlantic Star medals and Arctic Emblems with pride. They keep the memories of their shipmates alive and they will never forget them. Occasions such as the debate keep the story of their heroism, bravery and endeavour burning brightly. I can only add to the congratulations to Rob Gibson. He has worked on the issue for some time but, by bringing the matter to the chamber for debate, he serves the memory of those involved well. We owe a debt of gratitude that we can never repay but we can and should remember those who served. The heroism and determination to succeed that those remarkable young men demonstrated has been acknowledged by the Russian Government and the people of Russia. I welcome that and thank the Russian Government and people for such a kind gesture. They recognise that the convoys played a vital role in ensuring that food supplies, munitions and equipment were available to the Russian people as they continued their resistance to the Nazi invasion. If members think about the battle of Stalingrad, they will realise how crucial those supplies were. As a mark of that respect, in 1985, the Russian Government commissioned a Medal for the 40th Anniversary of Victory in the Great Patriotic War, which is known more commonly as the Russian convoy medal, and awarded it to veterans of the Arctic convoys. Sadly, despite promises that the coalition parties made while in opposition, the UK Government has yet to follow that lead and commission an official campaign medal. I am delighted that different members have said that they intend to write to the Government on that issue. I wrote to Andrew Robathan MP, the Minister for Defence Personnel, Welfare and Veterans, on 5 September to urge him to follow the example set by the Russian Government and give the Arctic convoy veterans the official recognition that they richly deserve. I await his reply. I welcome the work of those who have started an ambitious fundraising programme that aims to raise £1 million to establish a public museum space of around 3,000ft2, sited beside a new village hall in Aultbea. That museum will create an archive and display artefacts of the conflict, not least the one that Chic Brodie mentioned. I wish them well with that endeavour and am sure that they will succeed in creating a lasting legacy to the brave men who left Loch Ewe and sailed into the unknown. On Annabelle Ewing’s point that the Scottish Government should assist with the funding of that ambitious and fitting tribute to those brave seafarers, I confirm that the Scottish Government makes funding available to local and non-national museums through Museums Galleries Scotland, which will be able to provide advice on setting up a museum. I encourage the organisers to make contact directly with Museums Galleries Scotland if they have not done so yet. My officials will provide any interested parties with the relevant contact details. The Scottish Government does a number of things to support veterans. We have allocated £320,000 to establish a specific Scottish veterans fund. We have also appointed an armed forces and veterans advocate and created a defence policy unit to ensure that veterans issues are at the heart of all our defence policy. We will continue to work with the Ministry of Defence, the armed forces, the health service, local authorities, the veterans community and service providers to put in place the best possible level of support for our veterans. I have one final point, on remembering. My view is that, for individuals in a life-threatening situation such as armed combat, there is an acute fear that their contribution or the sacrifice that they make will not be acknowledged or remembered. That might sound odd, but it is my view and it is a very real fear. It is our responsibility to ensure that the huge contribution that veterans make, including the ultimate sacrifice, is not just acknowledged but remembered, and remembered with pride. They deserve nothing less. Meeting closed at 17:40.

In 2011-12, all bids to the new innovation and investment fund are being assessed in line with strategic priorities identified by each local authority. That will ensure that investment is targeted at the areas in most need. Although all projects are also being assessed against a benchmark of £40,000 per unit, we will retain the flexibility to consider higher subsidy in special circumstances.

It is necessary to recognise the source of the cut in subsidy to which the member refers: the previous Chief Secretary to the Treasury left office saying that there was no money left. We have had to absorb the costs of substantial cuts—around 40 per cent in capital in the next four years. We cannot hide from that fact. We cannot create money, nor, under current circumstances, can we borrow more. What we have done is apply the benchmark because we realise that it can bring far more housing on to the market, whether that is for social rented purposes or otherwise. It is encouraging to see that under the innovation and investment fund there is no shortage of registered social landlords, councils for council housing or other providers coming forward given the levels of subsidy. As I said, we also retain some flexibility in how the benchmark is applied.

Of course, part of the commitment is for 5,000 new council houses, which transforms the council house building programme in Scotland. There had not been council house building before the 2007 to 2011 Government; 5,000 homes—1,000 a year—are there already. We are confident that we will attain the 6,000 affordable housing completions that we have said that we will try to attain each year over the next five years. I am not saying that that is an easy target to achieve, but we are determined that we should achieve it. As I said, we have had substantial encouragement that we can achieve it from those who have bid under the different tranches of the innovation and investment fund. Shelter has made its point known—I have spoken to it since it made that point and I will continue to talk—but we are confident that we can achieve 6,000 affordable housing completions each year for the next five years.

The Scottish Government is committed to improving standards and encouraging growth in the sector. We support the improvement of private rented housing by providing local authorities with the resources and powers to tackle poor landlords and property condition; by involving private landlords in the development of policy for the sector in Scotland; and by talking to the United Kingdom Government and others about creating the conditions for growth.

If I picked the member up correctly, he is talking about giving people both the chance to own their homes and the chance to rent within the private rented sector. We have recently provided support to Homes for Scotland to look at a mortgage guarantee scheme that can help to bridge the gap. As the member says, banks and lending institutions sometimes ask for a 20 per cent deposit for an 80 per cent mortgage, which we think is wrong, especially when it is obvious that the applicants can afford a higher monthly payment than they would pay on an 80 per cent mortgage. The idea behind the mortgage guarantee scheme is that we make up the difference—something that was previously done by the markets, sometimes at a premium. In addition, we are working with several private sector developers—Tweed Homes in the Borders comes to mind—so that somebody can move into private rented accommodation at an affordable level and can, over time, pay additional moneys through their rent, which are put aside for a deposit and topped up by 50 per cent by the developer after five years. A number of such schemes are on the go just now and more are coming forward through the innovation and investment fund. We will continue to support the sector. As the member has identified, the biggest problem is the failure of lending institutions to make the money available. They talk a good game in terms of mortgage offers, but they are not following through.

We expect the United Kingdom Government’s reforms to impact in two ways. First, some claimants will no longer be able to afford to stay in the private sector, leading to an increase in applications to social housing waiting lists. Secondly, restricting housing benefit for those who are underoccupying social housing will lead to more households seeking to move to smaller homes. That could lead to a significant shortage in the availability of one-bedroom properties, longer waiting lists for social housing and increased dependency on temporary accommodation.

As I said, I recognise the disbenefits that there will be as a result of the UK Government’s moves in this area. I reassure the member that I met the Minister for Housing and Local Government from Westminster in London a couple of days ago and made those points to him. Although we have made the same points to the UK Government a number of times, we will write to reinforce them following my meeting with the minister this week.

I have to assume that the member has full knowledge of the United Kingdom Government’s budget as well. As I said, if we apply a 40 per cent cut to the capital budget of the Scottish Government, it will have consequences. The first number that the member mentioned related, I think, to private sector new starts. Our figure of 6,000 homes includes a mix of different tenures; we are not promoting one tenure over another. It would be useful if Mr Hume was to make representations on our behalf to the UK Government to say, “This is the wrong cut at the wrong time. If you invest in housing and transport, you employ far more people. They pay tax instead of receiving benefits, and we can create economic assets for the future of the country.” That would be more productive than having a go at the Scottish Government because of the consequences of UK Government cuts.

Yes. As the member says, that is the responsibility of local authorities. We are in dialogue with local authorities and are working closely with them. I am aware of the danger that he mentions and will continue to have that dialogue.

I met Strathclyde partnership for transport last week and discussed a wide range of issues informally. The member will be interested to hear that that involved an examination of the Glasgow subway—at around 1 o’clock in the morning—including a walk through a section of the subway tunnels.

I should perhaps reassure the member that the service had stopped at the time I was going through the tunnels. It stops late at night, which is why we left it until the early morning. What SPT does may well result in a benefit to the private sector and private operators, such as bus operators, but it also results in substantial public benefits. I am happy to consider the issue, but it is worth bearing in mind that all the things that SPT should be doing will result in benefit to the travelling public, even if it also sometimes benefits private operators. I will consider the issue.

I congratulate David Stewart on securing the debate. I acknowledge the work that David has done in the past on the issue. There has been an interesting range of contributions. We had someone who has campaigned for a long time on the issue. We had someone from the motor industry. We had someone who had served in the police. In Mark McDonald, we have as near as we get to a young person, at least in the current crowd—no offence to anyone else, including myself. It was a good range, even though it was a fairly small number of speeches. David Stewart alluded to and is well aware of the fact that significant challenges face us in respect of the safety of young drivers on Scotland’s roads. The latest confirmed figures for road casualties in Scotland, from 2009, show that road casualties are at their lowest level in 60 years. We should acknowledge the progress that has been made. That said, the Government believes that more can be done, particularly for young drivers. While, as with other age groups, rates are falling, they are not falling as fast for young drivers as they are for other groups. I would particularly like to take action with regard to fatalities and serious injuries. Jackson Carlaw touched on the fact that in all cases we are talking about adults. No one can get a provisional licence till they are 17 years old. There is the issue of responsibility—if someone is an adult, they must accept adult responsibilities. One can make a mistake with some adult responsibilities, such as the ability to marry, and many of us do. One can make a mistake with drinking. When we first get the chance to drink legally, we can make a mistake by overconsuming. However, the consequences of a mistake when we drive can be far more serious. We are talking about young people but they are also adults. The statistics show that around one in four drivers or riders killed or seriously injured on the roads in 2009 was in the 17 to 25-year-old age group. That figure changes to 29 per cent for car drivers only. However, young driver accidents are not increasing. If we compare 2009 with the average for 1994 to 1998 for all casualties—that is, all severities and all road user types—we see that casualties among 16 to 24-year-olds fell by 30 per cent, compared with a 33 per cent fall for all age groups. If we consider the category “killed and seriously injured” for car drivers only, we find that in the 16-to-24 age group there was a 48 per cent reduction over the same period, compared with a 47 per cent reduction for all ages. “Go Safe on Scotland’s Roads—it’s Everyone’s Responsibility: Scotland’s Road Safety Framework to 2020”, which was published on 15 June 2009, was debated by the Parliament in September 2009. The framework sets out our commitments for greater road safety for all road users and includes our intentions on education, publicity and young drivers. In the framework, we set ourselves challenging targets to reduce fatalities by 40 per cent and serious injuries by 55 per cent, based on the 2004 to 2008 average. Young drivers are identified as one of the eight national priorities in the framework. Road Safety Scotland has focused much of its recent publicity on young drivers, as well as talking about rural roads, which also cause concern, as members said. The organisation’s recent publicity measures feature young drivers and include a national cinema and television campaign on country roads and distraction. As Mark McDonald said, and as I know from experience, some of the work that is done in schools has a visible impact on young people, especially when people take part who have been involved in serious accidents with dramatic consequences. There is evidence that the behaviours and factors that contribute most to fatal and serious accidents that involve young drivers and their passengers are speeding, driving while impaired through drink or drugs, distraction, not wearing a seatbelt and—this is crucial—lack of experience. All those factors are addressed comprehensively in Scotland’s road safety framework. David Stewart made a good point about passengers. Parents—especially parents of daughters, given the figures—are very concerned to say to their children that once they are in a car that someone else is driving, they have no control, so they really must ensure that the person who is driving is aware that they must not take risks. Taking risks with oneself is one thing; taking risks with other people is quite another. In late 2010 we commissioned a nationwide debate with young people and key partner road safety bodies, which gave young people a chance to voice their needs and concerns and put forward their ideas and suggestions on the issues that affect them—I think that David Stewart referred to the debate and I am happy to let him have the findings from it. As I think that Mark McDonald said, the response from young people on graduated driver licensing was different from the response of older people. As we perhaps would have expected, there was much less support for the idea among young people and support grew as people got older. The report on the discussions, “National Debate on Young Drivers’ Safety”, was published on Transport Scotland’s website in March. My officials and I are aware of the research that Sarah Jones, from Cardiff University, conducted. She was invited to present her findings to the road safety strategic partnership board meeting in March. Her research found that between 2000 and 2007 the number of crashes that involved 17 to 19-year-old drivers appeared to be steady, at around 1,400 per annum. However crashes remaining steady does not equate to injuries remaining steady, and we categorise a young driver as being between 17 and 24 years old. I urge members to support the spirit of David Stewart’s motion and to note that graduated driver licensing is a reserved matter, as he said. We wrote to the UK Government to encourage it to move in that direction, and when it replied, “No,” we wrote back to express our disappointment and ask it to keep the option open. The report of the national debate on young drivers’ safety contained 17 recommendations to improve road safety outcomes for young drivers—I mention that to make the point that although we have had a refusal from Westminster we have not left matters at that but realise that there is much that we can and will continue to do. We have gathered evidence to help us to consider whether and how graduated licensing could be implemented in Scotland, if we have such an opportunity. As I said, to deliver the framework commitments we brought together key stakeholders to form the road safety operational partnership group and the road safety strategic partnership board. The group met on 30 June and agreed to consider all 17 recommendations in the report, one of which is to get further evidence on graduated driver licensing. We have not let the issue slip. We have made representations and we are taking other actions. We will keep on at the issue. Meeting closed at 17:29.

The Scottish Government is taking forward a range of transport infrastructure improvements that will benefit the south-east of Scotland. The Forth replacement crossing and the Edinburgh to Glasgow railway improvements programme are progressing well. We are fully committed to delivering the Borders railway project, which will reconnect communities in Midlothian and the Scottish Borders to the national rail network for the first time in more than 40 years. We have recently completed significant road improvements on the A68 Dalkeith bypass and the A7 at Auchenrivock. Our motorway and trunk road programme contains further planned improvements for the A68 and the A702. In the longer term, the strategic transport projects review has identified a number of transport improvements that will benefit the south-east of Scotland.

I am happy to meet the member to discuss that, but I have just laid out some positive news for the people of the Borders and the south of Scotland. The Forth replacement crossing is a not insubstantial project and nor is the Edinburgh to Glasgow railway improvements programme, which is costing around £1 billion. The Borders railway project, which has been progressed under this Government, will connect the area to the network for the first time in 40 years at a cost of about £300 million. I also mentioned road improvements, which I know are deeply appreciated in that part of the country. However, I am happy to meet the member to discuss the issue that he raises.

That is certainly a huge issue. When we debated it in the Parliament, we had a remarkable degree of consensus across the parties—I believe that the Liberal Democrats were part of that consensus, as were the Conservatives. Of course, we have still not had the action that we asked for, which was a meaningful reduction in fuel duty. The fuel duty rate is putting up prices not just for passengers but for all members of the public. The member is right to highlight that.

That is the subject of on-going dialogue. Officials held a meeting with the Department for Transport and the High Speed Two company as recently as last week, on Thursday 23 June. For my part, I have spoken with the Secretary of State for Transport on the issue, and we plan to hold further ministerial discussions in the near future.

The important point that the member raises is about costs and benefits. He is right to say that the high-speed rail option really only makes sense for Scotland if it comes here—that is when Scotland will get the biggest dividends—so it should do so. I will leave it to others to talk about the benefits of trams in Edinburgh. It is a question of ensuring that the benefits are disproportionate to the costs and that we gain a massive advantage from the project, which has happened with the M74. The same can happen with high speed 2 if there is the political will at Westminster to make it happen.

Yes, I could, although it would take some time. As the member will know, the frequency of those trains has increased and there have been improvements in the infrastructure. I will be happy to write to the member on the detail of that, if he would like.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is a mark of the importance that the Government attaches to this area that it has appointed Alex Neil as Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment. It is important in any Government but, at a time like this, when capital is so constrained, it is very important that we look at different ways of trying to attract more capital. I congratulate all the spokespeople who have been appointed to shadow Alex Neil and me. It would be difficult to answer all the questions that have been asked, as there are quite a number of them, but I will try as best I can. I will first tackle the issue that Lewis Macdonald raised in relation to the target for social homes. The Government’s position is clear enough. I have already stated publicly—and the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment said at committee this morning—that we aim to deliver 30,000 affordable homes, which is an average of 6,000 per year, over the next five years. That is despite the tightest budget settlement since devolution. We have indicated that, in addition to or within that, we intend to facilitate the building of 5,000 new council houses during this session of Parliament, but we have not set an overall target for council and housing association homes for social rent.

I will make some progress first, as there is quite a lot to get through. In addition, within the total affordable approvals, homes will be provided through the innovation and investment fund, the transfer of management of development funding programmes for Glasgow and Edinburgh and the shared equity schemes; by Glasgow Housing Association, the national housing trust initiative and the home owners support fund; and through mortgage-to-rent and mortgage-to-shared-equity schemes. The target of 5,000 new council houses can be compared with the number that were built previously. It has been said before, but it is worth saying again that the previous Administration, going right the way back to the 1990s, built a total of six homes, all in Shetland. Our target shows a substantial commitment to social housing. I will take Lewis Macdonald’s intervention.

As I said, I have stated in the public domain and the cabinet secretary has made clear—and I have just made clear again—that our priority is 30,000 affordable homes, or around 6,000 per year, over the next five years. That will not be easy to achieve because of the budget cuts. There are a number of other issues, so I will move on. Jackson Carlaw mentioned the ferries review, on which we intend to consult further following the first informal consultation. The point was made at the end of the debate about the importance of harbours and ports, which are very capital intensive, and the ferries themselves are of course very expensive. We are keen to get that right, so it is right that we take time over it. Lewis Macdonald made a point about unbundling in relation to the AWPR, as did others. We have to await the outcome of the legal process. That perhaps addresses a point that Maureen Watt raised. It is not for Government ministers to challenge any courts, so we will not do that. It is important that we respect the legal process. I know that the delay that it has caused has been frustrating for many people. Only after the process comes to an end can we look at how we can proceed. The cabinet secretary said that it would be worth looking at unbundling again at the appropriate time, but not in advance of then. The cabinet secretary answered a question from Maureen Watt about including a community benefit clause in relation to the AWPR. We have done that in previous schemes and we would be very happy to do it for the AWPR. Helen Eadie asked about European funding, which I think the cabinet secretary addressed when he spoke first of all. We are trying to look at every single penny that is available from Europe. We have always done that. If Helen Eadie is aware of any funds that we are not accessing, we are happy to hear what she thinks we can do. She said that she had not had a response to her letter yet; I am more than happy to meet her to discuss her constituents’ concerns about the Forth crossing. Malcolm Chisholm made a number of points. We are freeing up money for social rented housing. We published targeted guidance in March which, if adopted by social landlords, could save up to £1 billion against the already-budgeted amount to meet the cost of the Scottish quality housing standard. It is worth pointing out that the 1,273 local authority homes started in 2010-11 was the highest number in a single financial year since 1987-88 and that the 583 local authority homes completed was the highest number in a single financial year since 1994-95. Real progress is being made in that respect. As I indicated in relation to the targets that we have set, we intend to go further. Jim Hume raised a concern about having a single bidder for the Borders railway. It is our intention to see through the project and our 2014 target remains in place. There are issues to address, but the M74, which many members have mentioned as a positive example, also had a single bidder. Certain things have to be taken into account and we have to have discussions to ensure that the process is rigorous, but it is still possible to see through the project and we will do that. On the Rosyth to Zeebrugge route, there is no difference between the point that I made that the decision is a commercial matter for the company involved and the point that Alex Neil made, which I understand was in a completely different context, that we should be ambitious in that respect. Of course we have always wanted to see a passenger service on that route, but we understand the commercial pressures on the company concerned. Paul Wheelhouse made a good point about the Norwegian oil fund. Would it not be fantastic to have a job like this if we had £300-plus billion of which we could access £13 billion in any given year to do some of the things that we would like to do? That just shows the folly of having squandered the oil wealth of this country. He was right to say that no provision was made by the previous Labour-Lib Dem Government for funding the Borders rail link. It is this Government that has driven the rail link forward and we will continue to do so. Margaret McDougall made a series of points about council housing, but she did not seem to recognise the fact that the 36 per cent cuts to our budget—crucially, our capital budget—by Alistair Darling, which were subsequently supported by George Osborne, might have something to do with the cuts that we are having to wrestle with. That is the kind of thing that we are having to look at. As a general rule, I genuinely think that it is important that we look at any good ideas that come from other parties on these issues, because the cabinet secretary has a role in looking at innovative ways of drawing in new funding. However, we can only take such suggestions seriously if members say where the money should come from. At the previous election, it was shown that the idea that one can demand more money for everything and expect to get it is finished.

It is certainly not our intention that it should take decades. I point out that we are the first Government ever to commit to dualling the A9. Unlike some other parties, we put it in our manifesto. There is a question about funding, but if we were not facing massive cuts in capital funding, it would be much easier to dual the A9 much more quickly. We have made progress already, with £50 million spent, and we will continue to make progress, despite the fact that we are not helped by the cuts from Westminster. I say to Patrick Harvie that I think that he is completely wrong on the M74—he will not be surprised to hear me say that. The opening was immensely popular. There were queues waiting to get on to it last night, with saltires flying in the first cars to go down the road. There was even a group of hell’s angels who seemed to enjoy the road very much. This morning, both the M8 in the area and the M74 were running very freely, and I hope that that will continue to be the case into the future. The new motorway is very popular, and it is a huge boon for Glasgow and the west of Scotland. It is exactly the kind of project that the Government has championed in the past and will continue to champion in the future.

A study examining the opportunities for service enhancements across the wider Edinburgh to Newcastle corridor is on-going and should be finalised later this summer. It includes investigation of the case for local services between Edinburgh and Berwick-upon-Tweed. When the study is completed, it will be published on the Transport Scotland website.

The report is in its final stages and a process is under way between Transport Scotland and MVA Consultancy to sort out some final issues. That process should take place fairly quickly, but I cannot be more specific than to say that the report will be finalised over the course of the summer. Once it has been concluded and published, I would be more than happy to meet the local member and others who have an interest in the project.

It would be extremely foolish of me to say that in advance of receiving the report, the delay in the production of which has been caused, not least, as a knock-on result of Network Rail’s production of the east coast franchise timetable. We are moving ahead on the issue quickly. We would like to see the best possible services being provided in that part of the country, but we must wait to find out what the report says. There is not too long to wait. As I said, as soon as it has been published, I will be happy to meet the member to discuss it further.

The reinstatement of the Borders railway will facilitate an integrated transport network in the Borders area, improving social inclusion and community accessibility. Transport Scotland currently meets with the Waverley railway partnership, of which Scottish Borders Council is the lead authority, on a monthly basis to discuss project matters. That is in addition to specific meetings on the various workstreams and quarterly joint committee meetings that are attended by Transport Scotland and all three partnership authorities.

The member will know that the Scottish Government remains absolutely committed to the Borders railway and has made substantial progress already. Many of the decisions on bus travel are for the individual bus operators. However, through the bus service operators grant and our concessionary travel scheme, we provide substantial support to services across Scotland. It is for local authorities to choose to support particular routes as and when they see fit. In addition, on integrated travel, we have completed a five-year programme to procure and roll out new smart-enabled ticket machines to the entire bus fleet in Scotland. That is the largest integrated ticketing scheme implementation anywhere in the world to date.

Like other members, I congratulate Stuart McMillan on securing the debate, which is particularly timely given today’s publication of the Transport Select Committee’s report on its inquiry into the coastguard proposals and other marine safety issues. The speeches today and in the previous debate in January send a clear message, which was confirmed by the select committee. The strength of the concern about the proposals cannot be overstated. It extends not only throughout Scotland but throughout the UK. There is broad consensus that the proposals are ill considered and ill founded. As the motion and the David MacBrayne Group emphasise, the overriding consideration must be protecting life, not just saving money. We all support—and must support—efficiency in public services, but not at the expense of a service’s primary function, which in this case is ensuring safety at sea. We heard an eloquent speech from Mike MacKenzie about his experience in that regard. Of course, it is not only the coastguard proposals that cause concern. The convergence of those proposals with the withdrawal of funding for emergency towing vessels and the uncertainty over the future of search and rescue services and marine firefighting capabilities threatens to create a perfect storm that would leave users of our seas and our precious marine environment itself exposed to unacceptable risks. Tavish Scott was right to say that we should not forget the Donaldson report. It would be illuminating for those who consider the proposals to go back to that report and see what emerged from it. Alongside those significant concerns on the substance of the UK Government’s proposals and its funding decisions, we are very disappointed with the process to date. Despite the fact that the Scottish coastline and sea area make up 60 per cent of the UK total, there was no prior consultation with the Scottish Government or wider Scottish interests. That meant that valuable information and expertise were not taken into account in arriving at the coastguard proposals. However, I hope that the consultation to which Scottish interests contributed heavily will lead us to a more sensible outcome. The situation in relation to emergency towing vessels is even more perilous. Following a unilateral decision to withdraw funding, we are still no further forward in knowing how that vital service will be provided after September. The Scottish Government is pleased to play a part in the working group that was established to consider alternative provision, but we must emphasise that that is not a suitable model of engagement. In essence, we are asked to devise a solution to a problem that was created by the UK Government without any prior consultation or proper consideration of risk or appropriate resources. The select committee notes that the UK Government “is, quite literally, inviting disaster.” It is up to us to ensure that that disaster does not happen. We had one illuminating example of what that might mean from Dave Thompson’s speech. The decision-making processes on the future of search and rescue services and firefighting at sea have been marked by unacceptable uncertainty. Given that scant regard for Scottish interests across the board, it is natural that we look to exploring the merits of devolution of the coastguard responsibilities to Scotland as an option at least. In so doing, we are mindful of the need for the cost implications to be properly and transparently examined in order that the appropriate resources transfer with the responsibility. I also acknowledge the importance that the shipping industry, for example, places on a consistent and integrated UK service. However, those issues would not be insurmountable in the case of a devolved service. We have made our points to the UK Government in response to the coastguard consultation and in correspondence between ministerial colleagues and their Whitehall counterparts. The First Minister has also raised the concerns directly with the Prime Minister. We also provided evidence to the Transport Select Committee and I am pleased that the concerns about the inherent risks of the proposals are strongly reflected in its report. The David MacBrayne Group, which has years of experience of operating in Scottish waters, has also made a valuable series of representations. There is broad consensus with its contention that the focus on costs, rather than lives, is wrong and that local knowledge—about which we heard quite a bit tonight—is crucial. I also agree that the proposals’ social and economic impacts, particularly in our more remote areas, should be considered. A number of members said that we have not allowed ourselves to be divided and ruled. It was particularly interesting to hear some of the comments about the Clyde. That is where recreational sailing was born. I have sailed there many times, although I have never been given sole charge of the vessel, and it is reassuring to know that there is a coastguard out there looking out for me. Stuart McMillan’s point about the presence of nuclear submarines and all the other traffic in the Clyde is very important indeed. The consequences of not having the right cover really are unthinkable. The David MacBrayne Group makes the point about its involvement in search and rescue. It can and should contribute directly to the debate, and I hope that it is listened to. It will, I hope, be crystal clear that the Scottish Government has real concerns about the UK Government’s proposals for the coastguard and ETVs. The Transport Select Committee endorses those concerns, and we need a constructive dialogue with UK ministers in order to take the issues forward. We accept the need for modernisation, but we do not believe that saving money should come at the expense of putting lives or the environment at risk. This Government has taken great steps recently to improve the management of our seas. The Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 introduced marine planning to respond to the increasing use of our seas, and we stand poised to reap the benefits—as other members have mentioned—of offshore renewable energy. It is crucial that the valuable services that our coastguard and ETVs provide are not compromised in any way. We need maritime safety services that are capable of delivering for Scotland, which includes meeting all the demands that have been mentioned. That must include the search and rescue services and the fire-fighting capabilities that are also being reviewed. We need to keep safe those who use our seas and coasts, and we must ensure that we keep those seas safe from pollution. Today’s debate has again shown that members are unhappy at the way in which Scotland has been treated in relation to those vital issues. We need to work together with the UK Government in the weeks and months ahead, as it responds to the select committee’s report and finalises decisions, to ensure that Scottish interests are heard, understood and properly taken into account. Meeting closed at 17:41.

Transport Scotland meets First ScotRail regularly to discuss matters that relate to rail services, including those in Fife. The issue has also been raised at general meetings that I have held with Steve Montgomery, First ScotRail’s managing director.

I assure Roderick Campbell that Transport Scotland officials will continue discussions with the Department for Transport next week about options for providing additional cross-border train capacity through Fife into Edinburgh in the mornings. ScotRail has monitored patronage on its remaining morning peak services between Dundee and Edinburgh and will continue to monitor the demand for those services, so that it can present proposals to manage overcrowding by the end of July. Roderick Campbell is aware that the situation results from the decision by CrossCountry Trains. Lord Adonis wrote to my predecessor, Stewart Stevenson, about the proposals back in 2009, when we said that any diminution of cross-border services would be unacceptable. I have also written to the Minister of State for Transport, Theresa Villiers, and received a more positive response. Discussions will continue to try to address the implications for Scottish services of the changes that have been made.

I am more than happy to do what Murdo Fraser has asked. Indeed, if he provides specific details of the affected services, I will be happy to look into them. Although ScotRail should be doing that anyway, things are made difficult when services are changed by rule of the Department for Transport. Such moves have implications for Scottish services and it is very hard for ScotRail to fill in the gaps; indeed, there is also a cost attached to that. We are trying to pursue the matter and if we get a good response from the United Kingdom Government on the implications of its changes, it will be easier for us to deal with overcrowding on existing services.

Since 1999, a total of £32.2 million has been spent on delivering schemes on the A77 trunk road south of Ayr, £30.3 million of which has been delivered by the Scottish Government since 2007, and we are currently progressing schemes worth an estimated £23.5 million of future investment in that key route. The economic benefits are substantial. These investments help to improve access to the south-west of Scotland, which supports long-term sustainable economic growth and improves reliability for companies and individuals using the ports at Stranraer and Cairnryan.

I certainly agree that increased borrowing powers will make a major difference, particularly with regard to infrastructure projects. This is the time to invest in transport, housing and other such matters, given that at this stage of the economic cycle we can do things much more cheaply. That said, I recognise the importance of the Maybole bypass to Maybole residents and businesses and for wider links with the Loch Ryan ports, and I will be very happy to accompany Mr Ingram on the visit that he has suggested.

John Scott must acknowledge that our budget has just been cut by £1.3 billion, £800 million of which is capital funding, and that such a cut puts a strain on the STPR. We would like to progress many of the projects in the review right now but cannot do so because of finance. However, I take his point and assure him that we are looking at the situation. As soon as we have the money to take forward the scheme that he has referred to and, indeed, other schemes, we will do so.

Recognising the impact of last winter’s severe weather, the Scottish Government gave local authorities an extra £15 million—three times the previous year’s level—and Transport Scotland an extra £4 million to allow works to be programmed to address sections of road most in need of repair. On trunk roads, we have now completed 96 per cent of permanent winter pothole repairs.

We are aware of the defects on the A90 Brechin bypass concrete carriageway and in the past have found a flexible asphaltic material for pothole repairs to be very effective. The potholes are monitored and repaired as necessary following weekly inspections. However, because that carriageway is made of concrete, larger-scale repairs are generally gathered together into a single repair programme carried out later in the year. If Mr Don so wishes, I am happy to discuss this particular issue with him.

We are making a decisive change in our support for new housing developments by using Government funding to lever in maximum investment from other sources and thereby maximising construction. Housing association bids to the new innovation and investment fund will be assessed against a benchmark of a £40,000 subsidy per unit, but we have also made it clear that we retain the flexibility to consider higher subsidies where, for example, projects require additional support to reflect the challenges in some remote and rural locations.

I am aware that the reduced subsidy for affordable housing will increase the challenges of building in our more remote rural communities. To assist such development, we have made it clear that, in assessing submissions to the innovation and investment fund for projects in more remote and rural communities, we will retain flexibility in considering the levels of subsidy. I should tell the member that the assessment process has only started and that announcements on the bids will be made in the autumn but, nevertheless, I am happy to discuss the matter further with him if he so wishes.

Of course, I am unable to wish away these particular budget pressures. However, I am aware of the challenges facing different communities and am more than happy to meet the member to discuss the matter.

The Scottish Government is committed to bus services in Scotland and we are working with local government partners and bus operators to improve them. The Scottish Government is providing funding to the bus industry of more than £240 million in the current financial year.

Our protection for bus services for the elderly is exemplified by the fact that we give several hundreds of millions of pounds towards a concessionary travel scheme, which allows older people to get around the country. It is also true that, if they choose to do so, local authorities can support local services that bus operators might not otherwise provide through the bus route development grant. So such services are taken care of and the bus service operators have to decide on the services to provide. We will try to work with them to ensure that we have an integrated service wherever possible.

In 2011-12, we are providing £50 million for the new innovation and investment fund, £8 million for the new supply shared equity with developers scheme and around £188 million to fund commitments from developments that were approved in previous years. In addition, we are providing £98 million to the City of Edinburgh Council and Glasgow City Council for affordable housing.

The member might be aware that we are developing the strategy for housing for older people, and the Government will be consulting on it over the summer. Given that that is the case, I will be delighted to take the chance to meet representatives from East Dunbartonshire, as she suggests, and to discuss the affordable housing needs of that area.

On 25 January, I announced a cost refinement exercise to identify the potential level of cost that is likely to be involved in constructing a grade-separated junction at Laurencekirk. That study will result in a more informed preliminary estimate of the scale of investment that may be required and will be completed later this summer. That will provide the opportunity for a general discussion of options and costs in taking the matter forward.

If the member thinks back to the discussion that we had with her, Mike Rumbles, Nigel Don and others, she will remember that what not only members but petitioners wanted were more definite costings, and I have responded to that by announcing the cost refinement exercise. There is no point in committing to a grade-separated junction in advance of that exercise if that is not what comes out of it. My answer is not equivocal—I am unequivocally saying that we have announced the cost refinement exercise. We will await the results of that exercise and take decisions when it is complete.

The member has identified the different elements at play, including the council’s local plan and, following on from that, the possibility of a public inquiry that might apportion responsibilities and costs or give direction in that respect. As part of the debate that I mentioned in response to Alison McInnes, I am more than happy to discuss with the member other options that might help to improve safety at this junction.

The member is right to point out the possible major environmental concerns for his constituents and others. The proposed development is located in an area of international ecological importance. For that reason, it is essential that all the environmental sensitivities surrounding it are considered in the process. During the dialogue that we have with the applicants, any issues that require further clarification or additional information will be raised and addressed. The Scottish ministers will also undertake an appropriate assessment under the habitats regulations prior to taking a decision on the development.

It is on record. Earlier this year, we agreed changes to the reimbursement rate with the Confederation of Passenger Transport that make the scheme more sustainable. Bus subsidy is also provided as the bus service operators grant, which is paid directly to bus operators. The BSOG benefits passengers by helping operators to keep their fares down, by enabling operators to run services that are less commercially viable and by supporting the bus network. From April 2010, we removed the link to fuel duty through the BSOG and introduced incentives for operators to run low-carbon vehicles to help in achieving our climate change targets. That is something that we can further address if the fuel stabiliser that was agreed by the Scottish Parliament is eventually adopted at Westminster. In 2010-11, £66.5 million is available for mileage run, which was agreed with the CPT on the understanding that operators would seek to minimise reductions in mileage. Charlie Gordon also mentioned the Scottish green bus fund, which was promoted by the likes of Michael Matheson long before the Labour Party jumped on to that particular bus. The Government launched the Scottish green bus fund in July 2010 to encourage the purchase of low-carbon vehicles. The scheme funds the difference in cost between a low-carbon vehicle and a diesel equivalent. The fund of £4.4 million will enable 48 vehicles to be ordered for Scottish services throughout the country. Low-carbon vehicles allow growth in patronage to be increasingly favourable due to the reduction in emissions per passenger. The fund also enables economies of scale to apply to bus manufacturing, thereby enabling increasing numbers of low-carbon vehicles to operate in Scotland. In addition, we have sought to address the increasing problem of poor air quality in our cities by making available funding to retrofit particulate traps on buses. I am delighted to announce that, in this financial year, both Glasgow and Edinburgh will benefit from funding to the tune of £524,000. That will allow their citizens to benefit from improved air quality as the retrofitting is carried out on city centre bus services. I have mentioned fuel costs. The steep increases that we have seen recently threaten the economy and disproportionately penalise rural areas. For that reason, the Scottish Government calls for the Westminster Government to introduce a fuel duty regulator to mitigate the effect on prices, on individuals and on the wider economy. I do not think that it is possible for Labour members to hide their recent shameful abstention on the issue in trying to portray themselves as champions for bus passengers. A large part of the cost of running buses is fuel duty and the Parliament has voted in favour of a fuel duty stabiliser, a derogation for rural areas and the forgoing of Labour’s proposed increase in fuel duty this year in order to benefit passengers. Buses provide the sustainable mass public transport that is necessary to support economic growth while minimising the impact of transport on the environment—we must try to strike a balance. Given the suite of policy initiatives that the Government has taken, we can at least accept that we have sought to achieve that balance; however, we must always re-examine, at different stages, whether the balance that has been struck is the right one, and we should commit to doing that. Central to our policy has been the view that the bus has an important role to play in achieving modal shift, which is the major deliverable in helping to achieve our climate change targets. As we have demonstrated, the Scottish Government provides significant funding to the industry, which, as I have outlined, will increasingly incentivise investment in developing a modern vehicle fleet and reducing its environmental impact. We have provided detailed guidance on essential policy tools for operators and local authorities. I submit that those tools are sufficient to address the needs of local authority provision of bus services and that there is no requirement for further regulation. However, there is a need for transport to be given its appropriate priority and for partnership working across local authorities and with bus operators to achieve transport aims. Given its flexibility, efficiency and accessibility, the bus is an essential part of our community, our economy and our future. I encourage all those who are involved across the public and private sectors to work together to seize the potential of a positive future for buses. I move amendment S3M-8177.1, to leave out from “believes” to end and insert: “notes the Labour proposals for regulation of bus services; recognises the important role that bus services provide to communities across Scotland; welcomes the Scottish Government’s investment of almost £250 million in the bus network, including funding for the national concessionary travel scheme, the Bus Service Operators Grant, which supports the bus network, investment of £4.4 million in the Scottish Green Bus Fund and over £500,000 in retrofitting particulate traps in buses that help reduce costs, and calls for more practical support for passengers and bus companies including the introduction of a fuel duty regulator, as agreed by the Parliament on 2 March 2011, which would be of genuine help to bus users, reducing costs, unlike Labour proposals on VAT, which can be reclaimed and would make no difference to bus companies or users.”

Does Alison McInnes acknowledge that the bus route development scheme was not abolished, but was given to local authorities and mainstreamed into their funding?

Could Robert Brown explain how his party’s policy of doing away with concessionary travel support will help more women to use the buses?

Will the member give way?

Like Jackson Carlaw, I wondered what Labour would use its last party debate of the parliamentary session to discuss. I thought that, in one sense, it would be good to hear a detailed explication of Labour’s somersault on the council tax freeze, or perhaps to hear about which bus Andy Kerr was on when its destination was the closing down of Monklands hospital and it turned out to be a staunch defender of the hospital. It was with some surprise but also some pleasure that I noticed that the debate was to be on transport, and specifically on buses. On whether Charlie Gordon is a workhorse or a cart-horse—sorry, I mean a thoroughbred—I would certainly go as far as to say that he is nobody’s fool. I accept that point. However, transport is a problem for Labour when it comes to U-turns, because it is very difficult to do a U-turn on a bus, even though Labour’s policies these days appear to be like the wheels on a bus—they go round and round. Alison McInnes made some substantive points that are reflected in the Lib Dem amendment, and I agree with many of the points that she made. However, on the bus route development grant, the Lib Dems cannot one week argue for localism and the next week argue for nationalisation if they want to retain credibility. We have retained the bus route development grant. The money is still there and we believe that it is best delivered by local authorities. During the debate I was reminded of an old programme called “On The Buses”. I worked out who was Stan Butler and who was Blakey. I will not go so far as to say who was Olive Rudge—most of us will remember Olive. There has been a surreal element to the debate because, as Ross Finnie said, at no point has any detail been given about what reregulation would mean. There was certainly a shrinking back from the idea of nationalisation, but no price tag was put on the policy, which gave the debate a surreal flavour, particularly when Labour Party members spoke. Unfortunately for Karen Gillon, I am old enough to remember the reality of what buses were like under the Labour Government that ushered in the Thatcher era. [Interruption.]

I seem to have animated the Labour benches—that was quite good. The quality of bus services was very variable at that time.

Under the previous Labour Government there was a good bus service in Edinburgh, but in West Lothian and some rural areas there were huge gaps in provision; it was good in some areas but not so good in others. That will probably always be the case and we have to keep an eye on how we can improve services. Karen Gillon also said that every time the Tories mention Margaret Thatcher, votes stack up for Labour. We remember who invited Margaret Thatcher round for tea to number 10. It was Gordon Brown.

No. Every time we mention Gordon Brown, the votes stack up for the SNP.

Charlie Gordon did not take any interventions from me. Paul Martin’s puerile and spurious point of order, when he objected to my going for a drink of water during a two and a half hour debate, will be of interest to my trade union colleagues. It was also an interesting insight into the Labour Party. There have been some very good speeches. As was mentioned, this is the last time Christopher Harvie will have the chance to address the Parliament in such a debate. As ever, his speech was very interesting and its Germanic content was as high as ever. Based on my four years in the Parliament, I say that it is certainly the case that it will be a much less pleasant place without people such as Christopher Harvie in it. Rob Gibson made a very good speech. He pointed out that it is possible for people to take pleasure in the fact that Stagecoach is a huge international company while also saying—as some people feel—that the company is not getting it right in a particular area. That is perfectly legitimate. It is true that in some rural areas people have objections to the service that it provides. Bob Doris gave a very good account of how the modernisation of the subway will lead to a massive improvement in transport in Glasgow, but he also pointed out—

We have said to SPT that we expect a cost of about £300 million and that we will support it on the project. Robert Brown knows full well that doubt still exists about the capital programme in the future. That must be sorted out. However, we—unlike previous Administrations—have said that we will in principle provide support. Bob Doris’s key point was that integration is critical. He was right to say that. We must do things to continue to improve on that. It has been said that the Labour Party’s proposal is nationalisation, but the simple fact is that we do not know whether that is the case, because the Labour Party’s motion does not contain enough detail. Perhaps we will get that detail when Charlie Gordon sums up; the proposal could be nationalisation. Ross Finnie was wrong—money was mentioned long before Shirley-Anne Somerville’s speech. Stewart Stevenson mentioned a figure of £750 million, which is a conservative estimate of the cost of some forms of reregulation. We are interested in whether the Labour Party will put a figure on its proposal.

No. David Whitton appeared to say that we should give local authorities more money, even though we have given them a bigger share of our budget than the Labour Party did when it had the chance to allocate funds. Where would the money come from to give local authorities more money and to spend up to £1 billion or £750 million on bus reregulation? Will he explain where the cuts would be made? He will not have the chance to respond, but perhaps Charlie Gordon can give an explanation. Motions should not simply be lodged with absolutely no information about how proposals would be funded. That shows that what is being done is more gesture politics than anything else. When substantial changes in how the bus industry works in Scotland are contemplated, we must be clear about how they would affect not just bus services but the Government’s overall finances. As I said, we provide significant funding of £240 million to the Scottish bus industry under BSOG and the concessionary travel scheme. That will be maintained in 2010-11. Of course, the Labour Party voted against that £240 million, and against the concessionary travel scheme and BSOG in the budget—[Interruption.] Well, it has been said that we voted against not increasing VAT, but we have made it perfectly clear that we support retrenchment from that position. In addition to monetary support to the bus industry, we have provided a suite of guidance in consultation with local authorities, to enable them to develop and sustain local bus service provision through our on-going dialogue with the CPT. Since the time that David Whitton mentioned, I have met the CPT. The position is complex, but I am happy to give him full details in writing.

No—I said that I would write to David Whitton. The CPT is happy with the position on the national concessionary travel scheme and the bus service operators grant, but it is important to try to bear down on a demand-led budget. John Swinney has done that very satisfactorily, at the same time as reaching agreement with the CPT. On the concessionary travel scheme, it would be interesting to hear Charlie Gordon take another chance, which might be his final one, to say whether Richard Simpson’s position of starting to demolish the scheme is Labour’s view, or whether Charlie Gordon takes a different position. Perhaps he can outline that in summing up. In our tenure in office, we have provided a platform from which Scottish bus operators could plan for the future free from unnecessary red tape. We accept that some regulation is required, and regulation currently exists, but we have managed to provide a platform as others have looked to tighten the public purse. We have overwhelming stats to demonstrate that Scottish bus passengers appreciate the services that they receive. Support and working with others are far better ways to provide effective bus services than is reregulation, as proposed by Labour.

I refer the member to my previous answer. There has been substantial improvement, particularly for major applications—11 per cent, as I said. Of course, some applications are more complex than others. When particular initiatives are pursued, for example new bus or railway stations, other consultation processes must kick in, which can make the process longer. We have worked hard, by changing the planning legislation and by issuing guidance, to ensure that we do things faster. The overall figures demonstrate that, but I accept that there will be exceptions to the rule.

I am aware of the on-going campaign for a new bus station in Cumbernauld town centre, and of the member’s staunch support for it. My advice is that North Lanarkshire Council, local bus operators and Strathclyde partnership for transport should work together to develop practical and cost-effective proposals for a facility that will meet passengers’ needs. During this morning’s debate, we saw that the best environment for buses in Scotland is a mutually supportive one in which bus operators, Government and local authorities work together. That will provide the best outcome.

I am sorry; I was trying to answer questions about the bus station and park and ride. As Cathie Craigie knows from my previous answers to her questions, although the Scottish Government funded the park and ride at Croy, it is for North Lanarkshire Council to decide whether to apply charges to it. We have to wait and see what North Lanarkshire Council does. On through-ticketing and so on, I am happy to respond to the member in writing.

We are talking not of applications but of notes of interest at this stage. It is always true to say that there are many more applications for freight facilities grants than there are successful applicants. That is not because of a lack of funds in the budget line but because many applications do not come to fruition. That is for a number of reasons, which I think that Cathy Peattie recognises. It is worth pointing out that we have had around £10 million in the budget for freight facilities grants, which is £10 million more than the United Kingdom budget for those grants, because it was cut more than five years ago. We have spent substantially more in Scotland up to this point. Many projects do not go all the way through the process. It is unfortunate that Cathy Peattie and her colleagues voted against the £2 million that we allocated to the grant in the budget. We will persist with it nonetheless. We are anxious to see how many of the eight projects get to a level at which we can support them during the current year. Of course, what happens in future years in terms of how much will go into this funding is for future Governments to decide. We have no intention of re-opening the notes of interest process at this stage.

I am happy to do that. Over the past week alone, I have spoken to Network Rail a number of times on the issue. As the member rightly points out, the further devolution of Network Rail functions—and it is further devolution; Network Rail Scotland was already perhaps the most devolved part of the UK network—presents a number of opportunities, not least in terms of the new First ScotRail franchise. I am happy to take up the point with Network Rail as Alasdair Morgan suggests.

The basis that Des McNulty asks about is the same basis that applied when he was a planning minister. It is a democratic basis that has been established for many years and accepted by all the parties, whereby decisions go to inquiry reporters. In some of the local press coverage of this issue, Des McNulty suggests that the decision should have been taken immediately by ministers rather than going to an inquiry reporter. I checked on that today and can state that that has never been done, and there are good reasons why it should not be done. The process works in the way that has been indicated. There are specific circumstances in which an appeal can be recalled by ministers, but that does not even come close to applying in this case. We have followed the same process as was followed in previous situations. That is the right way to do it. If Des McNulty is saying that he would radically change the planning system to accommodate this particular case, he should bring that forward. I am, of course, a bit perplexed that he has portrayed himself as a local champion against Tesco in the local press at the same time as he voted against the large retailer levy. He can explain that to his constituents. However, there is no way in which we intend to change the planning system to take the kind of decisions that he suggests we should take just now.

I am stunned that that kind of argument can be made by somebody who opposed the large retailer levy. The large planning applications to which the member refers would not necessarily apply in this case. I accept that a substantially lower fee is paid in Scotland. I have made that point before to Mr Purvis. However, rather than £15,000, I think that the figure is around £18,000. As Mr Purvis said, though, it can be substantially more than that in England and Wales, up to a maximum of £250,000. All I will say is that that just shows the business-friendly policies of this Government, which ensure that we can allow planning applications to go forward.

Lord Foulkes will have heard the statements on the subject that were made by the cabinet secretary this morning. The Scottish Government has not been merely an observer. We receive regular updates from the City of Edinburgh Council and Transport Scotland maintains regular communication. As the cabinet secretary made clear, he has had a number of meetings with the City of Edinburgh Council on the matter. Mediation is due to start very soon, and now is not the right time to discuss material and substantial changes to the governance of the project. Nevertheless, I repeat that we want to ensure that every opportunity is taken to resolve the long-running dispute. For that reason, we have agreed to be involved in the mediation process, which should be allowed to take its course.

It is fair to point out that decisions of that nature rest with North Lanarkshire Council, which has ownership of the park-and-ride facility at Croy, for example. However, it is our view that rail car parks should not be viewed strictly as a revenue source but as a means of facilitating access to the rail network for people who live outwith a station’s walk-in catchment area. If the council decided to introduce charging, we would ask it to consider the implications for issues such as increasing road congestion levels. We would also ask that it consider the parking alternatives at each station. I know that the situation at Croy is particularly constrained, which could lead to inappropriate on-street parking by passengers who are seeking to avoid paying charges. For the avoidance of doubt, I point out that the restrictions are outwith the superb new park-and-ride facility at Croy.

Those are detailed issues on which the UK Government will have access to information and will be able to take a decision. However, we have said that as a windfall accrues to the Treasury when prices go up, we believe that that additional revenue should be shared so that although the Treasury may well get a windfall, it would share the benefit with the public by reducing costs. Of course, the reverse would be true when the oil price reduces.

I will make some progress just now, and come back to the member later, if I can. With the North Sea expected to raise an additional £2 billion this year as a result of higher oil prices—what was expected to be around £10 billion in oil revenues is around £12 billion this year—we believe that such a scheme would be affordable and would provide much-needed relief for motorists. The scheme that we propose would offer some protection for motorists and businesses by offsetting any short-term price increases. It makes perfect sense to me that if we want to have some control over our economy rather than to be driven completely by international events and to compound those increases with automatic increases in fuel duty, such a scheme would be a way to get some of that control back. I acknowledge Liam McArthur’s point, and it is clear that careful consideration would be required to ensure that any reductions in duty, for example, were passed on to consumers. It would take some work to do that, but schemes have been implemented in other countries, and I am convinced that a workable solution can be found. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth wrote to the Chancellor of the Exchequer in January to set out the Scottish Government’s proposals, and urged him to give the issue serious consideration. The chancellor has repeatedly stated that he is considering the issue, but has yet to take any action. It is vital that he provide further details of his plans in the budget.

I have just given some more of the detail. The principle that we would apply would be taken further, so that the windfall revenues for fuel duty could be the basis on which a rebate—or a reduction in the costs as applied to motorists—could be given. Obviously more detailed work can be done on that, but it would be done by the Treasury, which is responsible for collecting those revenues. High fuel costs are a particular concern in our remote and island communities. In some rural areas, petrol and diesel prices are up to 25p a litre higher than the national average. With fewer opportunities to use public transport, that imposes a significant cost on residents and businesses. As has been said in previous debates, the car is very often an absolute necessity and not a luxury in such communities. The Scottish Government has introduced a range of measures specifically to help rural communities. In particular, we are investing record amounts to support ferry services, which allows operators to keep prices at half the levels that they would be in the absence of subsidies. Highlands and Islands Enterprise and Scottish Enterprise continue to provide assistance to proprietors of rural filling stations with the capital costs of upgrading their facilities. However, the disparity in fuel prices between Scotland’s remote and island communities and the rest of the country remains a key concern. The Scottish Government is clear that that issue can best be addressed through a rural fuel derogation, which would reduce the rate of duty on fuel that is sold in certain rural communities in order to offset the higher distribution costs in those areas. Similar proposals have previously received cross-party support in this Parliament, and have been successfully implemented in France, Portugal and Greece. The Scottish Government made numerous representations to the previous UK Government to introduce such a scheme, but unfortunately those were all rejected. The current UK Government has been more receptive to the proposals—indeed, introducing a rural fuel derogation was a key element of its programme for Government, which is to be welcomed. However, rural fuel prices have continued to rise since last summer, but the UK Government has as yet taken no action. I understand that it has yet to even apply to the European Commission for the necessary derogation to implement the scheme, although I am happy to be corrected by other members if that is not an accurate description of the position. The UK Government’s lack of action so far reinforces my belief that it has yet to grasp the impact that rising fuel prices are having on Scotland’s economy. There is a need for immediate action. I have, for my part, outlined a raft of policy interventions that could help households throughout Scotland right now if this Government had the power to implement them. We would start, of course, by scrapping the increase in fuel duty that is planned for next month. It is worth pointing out that next month’s increase—or rather, later this month’s increase, if it is agreed at the budget and implemented in April—is not the last: further increases were planned under the previous Government for 2012 and 2013. If the chancellor can cancel those increases, it would undoubtedly benefit households and businesses throughout Scotland. I hope that Parliament will unite in calling on the UK Government to take immediate action to tackle that issue—indeed, I plead for unanimity on the matter. If we can, I believe that the Parliament talking with a united voice, in concert with the Welsh Assembly Government and the Northern Ireland Assembly, will be a powerful advocate for making the changes that we seek from the UK Government. I ask that no one tries to seek splendid isolation on this and that we work together—we have tried to compromise on what we have put forward to see whether we can reach a common position. This issue clearly highlights the urgent need for Scotland to be granted full financial responsibility and control of our fuel duty and oil revenues, so that we can take the right decisions for the people and businesses of Scotland. In the meantime, we can take this action if we are all united. I move, That the Parliament notes that petrol and diesel prices in Scotland are among the highest in Europe and have reached record levels and that the planned rise in fuel duty by the UK Government in April 2011 could increase prices by a further 4p per litre; recognises that such increases impose an additional burden on households and businesses at a time of rising living costs and could undermine the economic recovery; notes the UK Government’s proposal to introduce a 5p-per-litre fuel discount scheme for island communities, and calls on the UK Government to cancel the rise in fuel duty planned for April and implement a fuel duty regulator that would ensure that some of the additional revenue that the UK Government will receive from increased revenues due to recent increases in oil prices is used to reduce fuel duty to help support Scottish households and businesses.

Does Cathy Peattie agree that it is profoundly ironic that, in Grangemouth in her constituency, where up to £12 billion of revenue is generated for the UK Exchequer, we have been paying—I have used the filling stations in that constituency often—far more than in the rest of Europe although we are an energy-rich country?

How would the proposed VAT reduction, which I support and for which my party voted in the House of Commons, help not only the instability of fuel prices but businesses themselves? After all, because businesses will by and large reclaim that money, such a reduction will have a neutral effect on them.

I accept the member’s point about the time that it can take to do these things, but does he not think that, given the case that he has just made, the extreme situation that businesses and individuals face and the extent to which that has been compounded by the increase in VAT, there should have been some alacrity on the part of the UK Government and that it should have dealt with the matter a bit more quickly? We have not heard anything from it on the issue.

I seek further clarity on the Green Party’s position. Is it true that it seeks an 8p per year increase in fuel duty, year on year, into the future?

A more authoritative source than the House of Commons library, which Charlie Gordon mentioned—Peter Mandelson’s “The Third Man”—confirms that two further VAT increases were planned under the Labour Party. Alistair Darling has never denied that fact.

Will the member give way?

Achieving the cut through the reversal of the VAT increase does not address the points made by Labour members. It does not address instability, which was raised, or the business issue, as most businesses can reclaim the money. Surely we can do more than the one measure that Labour has identified in its amendment.

I thank the Presiding Officer and Mr Gibson. The debate has been useful and, in general, consensual; there is at least consensus that fuel duty is a vital issue that affects individuals, families and businesses. We should not lose sight of the impact on businesses, because the longer we allow very high prices to go on without taking action, the greater the brake that is put on the economy. The consensus is important, as Gavin Brown and other members said. If the Parliament can unite with one voice tonight, we will send a powerful message and our voice will be added to the voices of the Northern Ireland Assembly and the National Assembly for Wales as we try to get the point across to the Westminster Government. We will not support the Labour amendment, mainly because it seeks to get us to agree to rule out the regulator. I think that I explained why the regulator is extremely important. The measure that is proposed in the amendment would not address instability, which has been said to be a concern, and would not address the issue to do with businesses, because by and large most businesses are able to reclaim the VAT.

I think that the member probably misrepresented the OBR’s position. I am stunned by the respect that Charlie Gordon seems to give to the Conservative and Liberal Democrat Government’s Office for Budget Responsibility. It is perfectly legitimate for elected Governments to take their own advice and follow their own initiatives. The same issue would have arisen if we had taken heed of some of the siren voices that told us that a council tax freeze was not possible—but we achieved a council tax freeze in the first year of government. I said that we support VAT reversal—we voted against the VAT increase. VAT is a regressive tax. Of course there is merit in the argument that in essence the Labour Party flushed the economy down the toilet and dramatic things must be done to remedy the situation—[Interruption.] I remind Labour members of Liam Byrne’s note, which said that there is no money left. After 13 years in government, the Labour Party left the country with no money, and action must be taken. It is perfectly legitimate to argue for a derogation—the motion does not use the word, but the policy that is mentioned in the motion could not be achieved without a derogation. That brings me to the issue that has proved difficult for some members who support the motion. Jim Hume and Dave Thompson in particular found it difficult to get away from their long-standing concerns and campaigns—quite rightly, too. There was a bit of friction on how long it has taken the UK Government to act. As many members said, the issue is very real and immediate for people. Perhaps Gavin Brown said that most forcefully. People are thinking twice about whether to make a journey—even an essential journey—in the car because of the cost of fuel. The cost of fuel is hammering families and certain individuals. Since the UK Government came in it has committed to the policies that are mentioned in the motion. It has increased VAT and it has not yet completely ruled out the increase that is due in April. I accept that the issues are complicated, but I would have thought that it was possible to work around the clock on an issue that is as urgent as the one we are considering. Perhaps that has not happened because of the cost of the midnight oil, but it should happen. There should be urgency on the issue. As I said, the Scottish Government had to act quickly on the council tax and we worked hard to achieve the freeze. The expertise on fuel duty rests at Westminster, with the Treasury, which collects taxes. It is right that we say what we think the general principles are and it is right that the Treasury should work out the detail.

I am more than happy to engage. I cannot say that there has been huge enthusiasm on the part of HM Treasury to ask our opinion on such matters, especially in relation to reserved areas, but we are happy to engage on the issue. Of course, it takes two partners to engage in that way. We have taken a range of measures to support people in these difficult times. The on-going council tax freeze has been mentioned, but the abolition of prescription charges is also important. The small business bonus is also important to people. It eliminated the business rate burden on 74,000 properties. Those measures make a real difference to Scottish households and businesses. We would be delighted if we had the tax levers to address the high fuel prices directly but, sadly for us, that remains the responsibility of the UK Government. Perhaps the Scotland Bill Committee might consider that in greater detail in its deliberations. Ministers have repeatedly called on the UK Government to take immediate action to address the high petrol and diesel prices that motorists face. We have put forward genuinely constructive and workable solutions, which have been described in the chamber today. I am pleased that it seems like our calls for action are about to be addressed. The chancellor has committed to addressing the issue in this month’s budget. It is now vital that he follows through on the assurance that he provided and delivers real support for Scottish motorists. The most crucial part of that is the postponement of the rise in duty that is planned for April, which would have a better effect than Labour’s proposed VAT reversal. It would have a bigger effect because of the size of the increase. When the UK Government considers that, it is extremely important that it also takes into account the representations that are made by the Welsh Assembly Government and the Northern Ireland Executive. The UK Government can take that step immediately, but it would be useful if it could also make a statement on future rises that Labour scheduled in previous years. That would not alleviate the difficulties that current pump prices cause motorists, but it would ensure that the UK Government does not make matters worse with further tax rises. The VAT reversal for which the Labour Party argues does not prevent massively increased tax revenues from fuel. That is one of the main reasons why it would not have the same effect as the measures that we propose. Some people have argued that cutting fuel duty is unaffordable when Government borrowing is so high. The deterioration of the UK public finances under the previous Government must be taken into account, but the simple fact is that the regulator is a hugely beneficial measure for the entire economy. If we can take off the brake of people not being able to distribute, deliver and receive goods in the most cost-efficient way, we can help the economy. As my colleague Stewart Stevenson mentioned, there is a massive windfall to the UK Treasury through fuel duty. It is currently around £2 billion; it is receiving £12 billion as opposed to £10 billion. The potential exists to make a real difference. Fuel duty is an extremely important matter for the people of Scotland. It is extremely important that the Parliament discusses it. Lord George Foulkes thought that the debate was a waste of time and that his time could be better spent elsewhere.

Apparently, he is on the phone just now.

That confirms that Lord George Foulkes thinks that there are far more important things for him to do than address the issue, which is vital to the people of Scotland. He may want to find a red bounce to go elsewhere, but that is up to him. It will be salutary for the Labour Party if it is seen to treat the issue as superficially as George Foulkes has treated it. The issue is extremely important. I am delighted that the SNP Government has chosen to use its time to show some leadership to the Parliament in the debate and has managed to work with partners in the Parliament to try to create a united voice. The challenge now rests with the Labour Party. Does it want to stand to one side and be the one group that is in favour of increased prices for the people of Scotland—increased punishment for Scotland’s motorists—as would be the case under its proposals, or does it want to work with the Parliament and the people of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland to try to get the best possible deal for motorists in hard times? [Interruption.]

I am pleased to commend the motion.

I will deal with the last point first. There were good reasons why that was heard in private, and I do not intend to go further into that issue today. However, I am happy to answer the point about the announcement being made in April. I understand why some people—some in the Labour Party, for example—who see the project as a waste of money should think that there is no real urgency, but most of the rest of us believe that the project is vital. The reason why we have had the dual process of going through Parliament and advancing the procurement process as quickly as we have done is that the project is vital, and the first possible chance that we will have to make an announcement—I think that this has been cleared with the Presiding Officer—is April, shortly after the contracts have been awarded. That is why that is happening. Things are happening as quickly as they possibly can because we see the project as vital. I am happy to give Margaret Smith the assurance that I gave at stage 3. We are engaging and we will engage. We have already held an event with small businesses to ensure that they can maximise the opportunities that exist for them.

We do not want to do anything at this stage that would delay the award of the principal contract in particular. There are also tight timescales for the other contracts, but I am happy to take away Mary Mulligan’s suggestion, ask officials to look into the matter, and come back to her on the substantive issue.

First, it is worth confirming to Pauline McNeill, as I have done to other MSPs who have been in touch about the issue, that the Scottish Government remains absolutely committed to helping to make subway modernisation happen. We are convinced of the case for it, which is why our officials have worked closely with SPT officials to bring forward the business case along with the accompanying request for funding support. Those came to ministers quite recently and are being considered. We will make an announcement as soon as we are able to do so.

I agree with Bob Doris and have made it clear to Pauline McNeill that there is a compelling case for the modernisation of Glasgow’s subway. Obviously, such modernisations involve large sums of public money, which is in fairly short supply at the moment, so we are right to take the necessary time to ensure that we make the right investment at the right time. As I have said, the business case and the accompanying request for funding support came to ministers fairly recently—on 22 December, I think—and we are considering them urgently, but I accept Bob Doris’s point. Passengers very much valued the underground’s ability to help to address the winter resilience issues that we had.

It is only right that we should wait and see what the various partners involved come forward with on the funding that they intend to contribute. My experience of the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line was that that was how the previous Administration sought to advance matters. We should see what the partners that propose the project are willing to contribute before we come to a conclusion on the Scottish Government’s contribution. However, I can confirm that allowance has been made for that in the budgetary year to which the member referred.

I accept that there are anomalies in the fare structures, but it is also true that residents of the Highlands benefit from reduced-price rail fares through the 50 per cent discount that the Highland rail card offers. That is an additional discount for Highland residents and it helps to ensure that rural communities remain connected and accessible to the rest of the country. The anomalies are best addressed through the preparations for the next franchise.

Such projects are complex and costly. It is right to take time to get them right. The discussions between Transport Scotland and Network Rail that I mentioned are the right way to go forward and will continue. Those bodies will discuss whether to proceed to guide to railway investment projects stage 3—the option selection stage—and how that is best done. The situation is frustrating, but substantially more progress has been made in the past four years than in the eight years before them. Substantial further improvements have been made at stations such as Inverurie. We will continue to make progress on that, although we have had to start far later than we would have if the previous Administration had made progress.

I apologise for not hearing the initial part of Nanette Milne’s question but, on the latter point, I will certainly take up the matter with Network Rail and get back to her on it. I note the welcome from Maureen Watt for the work on the Inveramsay bridge, and the fact that that was not welcomed by Mike Rumbles.

Let me say first that the use of the de-icer this year is on an experimental basis. There have been preliminary trials, which will continue. We have placed the de-icer at strategic locations around the motorway network and, if temperatures fall below -7°C, it is likely that we will use it. Beyond that, if the de-icer proves to be successful, it will obviously be open to local authorities to use it as well. They may be interested in particular in the benefits of its use on pavements, where they have had problems. We have already helped out local authorities with £15 million additional support for additional costs of winter maintenance. Of course, that was made possible by not agreeing to previous proposals to take £10 million out of the winter maintenance budget. Just as it is difficult for local authorities to live within a constrained budget, the same is true for the Scottish Government, but we will continue to work with local authorities to make joint economies of scale when they are possible.

It is worth saying that the NPD model has been developed as a means of capping the returns earned by investors in public sector procurement at a level that produces a fair but not excessive profit that is aligned with the corresponding risk transfer. We have seen excessive profits being made in the past. We are determined that the economic benefits of the scheme should not be put towards excessive profits for private developers but instead should be shared among those who will enjoy the benefits of the scheme outlined in my previous answer.

Let me say first that we will not be in the business of building one motorway for the price of two, as has been done with hospitals in the past. There will not be the same excessive profits that have been produced in the past so, to that extent, the model is obviously not the same as PPP. Had the previous Administration been willing to look at alternative models, such as the trust model proposed by my council for new schools, we would perhaps not have seen the excessive profits that Andy Kerr was so keen on in the previous Administration.

Transport Scotland has consulted widely throughout the development of the scheme to ensure that the impact of construction is kept to an absolute minimum for those who could be affected. The environmental statement sets out where mitigation measures are required during construction. Once construction is under way, contractors are required to provide a contact point so that local communities can receive information and raise concerns during the construction process. The contractor is responsible for ensuring that the works are strictly controlled. Contractors must limit working hours and noise levels to limits set by the relevant local authorities and, in certain circumstances, financial assistance with noise mitigation measures may be made available. Following completion of the scheme, individuals’ rights to compensation are further protected under part 1 of the Land Compensation (Scotland) Act 1973 if they can demonstrate that the value of their property has depreciated as a result of physical factors resulting from the operation of the scheme.

There is a good reason why ministers do not get involved in the statutory processes that have led to the compensation claim and award that Cathie Craigie mentions. I am happy to discuss that case with her more privately in another forum. I visited the A80 this week. The new road will open to northbound traffic on Monday and to southbound traffic a week later. On the general point about public consultation, I was told by the contractors that there are extremely good relationships with local community councillors, who have praised the contractors for their public engagement, which Cathie Craigie will know about. They were also pleased with the progress that has been made on the road, which will open in advance of its timetabled opening and under budget.

As someone who represents Clackmannanshire, which has four or five examples of the same type of structure by the same architect, I could not say otherwise than that it is a very attractive illumination.

I am happy to give the member the assurance that he needs. I congratulate the member and Alexander Dennis on the work that is being done and on the way in which the member has pursued his constituency interest in this area, which is reflected in the fact that the First Minister, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth and my predecessor in this post all visited the Alexander Dennis site. Although we should not always compare ourselves with England, it is true that Scotland has invested around £4.4 million in its green bus scheme while England has invested around £30 million in its, which means that we have made a higher per capita investment. Our investment has produced major dividends, especially in relation to the manufacturing sector, where it has safeguarded hundreds of jobs, so I am happy to give the member the assurance that he seeks.

I am delighted that Charlie Gordon and his colleagues followed the lead of Michael Matheson in campaigning for those funds to be made available. I know that Michael Matheson met my predecessor and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth a long time ago to discuss the matter. Whoever has pushed for the policy, I think that there has been a good outcome. I met people from SPT about an hour and a half ago and saw some evidence of its green bus initiatives, not least the fact that some of its new buses now have three-times-improved fuel consumption, which is extremely important. We are in discussion with a number of people about how such things can be taken forward in future, but that will depend on budgetary considerations.

As I said, the Scottish Government is committed to the project, which has been in the strategic transport projects review since 2009. The bridge was surveyed by Network Rail in October 2010 and the outcomes of the survey have been passed to Transport Scotland. The outcome of Transport Scotland’s deliberations will be announced in early course. Mr Rumbles mentioned the local constituency member, who has been assiduous in trying to push forward the issue and whom I very recently advised of progress on the matter. That progress and the investment so far are timely. In fact, the process has gone at almost lightning speed compared with the eight years for which Mike Rumbles supported a Labour-Lib Dem Administration that did precisely nothing, or even the 28 years for which there has been Liberal representation in the Gordon area and during which the issue has not moved along at all. The simple fact is that, even with the £800 million capital cut from the Con-Dem Administration in London, we will proceed with the project. That underlines the point that a promise from the SNP is a real promise, unlike one from the Lib Dems.

I have already said that announcements on Transport Scotland’s deliberations on the Network Rail survey will be made in early course. I wonder whether Nanette Milne can say exactly how that process is helped by taking £800 million out of the capital programme. Despite that cut, we will make progress and we have already done so, which is in stark contrast to previous Administrations.

I imagine that the route to which Mary Mulligan referred is one of those that the Competition Commission considered when FirstGroup applied to withdraw services to which it had committed in a previous undertaking. The Competition Commission said that it was satisfied that there was no reasonable prospect of the routes becoming profitable. That decision was taken not by this Government but by the Competition Commission. In relation to bus services in West Lothian more generally, we have given record levels of funding to local authorities, including passing across responsibility for the bus route development grant, which is now mainstreamed into local authority funding. Decisions are best made by local authorities in conjunction with the providers. If a case can be made to the provider that it can make a profit, not least given the changes to the rail infrastructure that Mary Mulligan mentioned, I am sure that the matter can be taken forward by the parties involved.

Is David Whitton still struggling to identify one area where he would cut expenditure? Does he support the suggestion by the person sitting behind him, Richard Simpson, that the Labour Party should propose a cut in concessionary travel for pensioners, thus excluding groups of pensioners?

As I have already pointed out, it is not for the Government to determine supplies between councils and those from whom they order salt, but I can confirm that, as requested by Scottish Borders Council over the winter period so far, the Scottish Government has made 3,000 tonnes of salt available to the council, which has enough resilience to cover at least seven days. We were happy to help out; that is what the Scottish salt group was formed to do. The action has helped Scottish Borders Council. The request was made and it was met in full. I think that most of the delivery—around 100 lorry loads of salt—has been made to the council. We were happy to do that. It is worth mentioning that we have more salt in stock or on order now than we have used so far this winter, which means that we are in a better position than many authorities in other countries.

It must be pointed out that it is for local authorities to make their own orders. Nigel Don is correct to say that increased resilience can be achieved if we work closely with councils. The discussions that we have following the current severe winter will indicate whether standardisation is the correct route to take. Presiding Officer, you will not be surprised to hear that I am no expert on gearboxes for gritters, but the Scottish Government has made the offer—which Aberdeenshire Council has taken up in some circumstances—to help the council when trunk road gritters are not being used for trunk roads. We will be happy to do that in future.

I am thinking specifically of plans—I am not sure whether this applies to the plans that the member mentions—that had finance behind them and were put into programmes. Since 2007, a total of more than £50 million has been invested in the A9, bringing widespread safety and economic benefits to communities and businesses the length of Scotland. We continue to invest, and contractors are currently on site at Crubenmore investing £10.4 million in a 3.2 kilometre length of dualling. As has been said, the A9 connects the growing economic centre of Inverness and the north of Scotland with the central belt and the rest of the United Kingdom. Cutting journey times, delivering journey time reliability and improving the route will all lead to future inward investment and benefit Scotland’s vital tourism industry. There is no doubt that the phased dualling of the A9 is a complex and challenging process; it represents one of the biggest infrastructure projects in Scotland’s history. Dualling the A9 from Perth to Inverness involves approximately 87 miles of new carriageway and, as Mr Swinney made clear, that requires in-depth planning and design to ensure that we deliver the right scheme, taking into consideration all the factors, including environmental constraints, such as the protected Cairngorms national park. It would clearly never have been possible to design, authorise, procure and complete major dualling of the A9 in the lifetime of this Parliament. Murdo Fraser talked about priorities. I was involved in a members’ business debate last week, as was Charlie Gordon, in which I used the words of Aneurin Bevan, who said that politics is the language of priorities. My priorities and those of the SNP Government are, first, to put the project into the STPR so that it is on the record as one of our priorities. We have committed to dualling the A9, which I do not think any previous Government did. There are the Crubenmore improvements, which I have mentioned, the £50 million investment and the Ballinluig junction, which I have mentioned. Those are the priorities of the SNP Government. We will compare that, if we can, to the priorities of Murdo Fraser and his party. First, they chose to spend £500 million on trams. I do not accept the idea that the money somehow could never have been used to re-order priorities to assist the A9. They chose to spend £500 million on trams, which the people of Edinburgh did not want.

No. I want to make a couple of further points. The Conservative party was in Government for 18 years and did not commit to dualling the A9. The Conservative party, along with its colleagues, the Liberal Democrats, has just cut the Government in Scotland’s budget by £1.3 billion. There is £800 million coming out of the capital programme and there will be a 40 per cent cut to the capital programme over the spending review period in Scotland.

No. Those are huge constraints on what we can do in Scotland. There is so much more that we could do and so much that we could do more quickly if we did not have to suffer from, for example, votes to spend £500 million in Edinburgh.

I repeat the point that I have made, which should have dealt with that point from Murdo Fraser.

That £500 million was used by the Conservatives when they voted to have trams in Edinburgh. Their priority was trams in Edinburgh. Our priorities would have been very different—including the A9. I think that to try to use that fig leaf to get out of that is disgraceful. If I can say that, in addition—

We have made significant and necessary progress. The A9 route strategy identified significant improvements to the road to improve safety and improve the route for strategic and local users. In particular, it identified the problem of platooning traffic leading to driver frustration—a point that Mary Scanlon made—and identified a series of overtaking lanes and dualling sections. That programme of works, which is outlined in the strategy, is nearly complete.

I am sorry, but I am in my last few seconds. In 2008, we also announced a commitment to the STPR recommendations to ensure that the A9 will be further improved and rendered fit to serve Scotland’s future economic and social needs. Transport Scotland began the necessary and complex design works for phased dualling between Perth and Inverness, which shows the Government’s commitment to the route. Those design works have been undertaken alongside the physical A9 projects that have recently been completed or are progressing. The completion of the current programme is entirely consistent with beginning the longer-term work on dualling the Perth to Inverness route and the further junction improvements between Dunblane and Perth. Continuing maintenance and safety priorities for the A9 are considered in relation to the requirements of Scotland’s trunk road network as a whole. That means that investment follows the greatest need, based on thorough evaluation and opportunities that are identified to maximise the benefit of any investment. Murdo Fraser said that the Government has to choose. We have chosen to commit to phased dualling of the A9. That has been demonstrated by the work that we have undertaken so far. The commitment that the Conservatives made, instead, was to prioritise trams in Edinburgh. That speaks volumes. Meeting closed at 17:46.

Like other members, I congratulate Cathy Jamieson on securing the debate. I think that it was Aneurin Bevan who said that politics is the language of priorities. Given members' arguments, I see the freight facilities grants scheme as a far higher priority than, for example, spending £500 million on the tram scheme in Edinburgh. It is a question of the priorities that we want to advance. I say that because the FFG scheme has without question played an important part in moving freight from road to rail and water by funding new freight facilities. As many members said, it has led to a reduction of millions of lorry miles in the past 10 years. I join Cathy Jamieson and others in celebrating its success in delivering environmental benefits across Scotland. Many of the FFG-funded facilities will continue to remove lorries from Scotland's roads for years to come. On Richard Simpson's point, I confirm that the resource element will continue, so traffic that has been taken off the roads will not revert back on to them. Like other members, we are clear about the FFG scheme's positive environmental impact. That is why its budget has totalled more than £40 million since 2007. During that time we have made FFG awards to seven projects. It would repay the members who are most interested, among whom I certainly include Charlie Gordon, to look at the history of the projects. Many projects that are talked about for many years do not come to  fruition. The business case is sometimes not presented and, in some cases, an award is made that is not subsequently taken up. It is worth having a look at that information, which might go some way towards explaining the response that Charlie Gordon received at the committee from John Swinney on the take-up of grants so far. The projects that have been successful include the daily Eddie Stobart-Tesco rail service to Inverness, which takes more than 270 lorry journeys off the A9 each week, and the innovative JST floating pier, which enables timber to be transported to sawmills by sea. The nub of the situation is the UK Government's decision to cut the Scottish Government's budget by £1.3 billion in 2011-12. Whichever party members represent, they must agree that there is no question but that that presents a real financial challenge—a challenge that is without precedent since devolution. On top of that is the reduction of £800 million in the capital budget, which was hit particularly hard. Members have said, with some justification, that, in the global scheme of those reductions of £800 million and £1.3 billion, the figures that we are talking about for the FFG scheme are small. However, we have to get the smaller figures to add up to achieve the huge cut. As Karen Whitefield said, we are in Scotland and we have to talk about Scotland. However, the money that we get comes from Westminster. It is interesting to draw a comparison, because the Labour Party in England did not have the same scheme when it was in government. I think that the Labour Government in England spent £8 million on such grants over five years, whereas we have spent £40 million over a slightly shorter period. That shows a level of commitment to freight facilities grants that has not been replicated elsewhere.

I acknowledge and welcome that intervention, but what has changed is the financial situation. I think that Hugh Henry would go on to say that that is the reason why we should continue to fund new projects, but we must recognise how much the financial situation has changed for Scotland in the interim. We should remember the last words of the Chief Secretary to the Treasury in the previous Labour Government on leaving office: "There is no money." That is what his note said and that is what the Labour Party said. We are now dealing with the consequences of that and we have to live within our means.

Power is one thing, but resources are another. It would be useful if the member would acknowledge, even for one second, the disastrous effects of Labour's handling of the economy and the implications for budget lines across the whole budget in Scotland. It is true that, because there has been no progress so far on borrowing powers, we have to fund large projects, such as the Forth crossing, from current budgets. It is an impossible situation.

I am sorry, but I have to make some progress. The new hospital in Glasgow is another project that will take a huge chunk out of a capital budget that has been substantially cut, leading to our having to make very difficult decisions. Of course, significant commitments are already in place, including the £1 million of FFG that we are committed to funding in 2011-12. There have to be cuts somewhere and, reluctantly—

I have to make some progress. We have concluded that we cannot fund new FFG projects for the time being. We have allocated £2.9 million to support the freight industry in 2011-12, which enables us to continue to support significant modal shift across Scotland. I understand the disappointment felt by those who have FFG projects in development, such as the promoters of the new railhead that Cathy Jamieson mentioned. As has been said, the FFG scheme is a discretionary grant scheme and applicants can never be certain of grant support during the project development stage. There is no formal application at that stage.

Although I have already taken two interventions and do not have much time left, I will take the member's intervention provided that she is very brief.

I have been trying to deal with that subject. Cathy Jamieson made the point in her speech that the FFG scheme is suspended, from which I think she took some comfort. The scheme in England has also been suspended for a number of years. There is potential for change. I understand that the Tory-Lib Dem Government down south will look at the matter again in its budget. If that resulted in an increase in transport expenditure with which the FFG scheme could identify, consequential moneys would come to Scotland. We could benefit from that so we should keep the matter under review. Although we are unable to fund the scheme at the moment because of the draft budget, if additional moneys come in we can quickly go to projects that are ready to go. I ask people who are interested to continue to register their interest.

No, I do not have time. Charlie Gordon mentioned that there is another remedy, through the budget process. If he or Cathy Jamieson want to propose an amendment to the budget and say from where we could lose money, that is entirely within their gift, as it is within the gift of any party. Part of the remedy lies with others. If the priority attached to the scheme is as has been described, the Labour Party can make that move. The Conservative and Liberal Democrat parties can also bring pressure to bear on their colleagues south of the border. If we have that funding, we can continue to support FFG projects. Funding for FFG projects of £40 million over five years is substantially more than has been allocated elsewhere and gives an idea of our continuing commitment to such projects. We also facilitate the sustainable transport of timber through the strategic timber transport fund, which has been allocated £3 million in the forthcoming year. In addition, we continue to fund other activity to help the freight industry to reduce emissions, such as the distribution of freight best practice information. Remedies are available and the situation is not as bleak as it seemed at the start of the debate. I have confirmed that the scheme has been suspended, as it has been elsewhere, but there are other remedies. If others take different decisions to help us with the resource situation that we are in, the matter can be looked at again.  Meeting closed at 18:02.

Does the member think that the decision of the Labour Government to scrap the scheme five years ago and the fact that it spent less money in five years in England—which has a much bigger transport network than we do—than we have spent in one year in Scotland, mean that the Labour Government should have attracted the same kind of criticism? Did she make any points about the matter at the time?

Would the member like to address the impact of the £800 million cut in this year's capital budget? If Cathy Jamieson can describe the reduction of the freight facilities grant as "a slap in the face", does the member agree that the cut in the capital budget is tantamount to grievous bodily harm to the Scottish budget?

Transport Scotland is part of the Scottish Government. Through its traffic Scotland service, variable message signs are used to warn drivers of emergencies, incidents and road closures. When the signs are not required for those purposes, they are used to promote road safety, network operation and related campaigns.

Following the motorway closures last month, Transport Scotland and the police identified the need for co-ordinated and consistent high-level warning messages to help to guide the travelling public's decisions during the bad winter weather. Transport Scotland worked with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland to produce a nationally agreed set of warning messages that local police forces can use when they issue travel warnings for roads. The onus in deciding to issue such travel warnings remains fully on police forces. Transport Scotland provides operational support to the police by disseminating messages via the traffic Scotland system of variable message signs, media broadcasts and website updates. I understand Elizabeth Smith's point about whether the signs could be more effective. We review that continually with Transport Scotland. She is a stakeholder, like everyone else, and we will take on board her point.

I am more than happy to take on board Nigel Don's point, with the proviso that closing the gates is the police's responsibility, which I do not want to gainsay. The police have acted correctly at all times. Nigel Don's point about providing the maximum possible information to drivers ahead of time is extremely important. Through satellite navigation and other methods, we can do more to give drivers real-time information. We are considering how to do that.

The motorway and trunk road programme, which we published in June 2007, showed the estimated completion date for the M8 Baillieston to Newhouse scheme as 2012-13. Subject to parliamentary approval, the earliest completion date for the scheme will now be not before 2016-17. The M8 is a complex scheme and it is important that it has been developed in detail and consulted on fully to ensure a proper and robust solution. We are committed to commencing procurement of this key scheme in 2011-12.

I am happy to point out that the explanation for the delays is remarkably similar to that for the delays on the M74. The member will be aware that major road schemes can involve public local inquiries and legal challenges. In this case, there was also delay because HM Treasury would not confirm the arrangements for the international financial reporting standards schemes. Since 2007, this Government, under my predecessor, has undertaken 17 road projects and five more are currently under construction. Of course, the M80 and M74 will also be completed on time and, in one case, ahead of budget and time.

I have already explained the circumstances behind the delays. It is funny how, when a project comes under Labour, the idea of a public local inquiry causing delay is acceptable, but it is not acceptable in this case. As I said, the simple fact is this: under my predecessor, 17 road projects—some on them ones that the Labour Party had committed to but made no progress on—were progressed. As I said, the M74 project will be completed ahead of time.

The Scottish Government's position is that the air discount scheme is not intended to cover business-related travel and the original notification to the European Commission in 2006 did not expressly request it. Although we are aware that business-related claims have been made, we do not believe that a publicly funded scheme should be used to subsidise public and private-sector travel budgets. No assessment has been made by the Scottish Government of the impact of our decision to remove business-related claims. Clearly, the impact on public bodies and private-sector companies in the eligible areas will depend on their level of scheme use.

I am happy to meet Liam McArthur at any time to discuss any issues that he wishes to discuss and, where possible, I commit to consulting well in advance of making decisions. When the scheme was notified to the European Commission, a request for use by business passengers was not made. In fact, the scheme is covered by the aid of a social character provision, which is designed to offer social support to individual customers. The scheme also specifically prohibits use by national health service employees, although I am not sure why they should be treated differently from employees of other organisations. We are committed to continuing the scheme, but on the basis of how it was notified.

We have no plans to reinstate the branch line element of the Glasgow airport rail link project and we continue to dispose of surplus land.

It is worth considering some of the real-life circumstances that we face, such as the departing Chief Secretary to the Treasury in the previous Westminster Government saying that there was no money left, and the massive cuts to the capital budget from which we are suffering. Wendy Alexander cannot hide from those facts, no matter how hard she tries. The simple fact is that the cuts to our revenue budget are dwarfed by those to our capital budget. Wendy Alexander's disappointment is far less than mine at what the previous Labour Government did to the economy and the way the current Government has continued to apply with vigour the cuts that the Labour Party signalled. It is our duty to dispose of assets that we no longer need, to get best value for the taxpayer.

My predecessor, Stewart Stevenson, met representatives of Highland Council on 10 November to discuss developments regarding the proposed Inverness bypass as part  of the strategic transport projects review joint action plan. Highland Council is progressing a study into connectivity in south-west Inverness that includes options to cross the river Ness and the Caledonian canal. Transport Scotland continues to work with Highland Council as part of the stakeholder group for that study, meeting most recently on 10 December.

I am aware that the member is very well versed in these matters, including the circumstances of the Scottish Government's commitment on the eastern link and the council's commitment on the western link. Those options, which include crossings of the river Ness and the Caledonian canal, are out to public consultation at the moment. The consultation does not close until 28 January. I assure him that we will take a very close look at the responses as soon as we can, once the consultation process is closed.

The traffic Scotland website is updated in real time once information has been validated by the traffic Scotland operator. The information is received from intelligent transport systems monitoring equipment that is deployed on the network, and from the trunk road operating companies and the police. Weather information comes from automated processes that are provided by the Met Office.

I refer Elaine Murray to the discussion that we had earlier about the pressure on some websites. I subsequently discussed the matter with Transport Scotland officials. One issue is that the information has to be validated. That can sometimes cause problems and delays in making it available. Officials are willing to consider that matter to see whether things can be done differently. Obviously, it is important that the information is accurate, which is why they want to validate it. Looking at things such as texting and the trend of texts that come into them is one way  in which they might be able to make information available more quickly. I understand the problem to which Elaine Murray refers. Last week was an exceptional case, and officials are considering how things can be improved.

The Scottish Government continues to work with key bodies throughout the country, including in Clydesdale, to ensure that disruption is minimised and that critical services are maintained during the current period of exceptionally severe winter weather.

Of course I am happy to meet the member to discuss the issues. It is worth saying that a great deal of work is going on. In fact, some very innovative work is going on in relation to reheating rolling stock to get rid of accumulated snow and ice. Some of the things that ScotRail is doing at present might become the way in which things are done in many other countries as well. We should recognise that, as the debate earlier today showed, there was an exceptional situation, and as I mentioned, the very cold weather had a profound impact on the rail network. However, I am happy to meet the member to discuss those matters further.

John Swinney travelled to Orkney on 14 June and Shetland on 27 September to discuss ferries issues with the islands councils. The inter-island ferry services for which Orkney Islands Council and Shetland Islands Council are responsible were covered in those discussions. The two inter-island routes in the Western Isles are provided by CalMac Ferries as part of its contract with the Scottish Government. There have been no recent discussions with Comhairle nan Eilean Siar specifically about those services. The future of all ferry services in Scotland, including inter-island services, is being considered through the Government's ferries review. Officials working on the review last met Shetland Islands Council on 15 June. John Swinney met Western Isles Council on 16 June and Orkney Islands Council on 21 June. That was part of an extensive consultation that included 33 meetings with island and coastal communities. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities is a member of the ferries review steering group, which has met seven times since 2008, most  recently on 14 September 2009. Orkney Islands Council and Shetland Islands Council are also members of the ferries review operator sub-group, which last met on 17 June 2010.

The member's question about extension of the road equivalent tariff has been asked before and answered. There is no prospect of the pilot programme being extended at this time. Mr Stewart will be aware that Mr Swinney last discussed the matter with Orkney Islands Council leaders in Kirkwall on 14 June. There have been contacts between officials since that time, but there have been no formal developments. We are awaiting the outcome of the prioritisation exercise that Mr Swinney has requested. Caledonian Maritime Assets Ltd has also met OIC to discuss the joint procurement of vessels. The member will be aware that the services were transferred to Orkney Islands Council in 1987. The council contends that the Scottish Government has on-going funding obligations. The matter is disputed, but Mr Swinney and the Government are trying to progress discussions pragmatically. I am sure that that will continue.

We have supported such initiatives in the past, through the freight facilities grant. We have never been able to draw down all of those moneys for suitable projects, but the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth assures me that discussions on the issue can take place with John Scott.

Key responders have worked and are working hard to deal with the exceptionally severe conditions, which have tested contingency plans. We are determined to ensure that lessons will be identified and learned. The Scottish Government is co-ordinating and supporting key agencies' preparations for the predicted further severe weather towards the end of this week.

I understand the frustration that has been caused to those who have been affected  by the recent severe weather—rail passengers and others. We indeed considered the matter in substantial detail earlier, when I explained that very cold temperatures had caused problems with the rolling stock and the points, which meant that there was less rolling stock to provide the services that are normally provided. I discussed the matter with First ScotRail today, yesterday and the day before, and discussions are on-going. I assure the member that every effort is being made by ScotRail to ensure as full a service as possible. That cannot be done quickly, but ScotRail is working very hard to achieve it.

We agreed today to provide information directly to members through Transport Scotland and across the gamut of its activities. Right now, we are concerned to put in place whatever provisions are necessary to ensure the continuation of the trunk road network, the road network more widely and the rail network. That must be the focus of our activities. Perhaps the member could look at the information to which I have referred once it becomes available, and if he wishes further information we can discuss it at that point.

We fully appreciate the significance of Prestwick airport and the services that it provides. We outlined earlier today some of the measures that have been taken on the relaxation and derogation of obligations in relation to fuel tanker drivers to ensure further supply. There have been questions about the road network and tankers getting out. We have worked very closely with the Grangemouth providers of the fuels. These measures taken together—on providers, consistent supply through Grangemouth, ensuring that drivers can get to where they wish to go to  make their deliveries, and allowing drivers, where necessary, to work longer than would otherwise be the case—show that we are putting in place preparations to ensure a continuity of supply to Prestwick.

Transport Scotland views public consultation as an integral part of the delivery of its projects. During scheme preparation, public exhibitions, meetings with interest groups and face-to-face meetings with affected landowners are held. During construction, contractors are under a contractual obligation to consult those who are affected by the works. Their performance is monitored by Transport Scotland.

As Jeremy Purvis knows, Transport Scotland project teams met all residents of Falahill on a number of occasions to discuss the proposals. A requirements capture exercise was also completed to ensure that feedback and requirements were incorporated into the final submission. Final details were sent to all residents prior to the formal application being submitted on 4 November 2010. Also, in advance of the tendering phase, Transport Scotland reviewed commitments that were made to neighbouring properties to ensure that all proposals will deliver on those commitments. However, a subsequent value-for-money review of the issue showed that the costs may be affordable and that revisiting the proposed layout appears to have clear benefits for residents.  If Jeremy Purvis has continued concerns about the matter, I am happy to meet him to discuss them. I hope that he appreciates that I come fresh to the issue and am happy to find out what his concerns are.

It is right that we have such a debate when everyone in Scotland is talking about the weather and its effects. An issue that is important to the people of Scotland should be important to us. I start by thanking the various groups of people that some members have mentioned and which form the focus of John Swinney's amendment. Last night, I had the chance to see some of their efforts up close. I am referring especially to night gritters, who sat for many hours waiting to go out at the appropriate time, police officers and the many people behind desks who do a tremendous job. It was apparent that genuine effort was being made across a number of agencies and communities, whose role has been mentioned. I think that it was a Labour member who made the point that the issue should be about people. That is true, and that idea informs our amendment. I will try to deal with as many of the points that have been made as possible. I do not think that I will get through them all, but I will be happy to talk to any individual member who wants to pursue a point that I cannot mention. First, I highlight the fact that some members have taken a fundamental view of some of the issues that have affected us, and I have tried to take those issues into account. I enjoyed Bill Kidd's speech, although some members did not seem to. It was an interesting exposition of long-term and profound changes in weather conditions. I, like many other members, was not aware of the term "Arctic oscillation". He made important points about Paris, Poland, Canada and Finland experiencing dramatically different conditions in  recent days. Charles de Gaulle airport and the Eiffel tower were closed, which raises the question whether France's reputation should be damaged. Some people think that we in Scotland like to beat ourselves up; there is no need for us to do that when we have Jeremy Purvis around. We have tried to take immediate measures. Improved communications are at the heart of the six-point plan that we mentioned. Andy Kerr talked about the involvement of local government in that six-point plan—it was discussed in the presence of representatives from COSLA, SCOTS and the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers. Andy Kerr was right that there was not a great deal of time to consult, and action had to be taken quickly, but the plan was discussed with those bodies, and we can have further discussions as necessary. Some of the measures that have been mentioned by individual members are, as the cabinet secretary made clear, being considered, and others that have been mentioned will be examined. One of those is the point that is made in the Labour motion about planning exercises. Charlie Gordon mentioned that when we met on Monday morning. I do not know whether we are thinking about the same thing, but I envisage local authorities and all the agencies undertaking contingency planning from time to time when they are not under stress. We should look at doing that on a Scotland-wide basis or in an appropriate location in Scotland. Johann Lamont said that Nicola Sturgeon was not involved. I have attended four daily meetings since I got this job and Nicola Sturgeon has been at every single one to report on the efforts of the health service, which have been tremendous. Some of the figures that could be given out show how it has continued, almost without interruption in many cases. It has done a tremendous job and Nicola Sturgeon has been involved right the way through the process. Karen Whitefield mentioned the traffic Scotland website. As Alex Johnstone said, the pressure on some of those websites can be phenomenal. On 5 December, that website received 1.1 million hits. On 6 December, there were 21.6 million hits on it. It is not always possible to plan for that, although now that it has happened, we should do exactly that. Heating fuel provision has been mentioned by several members. There is an extent to which we have to act: there is no question but that we must ensure that we can help with supplies. However, there is a question about the vehicles that some of the companies are using not being able to access some rural locations with large tankers. We have raised that issue. It is also true that the demand for heating oil increased during the cold spell. Fuel  distributors are working well to resolve specific problems. The cabinet secretary mentioned the current extension to drivers' working hours and the rights and derogations that we have achieved. Grangemouth is ramping up its operation, and I understand that it had a further delivery today. We are mindful of the points that members have made and we will take them to today's meeting of the Scottish Government resilience room. Pauline McNeill and other members mentioned ScotRail. On the point that Pauline McNeill made about information getting to members, I will ask Transport Scotland to ensure that every member is given a briefing as far as possible about the various things that it is doing so that members are better informed. If something is not covered in that briefing, members can come back to me. Mary Scanlon mentioned that there were temperatures of -19°C. In my area, which is a lot further south than hers, it was -15°C for a number of days. I have never seen that before. Temperatures below -10°C have a profound effect on ScotRail's rolling stock. It is not easy to remedy that quickly because of the money that would have to be spent. I mention that as just one of the reasons why some of the services have been disrupted. I have tried to work constructively with members and I will continue to do so. For example, as the cabinet secretary said, we will accept Labour's motion. We have demonstrated that we are willing to listen, and to look at constructive suggestions, such as that about planning exercises. As the cabinet secretary said, Jackson Carlaw's suggestion has been discussed. It is not quite as straightforward as it may appear—I am sure that it will not surprise him to hear that—but it has been discussed because it seems attractive on the face of it. We will try to work through the problems, but the end result will be to have a much clearer definition and a more commonly accepted and understood set of warnings that people can know the integrity of. Mary Scanlon mentioned HGVs. Let me say that the intention is to stack HGVs—to put them to one side—when we have to get a gritter or snowplough on to a trunk road to clear it. There was a concern that they would be disadvantaged compared with general traffic, which could just go on its way. That is not the intention. The intention is to stack the vehicles so that we can get in for a short time to grit or plough a road. That means that where we can do that—I appreciate that we cannot do it everywhere—there should not be the problem that she mentioned in relation to livestock. Finally, despite my natural inclination to be constructive, I must mention Jeremy Purvis's amendment, which is a step too far. As is always the case, there 50 words when one will do and  there is no group of words that includes anything like "suggest", "collaborate", "measured" or "balanced". It is merely a never-ending stream of verbose negativity—not so much a Jeremy as a Jeremiah. He misses the mood of today's debate and, when we come to decision time, I hope that the Labour motion is accepted along with the Conservative amendment and the amendment lodged by John Swinney, but that we reject Jeremy Purvis's amendment.

I have enjoyed listening to the debate. If the truth were told, I have enjoyed listening more than speaking, because my voice is not doing well. I am glad that I have a couple of quiet days ahead of me on Thursday and Friday. Before responding to individual comments, I will make some important points. It would have been better if more members had been in the chamber. As many members have, I record my thanks and admiration for the work that my good friend and colleague Stewart Stevenson undertook. If the bill is passed today, it will be due to recognition of, and will be a worthy testament to, his drive, enthusiasm and dedication to the project. His involvement and leadership in delivering the project from development to design and through the bill process were considerable. I am sure that all members acknowledge his substantial contribution. There is general consensus on the bill albeit, sadly, with one or two notable exceptions. I thank Parliament greatly for its interest and support. This is a proud day for Stewart Stevenson—it should be—for the Parliament and, most important, for Scotland. This is the day when Scotland commits to a world-class structure across the Forth. As a couple of members have mentioned, we will have three bridges—three iconic designs made over three centuries—in one splendid Scottish setting. This is not only about structures. Beautiful though they are, such structures are merely a means to an end in which our purpose is, of course, to secure our future economic and social wellbeing, thereby providing an inclusive and economically vibrant Scotland. A number of points were raised in the debate and I will try to address them. In his summing up, Charlie Gordon referred to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth as being "enervated". I have never seen John Swinney enervated. I have seen him energised perhaps, but I have to say that: he is my boss. Charlie Gordon made a number of interesting points, to which I will come back. He also touched on points that members who spoke before him had made, not least of which were Jim Tolson's points on the Halbeath junction and Rosyth. The Halbeath commitment remains in place and there will be further discussion on the matter with Fife Council. We cannot put a price on the works until we have  had that discussion. I cannot say just now whether we can commit to Rosyth. We do not yet have sufficient details from the council on that, but I am content to explore the option, while being mindful at all times of funding constraints. We will explore the option as best we can as things go on. I say to Mary Mulligan that we are providing a link from the new bridge to the M9, using the existing asset of the M9 link. I remind her that we are making improvements to traffic management in Newton: we will sign traffic from the M9 through to Newton. I mentioned earlier the funding commitment that we will make. I say to Dave Stewart that we are confident that we will be able to sign the contract in April; we are very confident on that and we want to do it because we can then commence work in the summertime. David Stewart also asked about EU funding applications. We have done that but, unfortunately, we were unsuccessful. He also made a point on regular updates to committees. I will continue the commitment that Stewart Stevenson gave previously; Dave Stewart will be aware of the updates that Stewart Stevenson has already given. We will provide six-monthly updates. Dave Stewart also spoke of his concern about the two consortia that are bidding for the project. My view is that there is very little likelihood that either would like to withdraw, given how much they have already put into the process that—of course—started quite some time ago. He also made a reasonable point on the adopt an apprentice programme. That issue is one for my colleague Angela Constance, who has the skills remit. We continued the programme this year, but whether it will continue in the future depends on budget constraints. I will ensure that my colleague takes up the point. A number of members made the point to Patrick Harvie that the real risk is that, if we were to wait until we had checked the cabling—which will happen in 2012—and the results were wrong, we would not have enough time to build the new bridge. If we do that, we will stand to be condemned by everybody in Scotland.

The member should know that the cable inspection results will not be known until 2012. This is not only about cabling. As, I think, Margaret Smith said, it is about other aspects of the bridge, too. We cannot risk not having a  replacement crossing in place by the time drastic action needs to be taken in terms of remedial work to the cables and elsewhere on the existing bridge. In approving the bill to construct the bridge, Parliament will be protecting and investing in the economic wellbeing of Scotland. We will be protecting and investing in our future—Scotland's future. In voting for the bill today, we reaffirm our commitment to our collective future. As I said, we are building an iconic bridge—the third such bridge across the Forth. Before I finish, I should say that I appreciate Ted Brocklebank's statement on iniquitous tolls. I very much agree with him: we should not have iniquitous tolls on any bridge in Scotland. I worked very hard on that in the past. As I said, in voting for the bill today, we reaffirm our commitment to our collective future. All that remains is for me to ask Parliament to formally support the motion.

The member should be heartened by the experience with the Clackmannanshire bridge, which was delivered on time and on budget. As I may have other points to address when I sum up, I confirm that the new VAT rate will be applied to the project, but we have reviewed the matter and are confident that expenditure can be kept within the present envelope.

It is important to reflect, at stage 3, on why we introduced the Forth Crossing Bill. The problems with the Forth road bridge are well known. Should the crossing be restricted or not available, there will be dire economic and social consequences. That cannot be allowed to happen. Our manifesto therefore committed us to a replacement Forth crossing, and we took action. In 2007, we developed our proposal. In 2008, we confirmed retention of the Forth road bridge as part of a public transport corridor. In 2009, we introduced the Forth Crossing Bill, which, this year, has been subject to detailed public and parliamentary scrutiny. The bill withstood that examination. In 2011, we will build. In only four years we have gone from initiation to construction. The Government recognises the issues. We have acted quickly, and we have delivered. Like other members, I never forget that we are making legislation for and on behalf of the people of Scotland. Accordingly, we must engage with those who will be directly affected by it, and we have done so. We have listened, and we have reflected. As the committee graciously acknowledged in its report, we have made a host of significant, positive changes. They include changes to improve design, changes to improve mitigation and changes to improve monitoring, reporting and community engagement. The hybrid bill procedures, which were applied here for the first time, present undoubted challenges, particularly for objectors. Substantial periods of time have been given to investigating complex matters, some of which are deeply sensitive for individuals. I am sure that we can all learn lessons from the process. However, the process has been thorough and exacting. It is important to acknowledge the contribution of those who have shaped the bill and its associated code of construction practice. Although I will mention him again in my summing-up speech, I mention first the efforts and diligence of Stewart Stevenson in getting us to this stage. I also thank publicly the many individuals, community councils, local authorities, businesses and associations that have actively engaged in the process. We might not always have agreed, but their contributions and advice were much appreciated, and our proposals are better for that engagement.  It would be remiss of me if I did not mention the people within the Parliament who have done a lot of hard work to improve the bill, including the Finance Committee, the Subordinate Legislation Committee and the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee, for their considered analysis. I also acknowledge the leading roles of Mary Mulligan and Margaret Smith in representing their constituents in Newton and South Queensferry. I am sure that the Parliament will join me in paying tribute to the skill and rigour of the Forth Crossing Bill Committee, expertly led by Jackson Carlaw, in scrutinising the bill. This is a good bill. Together with the associated code of construction practice, the bill is the better for the exacting scrutiny to which it has been subject. The code sets out precisely how the contractor should undertake the works, and it enables full scrutiny and transparency of actions. In so doing, it rightly provides the highest possible levels of protection for the public. The construction task itself will be huge. It will be, as has been said many times in the media, the biggest single project in Scotland for a generation. The bridge construction will take between five and six years, and our code of construction practice addresses mitigation measures to minimise disturbance over that period. We are also investing in public transport measures. We will implement bus hard shoulder running on stretches of the M90 and M9, and we are working with Fife Council to deliver Halbeath park and ride. Those and other measures will assist traffic flows during the construction phase and beyond. We will set very high standards in the provision of information. I can confirm that we will establish a contact and education centre at the current offices of the Forth Estuary Transport Authority at South Queensferry, which will be a focus for interested individuals. We are providing accessible engagement and information, because information and providing public protection will be at the heart of this vital project. The bill is absolutely necessary. The Forth replacement crossing project is absolutely vital for ensuring Scotland's economic wellbeing. Accordingly, I commend the bill to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Forth Crossing Bill be passed.

I thank Margaret Smith for lodging amendment 4, which seeks to place a duty on ministers to provide information to specific  groups and individuals. The provision of information is critical to the success of the project. The recognition of the need for information to be provided to relevant parties at appropriate times is a matter on which there is no difference between myself and Margaret Smith. The amendment re-articulates some but not all of the requirements that are contained in the code of construction practice. That does not mean that the many other provisions in the code in respect of information, liaison or engagement are of any less importance. Notwithstanding the amendment, I confirm categorically that ministers are still required to comply with all aspects of the code. That said, I confirm that the Government is content to accept amendment 4.

I thank Mary Mulligan for her explanation and recognise her concern. That is why we have given a clear commitment to fund improvements at Newton. I am happy to state on the record that the Scottish ministers will fulfil the commitments and undertakings that have been given, as set out in the register of commitments and undertakings. Accordingly, I am happy to confirm that the proposed measures for Newton will be fully funded by Transport Scotland and delivered by West Lothian Council. I am sure that Mary Mulligan will welcome the restatement of that commitment. Unfortunately, I cannot accept her amendment. First, it places commitments that are given to local authorities in a different class from those that are given to other parties such as householders and, therefore, provides for a distinction where none exists. Secondly, having made that distinction by virtue of referencing local authorities specifically, it could generate an unintended consequence. A future Administration might argue that, because local authorities are expressly mentioned but others are not, it was the Parliament's intention that somehow ministers should be under an obligation to honour only commitments that have been made to local authorities. Because other parties or individuals are not mentioned, one could surmise that any commitment that has been made to them has a somewhat lesser status. With that explanation, I trust that Mary Mulligan will appreciate why I cannot support the amendment. However, I stress again that I am committed to funding improvements at Newton.

Amendment 1 is a minor technical amendment. Plot 1920, which is shown on parliamentary plan L19, is required for the construction of ancillary works and will bring into the ownership of the Scottish ministers the solum of parts of the M90 that are not currently in their ownership. The plot was included in the original parliamentary plans and the book of reference. The owners of the land were notified of the introduction of the bill and the inclusion of the land in it. However, due to an oversight, the plot was not mentioned and listed in schedule 9 of the bill. The amendment corrects that error. I move amendment 1.  Amendment 1 agreed to.

These amendments reopen matters that were previously determined at stage 2. However, they are critically important and I want to be stark in saying that, if passed, the amendments will generate significant risk and uncertainty—risk and uncertainty for the contractor and a likely increase in the contract price; a resulting significant financial risk to a future Government, the Parliament and the taxpayers of Scotland; and uncertainty in the process for local authorities and the public. As members will be aware, noise and vibration matters have been subject to detailed scrutiny ever since the bill's introduction in November last year. We have worked closely with the City of Edinburgh Council, West Lothian Council and Fife Council to develop an appropriate noise control regime. The aim is to have in place a regime that will meet the national objectives of having the project built on time and on budget; will allow independent oversight of construction by the local authorities; and, perhaps most significantly, will provide safeguards for members of the public. That regime is now incorporated within the code of construction practice. Members who have followed the bill's progress will note that the issue of noise was subjected to detailed scrutiny at stage 2. The assessor, Professor Begg, sat for 11 days during which noise management was discussed extensively. The evidence included a full, comprehensive and detailed exposition by all concerned parties of the issues that Margaret Smith now wishes to be reconsidered. In his report, the assessor noted the merits of our proposals and recommended our approach to the committee, which gives full effect to the noise management process now defined; fully involves the local authorities as integral members of the noise liaison group, scrutinising the contractor's proposed construction methods before they are approved; and—this relates specifically to Margaret Smith's amendment 2—retains the ability of the local authorities and the public to have a statutory mechanism by which to challenge independently the contractor's undertaking of construction works. Also, under our proposal, the local authorities will gain an  additional statutory mechanism to ensure the implementation of the noise management processes. Let us not forget that, at stage 2, as Jackson Carlaw can attest, the committee endorsed that approach. Accordingly, the assessor and the committee—the two parties most intimately involved in consideration of the bill—supported the comprehensive proposals that we have put in place. Our approach provides consistency across the project, which lies within three local authority areas, and provides certainty for the public. It also provides a significant benefit to the management of risk and the price of the contract, as it will provide the contractor with the knowledge that his or her operations will be disrupted only if he or she operates outwith the framework of the code of construction practice. That code has been amended to reflect local authority concerns. I confirm that we are not removing local authority powers to take independent actions afforded in the Control of Pollution Act 1974. Both the councils and the public will retain a statutory mechanism by which to challenge independently the contractor's undertaking of construction works. The councils will also have an enhanced role through the code of construction practice. I do not believe that the amendments have wholesale support from local authorities. I remind Margaret Smith that Fife Council did not object to any of the proposals during the parliamentary process and that West Lothian Council stated, on 13 September, at the assessor hearing: "As the Transport Scotland team has correctly pointed out, what it is proposing in the code of construction practice is better than what exists purely under the 1974 act. That is what we as the local authority would expect on a project of this size." Margaret Smith seeks to overturn the process within the code of construction practice that has taken more than a year to achieve; to overturn the consistency that will apply across all three local authorities for controlling noise and vibration; to overturn the findings of the assessor; and to overturn the considered views of the committee. Having overturned those things, she wishes to introduce significant risks and uncertainties. Surely, the introduction of risk and uncertainty cannot be the considered view of the Parliament. I strongly urge Margaret Smith to withdraw her amendments. If she does not withdraw them, I urge all members to resist these amendments, the consequences of which will fall on a future Administration.

Will the member take an intervention?

The assessor sat and considered the City of Edinburgh Council's arguments and then made his decision. Is it not the case that City of Edinburgh Council accepted that decision and has not made any representations since that time?

There is wide-ranging evidence of a variety of benefits stemming from outdoor learning experiences for children and young people. Many of those benefits, in particular improved mental, emotional, social and physical wellbeing, have a positive impact on behaviour in educational settings.

We are very much aware of the fact that health and safety legislation can be seen as a barrier to outdoor education. To that end, we have worked with Learning and Teaching Scotland to produce online advice and guidance for teachers who want to get involved in the outdoor learning experience, which is something that we very much encourage. Lord Young, who used to be an adviser to the Conservative Government, has made recommendations for educational visits in order to reduce the amount of bureaucracy. We support that. I wrote to Lord Young and received a response suggesting that measures will be taken to ensure that health and safety—which is a reserved matter—is not seen as a barrier and that, instead of some of the licensing regimes, we might have a code of conduct that would make it easier for teachers to be involved in outdoor education. Despite those inhibitions, it is gratifying to see that many teachers, including one or two who are present today in the chamber, still ensure that they provide children with a full range of experiences outwith the classroom. We want to encourage that.

We are working with Skillset, the relevant sector skills council for the industry, to develop and support a wide range of initiatives to help the textiles industry in Scotland. As well as updating the national occupational standards for the sector, new qualifications have been developed to address employers' needs. Small employers in the sector are able to access workforce development support as part of the Government's flexible training opportunities scheme. Through the skills in textiles programme, the Government is helping textiles firms to improve their productivity and links with academia.

I am happy to update the member on the progress that has been made by Skillset in relation to, for example, the Scottish  Qualification Authority's accreditation co-ordination group, which has approved a leather production level 2 Scottish vocational qualification structure. SQA has also approved a fashion and textiles assessment strategy. A level 3 SVQ in kilt making—which is very topical today—has been accredited and added to the Scottish credit and qualifications framework. We enjoy a good relationship with Skillset, although we had some concerns during its establishment about the way in which the previous regime had been changed at UK level. As I am sure the member is aware, those issues are determined by and large at UK level. However, we have been very active in ensuring that Skillset serves the interests of the textiles industry. If there are continuing issues of concern, I am more than happy to meet the member to discuss them.

Improving the perception of careers in the industry is important. That can take place at school level, and we have encouraged that through SDS in particular, and through the careers service, but it is also true to say that the colleges have to make their offer of training for the textiles industry much more obvious. It was clear to me when I met the industry some months ago that there was not an appreciation of what the colleges can do—for example, in providing bespoke courses at the request of employers, rather than employers' having to tap into current, continuing courses. The relationship is now working far better with Heriot-Watt University and Borders College, and that will lead to a greater uptake by young people, as the member mentioned.

The educational and economic benefits of the merger were set out in the business case that was jointly prepared by the three colleges concerned. Ministers also received advice from the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, which supported the merger. We have published on our website all the key documents on which our decision to approve the merger was based. In approving the merger, we took into account the intended benefits for students, including wider provision, greater choice, better articulation with universities, better support and less duplication. The merger has established Scotland's largest college in the heart of Glasgow, and has given the city an institution of international significance.

It is fair to say that all colleges in Scotland have a good track record in bringing learning opportunities to people from deprived backgrounds. It is a feature of all the colleges that they encourage significant numbers of students from deprived areas. As the largest college in Scotland, the new City of Glasgow College, where one in 10 of all Scotland's learners will study, will offer a stunning prospectus of more than 2,500 courses. That will provide an unparalleled level of opportunity to many who live in areas of deprivation and who might not otherwise have been attracted to learning.

I am sorry that Karen Whitefield is showing the same horror as the rest of the Labour Party that curriculum for excellence is working in schools. Does she remember the extent to which, between 1999 and 2007, teachers, schools and councils were demotivated, fed-up and undermined by the number of initiatives that they had under the previous Administration, including ring-fencing and bidding for different funds?

You were not aware? You did not know?

In Scotland, 63 per cent of 18 to 24-year-olds are in employment compared with 60.8 per cent in the United Kingdom. More than 85 per cent of young people in Scotland who left school in the summer of 2009 had sustained a positive destination nine months later. However, we are not complacent about the challenge. Tackling youth unemployment is a top priority for the Scottish Government and we are not prepared to accept the prospect of another lost generation. That is why we have launched a raft of practical actions, backed with £6.5 million of investment, to support leavers from school, college and university this summer.

I can confirm that I did follow the Labour Party conference closely, and particularly the words of Iain Gray when he said: "when unemployment rises and poverty flourishes and opportunity disappears, people will look to Labour". That is exactly right. People want to know the cause of those things, and it was the Labour Party. They are also interested in the idea that the Labour Party wishes for the worst for Scotland in order that it can prosper. That is exactly the wrong approach. It is the opposite of the approach that we are taking, which is positive, specific actions, through the measures that I mentioned previously, to deal with the consequences of the malaise in the UK finances that has caused unemployment.

As I have mentioned before, we have prioritised modern apprenticeships. Last year, more than 20,000 apprenticeships were  created, which was up from just over 10,000 the previous year. We have a similar target this year, with 15,000 in the budget that David Whitton supported and another 5,000 through European structural funding. We are therefore looking to carry forward last year's success by achieving another 20,000 apprenticeships. On the effect on youth unemployment, there is obviously not a direct correlation, but youth unemployment in Scotland has remained stable right through the 12-month period.

We are committed to delivering 55 schools through Scotland's schools for the future programme.

I certainly share Claire Baker's concern at the general state of public finances at a United Kingdom, Scottish and, as she has mentioned, council level. However, I point out that Fife Council's record on this matter is extremely good, having built since 2007 nine of the 303 new schools that the Scottish National Party Administration has overseen—53 more, I should say, than Labour was committed to. That represents more than £40 million of investment from the Scottish Government. Ms Baker knows full well that the commitment in question depends on different parties and pressures, one of which is the huge 36 per cent reduction in capital expenditure that the Scottish Government will suffer over the coming year. Perhaps that underlines the view that, in the words of the Labour Lord Myners, "There is nothing progressive about a government that consistently spends more than it can raise in taxation and certainly nothing progressive that endows generations to come with the liabilities incurred with respect to the current generation." Although we in the Scottish Government—and, indeed, councils—are wrestling with the problem, we are nevertheless committed to our school building programme.

This Government has provided record levels of funding for colleges to help them address the pressures brought by the recession. Our 6.9 per cent increase this year, compared with last year, recognises the additional demand for places and the role of further education in building skills for the future.

I am being encouraged just to say yes, but I will forego the opportunity. I visited Angus College recently and was able to sit in on one of its skills classes—an award-winning class that helps to develop the soft skills of those who are furthest from the labour market. The project has been recognised by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education as providing a sector-leading innovative practice, and the more choices, more chances work that is done by Angus College is truly remarkable. I do not disagree with anything else that Andrew Welsh said.

I have to say to the member that, as yet, the process has not begun because the business case has not been lodged with the funding council. That has to happen first. It is only at that stage, and if, as seems likely, the prospective cost is in excess of £50 million, that the case will come to ministers. We will have to wait and see what is brought about by that process as well as by the spending review and the spending decisions that will be taken by the Government over the coming weeks.

I met Clackmannanshire Council on 16 July 2009 to discuss a number of key issues relating to education and children and young people. At that meeting we signed the single outcome agreement. I will be attending the Clackmannanshire tenants and residents federation annual general meeting on 2 November 2010 and council representatives are expected to attend.

I will take Richard Simpson's last question first. The money for a new primary school is secure. A decision on what will happen to the two existing schools will be reached after we have received the council's proposals, which we still await. For that reason, I have not had specific discussions with the council about the primary  school estate; I am not able to get involved in such discussions when there is likely to be a proposal to close a school, which may ultimately be referred to ministers. However, I have spoken to the council previously on many occasions. Over a number of years, I have pointed out to it the folly of its public-private partnership burdens, which will put pressure on the maintenance budgets for all schools.

Responsibility to fund a coherent system of high-quality college education lies with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, rather than with ministers. I have asked the chief executive of the funding council to write to the member to outline its approach to the future funding of colleges in Glasgow, including the new city of Glasgow college.

It is hard to give the reassurances that are sought, given that they are built upon false premises. On the point about the  merger being agreed—I think the member said "promised" by the funding council—on the basis of a £300 million contribution towards the capital development of the new college's estate, that was not the case. The colleges asked for the merger based on educational grounds, and the merger was supported by the funding council based on those same grounds. Subsequently, it was also supported by ministers on those grounds. I have made some information available to a previous questioner about the process of reaching a decision on any future capital investment, and that should have alerted Robert Brown to the fact that we cannot say—I do not know how he can say it—that £100 million has been set aside or a limit of £100 million has been set under the process. Ministers have not yet received a business case from the city of Glasgow college, and nor has the funding council. In the discussions that the cabinet secretary and I have had with representatives of the colleges, we made it very clear that the position of Stow College was to be taken into account in their future actions, and that Stow College should be accorded every possibility of being involved in the process at whatever level it seeks. We expect the colleges to observe the promise that they made.

I, too, congratulate James Kelly on securing the debate, and I echo the point that this is a very good time for it, given that the Commonwealth games in Delhi are in full swing. The Scottish Government is fully committed to supporting sport in our communities. As Margo MacDonald has just been saying, that is the backbone of sport in Scotland. In the past year, through sportscotland, we have provided significant support for sports clubs across the country, most markedly in South Lanarkshire. We will wish to recognise the contribution of the sports alliance and its constituent bodies—the Scottish Sports Association, the Scottish Association of Local Sports Councils, and Scottish Universities Sport. The Minister for Public Health and Sport cannot be here today as she is in Delhi, but she meets members of the alliance regularly. The Scottish Government echoes the sentiments that have been brought out in the motion and in some of the speeches this evening. Sport can make a significant contribution to Scottish society and, as a number of members have said, it can benefit our physical and mental wellbeing. We recognise that we do not do enough as a nation. It is therefore essential that we increase our levels of physical activity, which in turn will help us to combat a range of illnesses—Nanette Milne mentioned some—and shake off our record of being a nation in poor health.  As Ross Finnie said, we love our sport, but we need to do more than just watch it from the sofa or the terraces. As well as helping us to become healthier, sport can bring significant economic benefit. That is particularly true when it comes to big events—notwithstanding the points that Margo MacDonald rightly made about the costs. She was also right to suggest that some countries that seek to hold such big events perhaps now feel themselves priced out of them, given the costs that can go with them. However, the Commonwealth games in 2014 will deliver an estimated net economic benefit of about £81 million at the Scottish level, with an estimated 1,200 net jobs, 1,000 of which will be in Glasgow. The Ryder cup at Gleneagles, which will take place shortly afterwards, is expected to benefit the Scottish economy by £100 million—that is what it says in my notes, but I have recently seen an estimate that puts the figure at around £150 million—in the week of the event alone. Tackling antisocial behaviour is another area in which sport can play its part, as James Kelly said. We fund that through, among other things, the Government's cashback for communities programme. Funding is being provided from the proceeds of crime fund to a range of sports bodies, such as the Scottish Football Association and Scottish Rugby, to offer our young people the chance to keep fit and try new activities, in the hope that that will change attitudes and behaviours and, in turn, make our communities safer. We must remember, as several members have said, that sport is meant to be fun. At the top level, athletes earn huge sums, but for the vast majority of people sport should be about having fun and enjoying themselves. Some members mentioned the prospect of cuts and the impact that that might have on sport. It is somewhat ironic that we are discussing that possibility when it is possible for some players at the peak of their sport to collect £200,000 a week for playing football. I am not saying that that is all that they do, but it marks the difference between the scale of private funding and what Governments can expect to spend. I say to Margo MacDonald that it is true that New Zealand has hosted the rugby world cup at least once, and I think that it is to host the next rugby world cup. In addition, it is interesting to see a small country such as the Falkland Islands competing at the current Commonwealth games. It is taking part in the badminton competition, despite having only one club with 40 members. By its nature, sport is competitive. As we have seen from the performances, that is at the very heart of sport. Whether it is winning a kick-about with mates or winning a championship final, sporting success makes people feel good about  themselves. I am sure that the whole nation was delighted to see Colin Montgomerie lift the Ryder cup on Monday after leading the European team to victory at Celtic Manor and to watch Robbie Renwick taking gold in the pool on Tuesday. I was lucky enough to get down to one of the days of the Ryder cup—fortunately, it was the day when the scoreboard was almost entirely blue. The day after, we managed to go on to win the cup. It was phenomenal to see the level of interest in the event. Listening to "Flower of Scotland" being played as Robbie Renwick received his gold medal made us all feel extremely proud—it had echoes of Liz Lynch's victories, as was mentioned. Although sport is competitive, it is about more than winning. It is about what we can bring to individuals and communities alike. Not everyone will have the talent or the belief to win major events, but they should have the opportunity to have that ambition. It is important to remember that even the physical infrastructure can have a legacy that is not physical. I have lived through two Commonwealth games in Edinburgh, the first of which was when the Royal Commonwealth pool and Meadowbank stadium were built. After the games, it was inspiring for those of us who lived in Edinburgh to be able to use the same pool that the athletes had used. Like Willie Coffey, I had the chance to run the five Edinburgh marathons in the 1980s, each one of which finished on the tartan track in Meadowbank stadium. Although most of the race involved running around the back streets and the foreshore of Edinburgh, it was highly inspirational to come into the stadium, where the international athletes had been, for the end of the race. The physical infrastructure can have an important legacy. As has been said, it all starts at the grass roots. It is essential that we have the appropriate infrastructure—I am talking about people as well as buildings—that will allow everyone to develop their basic skills at an early age and have the opportunity to try a wide range of sports and get the right coaching in a facility that is fit for purpose. In that regard, I take Hugh Henry's point. Some of the early public-private partnership buildings were not open to the community at night, and I commend local authorities such as Glasgow City Council, which bought out the contract so that everyone in Glasgow could use all the facilities that were part of the original PPP programme. Now that the Commonwealth games are under way, many of us have been glued to our seats watching top athletes compete. Such events have the ability to inspire and encourage others to do that little bit extra. We must capture that interest and enthusiasm if we are to have health at the heart of our legacy plan, and our clear aim is to  create an active nation. Ross Finnie's point about the lack of success of countries that have hosted events such as Commonwealth games was well made. To return to the Ryder cup, the club golf programme, which was born out of our bid to host that event, has been extremely successful in introducing thousands of young people to golf and it will have long-term benefits. It has been mentioned that local grass-roots clubs can be a focal point for bringing communities together. Those clubs need to be supported and helped to thrive, and that support will be provided through the community sports hubs.  We should all enjoy and celebrate the Commonwealth games, but we should also recognise that we should not measure success just by the performances of the few; rather, we should measure it by the efforts of the many. We should use the games as an opportunity for Scotland to become a healthier and fitter nation.  Meeting closed at 17:55.

I will take up the bulk of my time by responding to some of the points that have been made. That in itself should underline the fact that, on the strategy, we have tried extremely hard to engage with others, including members of the other parties in the Parliament. Liz Smith's points about careers advice are worthy of a response. We are committed to redesigning the delivery of the careers services to help people, particularly young people, to make better informed career choices. Very shortly, we will publish a new careers information and advice strategy, which will include a commitment to more intensive careers support for those who need it most.

I do not think that I agree with that statement, but the point that I was making was that we recognise that there is a need for change, partly because of what we expect to come from Westminster and partly because of what we require from the careers service. That issue has been taken on board and announcements on it will be made shortly. I want to respond to Margaret Smith's point about the UK Commission for Employment and Skills. In its report, as others have mentioned, UKCES recommended the better integration of employment and skills services. In August, we completed a national roll-out of integrated employment and skills services, which has made it easier for people to access training, careers and employment services, thereby helping them to get back into work more quickly.  David Whitton made a point about volunteering, which was mentioned as part of the summer leavers skills strategy that was launched recently—yesterday, I think—with ProjectScotland, which was discussed by Jim Hume. It is too early to give figures on that, but we will produce such figures. More generally, Margaret Smith asked about the outcomes from the summer leavers package. It is a bit too early to provide meaningful figures on that. We are getting some information through, mainly from schools and colleges, but we are in a position to make progress in collecting those data, and we will provide that information as soon as we have it. It is fair to say from what we have seen already that work in some areas has been more effective than work in others, as is to be expected. We must look extremely hard at how we can make progress with looked-after children—to which I will return shortly, when I respond to Jeremy Purvis's point—which is an extremely difficult area. I point out that the figures that he mentioned have been bad for a very long time. That is not because Governments have not tried to do something about the issue; it is something to do with the nature of the problem, which we are trying hard to address. Christina McKelvie raised gender issues. I accept that we still seem to have a cultural apartheid, with girls doing hairdressing and boys doing motor vehicle training. Although that still seems to exist, huge progress has been made in the last year or so as regards the number of women who are taking up apprenticeships. There has been a huge shift. Unfortunately, the process still seems to run along particular tramlines, as Christina McKelvie mentioned. We have impressed on our partners the need to address the issue and have had discussions with the trade unions, which are also extremely concerned about it. We can use marketing initiatives and any other tools that we have to get across the idea that in some industries into which we cannot get women to go, particularly the industries involving construction skills, we must try to effect a culture change. That will not happen quickly. In addition, I was told last week by a representative of JP Morgan that in Glasgow, for example, it is extremely difficult to get women coming through as computer engineers from university IT courses and that the industry is crying out for people. On trade union learning, Karen Whitefield made a point about European social fund funding. I responded by saying that the Government has contributed substantially more to trade union learning than previous Governments. She asked whether that is sustainable. I mention the European funding because the extra money that  we have given to trade unions to encourage more trade union-based learning has allowed them to access additional moneys from the ESF. Even if all the ESF moneys were taken away, there would still be more money going towards that. We must look at the budgets that are coming up soon before we can make further commitments, but we are engaged in discussions with the trade unions on the matter. Tricia Marwick and other members spoke about trying to anticipate the skills that we need for the future and recognising the immediate need for skills. I would not want to underplay the difficulty of anticipating the skills that will be required. I discussed that matter earlier with David Whitton. The renewables industry, for example, will need many traditional skills and it takes a fair bit of thought to anticipate what skillset we will need and to develop courses that will provide the proper mix of skills. I agree with Tricia Marwick. People who have trained in traditional industries such as plumbing and electrical engineering or have trained to become electricians may not have a job at the moment, but they may be retrained more easily than others in multiskilled positions. That would help us with the expected high demand for their skills in the renewables boom that is coming our way.

I agree. I was lucky to be at Owens-Illinois in my constituency yesterday—it used to be United Glass or Pilkington. It has a huge manufacturing operation. The company made the point that, while employees need flexible skills, management must take a more enlightened approach to empowering employees and giving them more say in how they go through their career, with learning opportunities that are relevant to their jobs. I was disappointed by Gavin Brown's speech. He asked for a couple of examples of Government engagement with employers, which I gave him. I was unable to give him an exhaustive list of how we engage with employers, because we do that in many ways and it would take me a long time to go through the whole list. One example that I gave was of the summer leavers package. To make sure that that hotline was established by employers we engaged all the employers organisations, including the small business organisations. In relation to tourism, the 800 targeted pathways opportunities that were identified were developed with the British  Hospitality Association, which is an umbrella body for many tourism organisations in Scotland. We regularly have skills summits at which we engage with employers, so I do not accept that we do not engage with employers, and it was wrong of Gavin Brown to suggest that. Perhaps he is unaware of some of the things that are happening. I am more than happy to come back to the issue. I have no problem with the Labour amendment. The amendment, and the way in which David Whitton in particular has engaged on the matter, show an understanding of the gravity of the situation that we face. When there is such engagement, there is influence. I readily recognise that the skills strategy has been influenced by some of David Whitton's thinking and previous budget discussions that we have had. I can accept the Conservative amendment. I accept that Liz Smith has differences with some of our suggestions, but she proposed positive measures to try to improve things, although I do not necessarily agree with them. Unfortunately, I cannot say the same about the Liberal Democrat amendment, which is carping, pointless and negative. The Liberal Democrats' approach is consistent with the approach that they took the last time we had a skills strategy debate. Margaret Smith's amendment should be contrasted with the comments of, for example, Alison Hay, who is a Convention of Scottish Local Authorities Liberal Democrat. She fully supports the skills strategy and thinks that it will be an important addition to how we deal with skills in Scotland. If the Lib Dems want to be part of the solution instead of just carping from the sidelines, they must rethink how they go about things. I commend the motion that is before members.

I reassure Jim Hume that we took up with Siemens the points that Tavish Scott made at First Minister's question time, and I can tell him that Siemens is very happy with the support that it received from the Scottish Government and with the advice that it got.

Karen Whitefield has mentioned employers and trade unions. Does she recognise that this Government has increased the amount that is given to trade union learning, and has also increased the amount that is available through European funding, which has increased the pot?

Does Claire Baker acknowledge that some of the confusion that she rightly mentions is due to the respective roles of Jobcentre Plus and Skills Development Scotland? Is she aware that there is now a lot more joint working than used to be the case? Would she support the further integration of the two bodies, even to the point that one assimilates the other, such that the functions of Jobcentre Plus are taken over by a Scottish-led consortium?

Does Elizabeth Smith recognise the extent to which schools are already providing opportunities for vocational learning at 14, 15 and 16? I appreciate that not every school and not every local authority is doing it. However, is she saying that we should direct schools to do it, or that schools should choose to do it?

I am sure that Mr Whitton would want to recognise that although that facility was largely self-funded, the Scottish Government made a contribution to it. Does he agree that its defining feature is the flexibility that it offers with regard to the skills that could be developed in that environment? As he said, multiskilling will be essential, and that unit has been designed specifically to allow such training to take place.

The debate comes at an important time in Scotland's economic recovery. Growth returned to the economy at the end of 2009, but economic conditions remain fragile and considerable challenges are to be faced if we are to consolidate the recovery. It is clear that skills are vital to recovery in all sectors of the economy. A key function of the Government is to create the right conditions for economic success, and skills policy is one of the strongest levers at our disposal. We held a constructive debate on skills in January, which sought to develop a consensus on the way forward at a time not just of significant challenge but of opportunity. On Tuesday, I launched the refreshed skills strategy, "Skills for Scotland: Accelerating Recovery and Increasing Sustainable Economic Growth", which makes clear the Scottish Government's commitment to training and skills as we seek to accelerate recovery. I hope that members have had the opportunity to read and digest the strategy. The consensus in Parliament was that more flexibility is needed in the skills system to reflect economic change. The Government is now setting out a flexible package of skills support. We all agree on the importance of modern apprenticeships. It is vital that the programme continues to provide people with the opportunity to gain the skills, training and experience that are needed to find sustained employment. It must also continue to provide businesses with the expertise that will help to drive future success. Last year, more than 20,000 people started modern apprenticeships in Scotland—that is up by more than 90 per cent on starts in the previous year. The proportion of female starts also increased significantly, but work has still to be done to increase women's participation and achievement in a number of sectors, including information and communications technology. People in the ICT industry and in the banking industry have told me that they are keen for far more female graduates with an ICT background to come to them.  We will continue to promote accessibility and diversity in the modern apprenticeships programme and throughout other learning environments. This year, Skills Development Scotland has been set the target of delivering 20,000 modern apprenticeship starts and more than 40,000 training places in total. That figure includes 14,500 training places to help to support the unemployed to enter the labour market. This year, SDS is also providing 5,000 flexible training opportunities that are designed to meet small employers' skills needs. During my visit to Gems Engineering Ltd in Glasgow on Tuesday, I saw at first hand the benefits of that flexible scheme, which is helping employers to enhance the skills of their staff and to bring real benefits to their businesses through improved productivity and a stronger and more confident workforce. As we move forward, we will continually seek to develop innovative models of skills support to encourage greater employer investment in skills. The strategy also recognises the need for a flexible and responsive skills approach to new and emerging economic opportunities, including those in the low-carbon economy. The start of a new wind turbine modern apprenticeship framework at Carnegie College is an example of that. In January, we agreed that the skills strategy should provide the support and opportunity for young people, including those who are traditionally the hardest to reach, to be successful. The threats from rising youth unemployment are clear. Since the start of the downturn, the Government has guarded against those threats. In June, I announced a substantial programme of support for the large number of summer leavers from schools and colleges. It included a minimum of 800 targeted pathways opportunities; a new SDS one-stop shop providing guidance to employers on offering young people a chance to get started in the labour market; and a £1,000 incentive for employers recruiting a young apprentice who faces additional barriers that restrict their ability to participate. Those opportunities will be available throughout this financial year and will complement other support for young people, including the universal delivery of 16-plus learning choices and record investment in universities and colleges to provide more and better learning opportunities. Since the summer, we have been working hard to help school leavers to secure a place in learning or training. We have also tasked ProjectScotland with working with SDS and partners in the voluntary sector to target volunteering opportunities at the summer leavers who are yet to secure positive destinations. Many young people have successfully taken up places in college or  training; it is the right time to target volunteering places at those who are still in need. I flag up the importance of the curriculum for excellence. We often talk about wanting our young people to be successful learners, confident individuals, responsible citizens and effective contributors. We will achieve that by ensuring that they can develop skills for learning and skills for life, as well as the skills that they need for work. We recognise that those skills can be taken forward across the curriculum and in all of the different environments in which a young person learns. The strategy recognises the increasing number of unpaid adult carers and young carers in Scotland, who gain invaluable skills in carrying out their caring tasks. Many carers and older young carers—if I may call them that—also want to be supported to remain in employment, to access employment and to learn and gain new skills. The skills strategy and the carers and young carers strategies set out how we can help them to achieve that. We wish to focus on employer need. This week we set out the ambition for a skills system that is driven by what the labour market most needs, rather than by what the skills system can most easily deliver. The commitments in the strategy will help to achieve that by placing greater focus on working together with employers better to understand and to assess the skills that they need to be successful, and by ensuring that the supply of skills can be responsive to those needs. In January, we spoke about the need for an annual skills and training summit.

There are a number of specific measures. I mentioned the summer leavers package, which we made a one-stop shop for employers. Instead of being bounced around a number of agencies, employers could access the available opportunities through a sole telephone line. The person on the other end of the phone was able to direct them to those opportunities without having to put them on to a different organisation, which made things easier. Similarly, we have directed many of our new initiatives at small businesses. We recognise that it is more difficult to engage with a large number of employers. Although the strategy sets out the way in which we intend to do that, that work is not finished and there will be new measures to take it even further.  A partnership approach is vital. Annual summits offer a great opportunity to make ideas a reality. Last year, those ideas included the adopt and safeguard an apprentice schemes and the innovate with an apprentice two-for-one incentive for the life sciences sector. This year's summit helped to inform the structure and content of the strategy that we are debating today. I particularly welcome the support that was received at the summits from John Park, who is not in the chamber, and David Whitton, who is. We will continue to support that collaborative approach. I turn to the subject of simplification. As I have just said in response to Gavin Brown, I am aware that some employers have experienced difficulties in the past when trying to engage with the skills system, which is why simplification is a priority theme of the strategy. Through it, we set out a range of initiatives that will help to ensure that the system is more coherent and accessible both for individuals and for employers. It is a national strategy, but we recognise that local challenges are faced around the country. We would all agree that the best people to make decisions at local level are those who work at local level. The strategy sets out our intention to ensure better alignment between national agencies, community planning partnerships and local employability and economic groups. In doing that, we can ensure that services are properly targeted to match the different needs of residents and employers in local areas. The United Kingdom Government looks set to reduce funding to the sector skills councils significantly, as part of its wider reforms to the UK Commission for Employment and Skills. Even before cuts and reform begin, there have been impacts on Scotland. Skillsmart Retail has already reduced its presence in Scotland, and Cogent and SEMTA—the sector skills council for science, engineering and manufacturing technologies—have switched responsibility for life sciences in Scotland. Both of those moves were made with no prior consultation of Scottish stakeholders. That is unacceptable, as has been made clear to the chief executive officers of the SSCs concerned. Against the backdrop of severe funding cuts, we still expect UKCES and the SSCs to retain some responsibility for functions that are critically important for Scotland, and we will ensure that Scotland's needs and expectations are clearly articulated around delivery of those functions. If other SSCs reduce their presence in Scotland, we will not hesitate to take radical and practical steps to ensure that the voice of our employers is heard across the Scottish skills system. The refreshed strategy is published at a time of significant challenge for the public sector. We will know more about future budgets next month, but  our priority for skills will continue to be around providing individuals with the support that they need to find sustainable and productive employment. There is no doubt that skills and training are a point of shared commitment across the Parliament. We are all determined to get it right for the benefit of our young people as they move into the labour market for the first time, for the benefit of those who are already in the labour market and who seek to upskill and stay in work, and for the benefit of employers who are seeking to take advantage of new opportunities and to increase profits. Today's debate offers an opportunity to reach across political boundaries and achieve consensus on the right way forward for skills at a time not just of significant challenge but of opportunity. Members from across the Parliament have made a strong contribution to the skills debate. The Government has listened, and we have now responded. Indeed, most of the points that were made by Opposition members during the previous skills debate have been addressed in the skills strategy. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the publication of the refreshed Skills for Scotland skills strategy and agrees that the principles of flexibility, responsiveness and partnership working are critical to meeting Scotland's skills needs and accelerating economic recovery.

I had an opportunity to visit Royal Strathclyde Blindcraft Industries on 6 July, where I met staff and employees. RSBI is a successful example of a supported employment workshop that offers training, development and career progression, to benefit people with disabilities and the local economy.

I had a chance to listen to some of the debate this morning, when such issues were raised. I acknowledge the genuine commitment and compassion that Helen Eadie has displayed on the matter, in the debate and in discussions with me. I hope that she acknowledges that there is the same commitment on the Government benches. We provide direct funding for some supported employment workshops, in Aberdeen and other areas. The member asked about orders. Of course, it is not possible for us to provide contracts if we have no requirement for the goods but, in areas in which we have a requirement for goods, we are closely considering whether we can place contracts that will benefit the workshops. That work is continuing. As was mentioned in the debate, where we can we also use the European Union public procurement directive, in relation to reserving contracts for supported factories. That is helping  the order books of the workshops that Helen Eadie mentioned. I am happy to get back to the member with the other information for which she asked, although that is held by individual workshops.

I confirm that the invest in an apprentice and adopt an apprentice initiatives will be kept and rolled forward to next year. We believe that they have been extremely successful. That is perhaps underlined in some of the figures that I mentioned earlier in relation to our relatively positive position on youth unemployment compared with the rest of the UK. The initiatives that we have taken in the past year to ensure that young people have those opportunities are partly responsible for that. I am afraid that I cannot say what will happen beyond next year because we will have a comprehensive spending review in which we have to analyse everything that we are doing. I therefore cannot guarantee what will happen, but the initiatives will continue for the next year. The member's question, for which I thank her, has brought back to my mind Mr Purvis's question about the get ready for work and training for work programmes. It is the case that those will continue. As I think Mr Whitton said earlier, we announced 35,000 opportunities this year with a slightly different balance between apprenticeships and other opportunities. Not only will those flexible opportunities continue, but there will be more of them this year.

On the member's final point, we intend to work, and are working, positively with Project Scotland. She might recall that, at the time when the Project Scotland initiative was controversial, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance  and Sustainable Growth encouraged Project Scotland to be involved in exactly the kind of initiatives that we are discussing and to work with Skills Development Scotland and others in order to do that. We will be working with Project Scotland, and the engagement on that so far has been positive. The member's other point was about North Lanarkshire and South Lanarkshire. Representing Clackmannanshire, I am well aware that there are intense hot spots around the country. I repeat the point that I made previously: where there is greater demand, we will meet it, using the same solutions that we see throughout the country. We have used that approach in the past. It was done to an even greater extent with college funding last year, which went to specific colleges to cover the areas of greatest need. This year, we recognise that there will be demand throughout the country, but that does not prevent us from giving the greatest support to those that are in greatest need, and we recognise that North Lanarkshire and South Lanarkshire are two of those areas.

First, we have involved PSYBT in the construction of the initiative. It will be a new product. It will not replace something that already exists but will fill a gap in the market. It will create a structured entrepreneurial learning path for school leavers, building on what we have done already under "Determined to Succeed: Enterprise in Education". The initiative will be targeted at higher-level achievers—primarily pupils who have participated in Young Enterprise Scotland's company programme—and will comprise first, a programme of immersion in theory; secondly, as I have already made clear, practical experience with a local entrepreneur; and thirdly, market testing and business start-up activities. First, we have to identify the participants in order to carry out marketing and awareness raising. That work will start this month. Familiarisation will take place over July and August, applications will be selected in August and the programme itself will start in September. This sort of approach has never been taken before in this context and I reassure the member that the initiative is genuinely new; however, we very much hope that it will provide a template for future activity.

Margaret Smith might be aware of the talent Scotland graduate placement programme, which will be rolled out at the end of the month by Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise, and which aims over the next three years to place approximately 720 graduates in three-month to 12-month projects with businesses in Scotland. HIE will also provide 160 undergraduate placements over three years. The scheme will replace the now discontinued graduates for business programme that Scottish Enterprise ran and—I say in response to the other part of her question—will be provided through the talent Scotland website, linked to the Association of Graduate Careers Advisory Services shared vacancy service, in order to ease access for businesses and graduates. Work to update the website is under way. The scheme will involve a working partnership including AGCAS, SDS, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, HIE and Scottish Enterprise. For its part, the Government has agreed to provide £60,000 this year to support the position of project manager to be based at AGCAS. There are other elements to what we are doing for graduates, and I am happy to provide the member with more information.

I thank the member for that important question. Some employers, especially smaller ones, have found it difficult to access easily skills and training opportunities, partly because of the plethora of different agencies and organisations. That is why the one-stop shop is so important. Although we have very much focused on ensuring that the initiative is introduced to deal with the pressure from the summer leavers that we have identified—I thank SDS, in particular, for the huge amount of work that it has carried out to ensure that it works right from the start—I  acknowledge Sandra White's point that it will produce huge benefits for small employers and sole traders, who often do not have enough time, or who need assistance to navigate the skills landscape. As I said earlier, the idea is that with a single phone call the employer will get information about different agencies. Of course, they might well have to go to another agency for more in-depth information—there is nothing wrong with that—but they must get a proper and full response with that first phone call. We certainly want to continue the initiative, because we think that it will have real benefits.

The issue has already been raised with me in relation to at least one college—Carnegie College—and I have undertaken to Mr Whitton that I will look at the pressure that has been identified in that respect. The driving feature of the schemes is that they are demand-led—in other words, people come forward to take up the opportunities—but we are more than aware of future large-scale capital projects and the skills demands that they will make on the Scottish economy, and are directing resources towards those ends.

Young people are our future workforce. They represent a pool of talent that we must nurture and invest in if we are to achieve our goal of sustainable economic growth. However, it is also true that recession hits young people the hardest and can do them disproportionate and lasting damage—as most of us who have lived through previous recessions will be aware. Sadly, the high price that was paid because of previous Governments' failures to tackle the effects of earlier recessions on young lives is still evident. This time, we were not prepared to accept the prospect of another lost generation. From the word go, the Scottish Government has recognised the threat, which is why we have helped to build provision that helps young people to avoid the worst effects of the downturn. So far, we have made provision for record-breaking levels of investment in higher education, further education and training provision. We have made young people a priority for the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and for Skills Development Scotland, we have introduced 16+ learning choices, which will offer appropriate post-16 learning to all our young people and, through ScotAction, we have provided an additional £16 million in 2009-10 for 7,800 apprenticeship starts and a further £16 million in 2010-11 to sustain those apprentices in training. In addition, we have made a commitment to Parliament that we will do yet more to stimulate growth, including creating the right business conditions and a new skills strategy that will position Scotland for recovery. Although youth unemployment in Scotland has increased, our record on youth unemployment is the best in the United Kingdom. Our youth unemployment is still lower—at 14 per cent—than the 17 per cent that is recorded for the rest of the UK. However, we cannot be complacent. Although we are out of recession, we know that the recovery is fragile and that job prospects remain uncertain. Throughout the downturn, we have remained vigilant and proactive. We have anticipated movements in the labour market and we have acted swiftly and decisively.  Last year, we noted that a greater number of young people stayed in learning after the summer. Of course they did; with the number of school leavers going into a job down by 7 percentage points—the largest fall since 1992—a higher proportion returned to school. Indeed, the figure was up by more than 3 percentage points. In addition, a higher proportion went into college and university—the rise there was nearly 6 percentage points. That is good, because we want young people to stay in learning because that is the best way to improve their long-term employability. It is heartening that so many young people and their parents and carers also see that value. That increase in the number who are continuing in learning is also a clear demonstration that our institutions—our schools, colleges, universities and training providers—are able to respond effectively to increased demand. However, more returners last year means that we are likely to have more leavers this summer. We recognised the challenge that such an increase would present in the coming year. Correspondingly, we have been planning in order to ensure that the whole process is managed as effectively as possible in the interests of young people. To that end, earlier this year I established a small task force to consider how we could best respond to such a development. First of all, we had to understand the problem that we are dealing with. Let me give members the facts, in so far as we can predict them. From the information that we have been able to cull—not least from young people themselves—we expect a relatively modest increase of about 3,000 in the number of young people leaving school and college this summer. However, the figure could be greater. As I said, we are currently relying on information about young people's stated plans, but the reality might turn out to be different as young people change their minds and circumstances change. The vast majority of those 3,000 people are school leavers, most of whom will want to remain in learning or move into training, although some will want employment. Although we expect that there will be more leavers than usual right across Scotland, the challenges in meeting increased demand for learning will, self-evidently, be more acute in areas that have high levels of youth unemployment. From previous recessions, we know that young people who already struggle—people such as care leavers—can be doubly disadvantaged. The Government is taking swift and decisive action to deal with the pressure. We believe that we know the scale of the problem, where it will be most acute, and which young people will need most help. We also know what support young people are going to need, and what employers need to help us to help young people.  Today, I am announcing a comprehensive and affordable package of incentives and support. This will comprise 800 vocational pathway opportunities for young people. It will include an incentive of £1,000 for up to 2,000 employers who take on a modern apprentice who is a care leaver, or other young person who might otherwise struggle to get such an opportunity. It will also include around £400,000 for a new entrepreneurial intervention. In addition, £300,000 will be made available for graduate advice, information and work placements. Crucially, there will be a brand new Skills Development Scotland employer one-stop shop called step forward Scotland. In recognition of the fact that young people have a variety of interests and ambitions, there will be around 1,000 new volunteering opportunities. That comprehensive offer builds on and complements existing Scottish Government investment. We have made available £15.3 million for 4,100 additional college places. Last week, the First Minister announced 5,000 additional all-age modern apprenticeship places, and young people will have access to those opportunities. Altogether, and notwithstanding the additional measures that we announced recently, we will produce another £6.5 million in additional measures that build on the wide range of opportunities and support that is already available across Scotland. I will be clear. We are not creating jobs; we cannot do that. We are also not guaranteeing places; no Government has ever done that and we are not doing it. Our priority is to ensure that every young person who is leaving school, college or university this summer has the support that they need for as long as they need it, so that they can move into long-term sustainable employment. Skills Development Scotland will help us to deliver that. Our intention is that absolutely no one should fall through the net. When the jobs market is tight, those who are harder to help, such as care leavers, tend to get pushed to the back of the queue, and that is not acceptable. Our focus is on all young people, but we will emphasise vulnerable groups. The job of Government is to lead and to act decisively. We have to make our priorities clear, mobilise all the resources that are at our disposal, and ask our partners to step forward for Scotland, which is precisely what we have done and will continue to do. Over the past few months, we have spoken to many people about our hopes and fears for young people. We have spoken to employers, local authorities, colleges, the voluntary sector, trade unions and many others. In all my time in public service, I have rarely encountered such consensus on a single issue. Tackling youth unemployment must stay right at the top of the agenda.  Employers, especially smaller employers, are often pressed for time, so we need to make it as easy as possible for them to access young people who are looking for opportunities, which can produce great benefits. This afternoon, I met some young people from Edinburgh who had found employment with an Edinburgh hotel group, which had invested in them by giving them training opportunities. That is exactly the kind of activity that we want to maximise. I am certain that everyone in the chamber this afternoon can subscribe to our view. We might debate how best to tackle youth unemployment, but we must tackle it. The package that I have announced today is specifically designed to deal with the pressure that has been created by this summer's leavers. It will not make youth unemployment go away, and it will not distract us from the bigger job that is still to be done. I have every confidence that the efforts that we have made during the past few months, and the response that we can expect from our partners, will make a massive difference to our young people.

I thank David Whitton for those questions; I will try to answer each one. I will take the last question, on the refreshed skills strategy, first. Mr Whitton will acknowledge that the skills landscape—if I can put it that way—across the United Kingdom is changing rapidly, and we have had to take a bit more time to take that into account, although we will not hold up the strategy for too much longer. Some of the points that he made about skills gaps that have been identified by employers will be addressed through the refreshed skills strategy. As I have done with the statement today, I will do what I can to ensure that he gets early sight of that strategy, which should help to answer some of the questions that he has asked. It is fair to say that no Government has done as well as it should have done for care leavers, and we accept completely that it is not an easy issue to resolve. Through the one-stop shop, we intend to ensure that all care leavers are not left once they leave care. They rely on the state to a great extent throughout their lives up to that point, so it is only right that the state does not run away and leave them to fend for themselves when they leave care. Each care leaver will, through Skills Development Scotland, be given a key worker who will work with them. It will not be a one-off contact. Once they have made contact in the first instance—we will encourage everybody to make contact, whether they are employers or young people—there will be a continual monitoring and presenting of new opportunities as they arise for the young person. In addition, I have written to every single one of Scotland's colleges to ask them to have particular regard to that group of people and the opportunities that they represent. We will also revisit the issue over the course of the summer. We know that the situation will change over the summer, but we also know that we will not get some of the relevant hard facts until September, or perhaps even later. We have a serious intention to deal with the issue, and the incentive that I announced—the £1,000 that is available for up to 2,000 employers—will make substantial inroads. The last point is on the one-stop shop. It seems obvious that we should introduce one, and the idea has been mentioned over many years in relation to various public services. However, it is much easier to say than it is to do, as it requires substantial systemic change. Although we are making the change for the particular pressure that we envisage, we think that it will produce long-term benefits for the whole skills agenda in forthcoming years, as people will find it easier to  access the skills agenda. That is particularly the case for employers, who will have one place to go to get answers to their questions and will not be shunted around different agencies, and for young people, who will also have one place to go to get the answers that they want. We hope that the marrying up of demand and supply will help us to achieve a positive outcome.

On the first question, there are specific incentives. The adopt an apprentice schemes that are run under the ScotAction programme will continue over the course of the next year. They are incentives for young people to get opportunities, but they are also incentives for employers, because they allow them to take on people with support from the Government. The reason why we have always stuck with an employer-based approach to apprenticeships is that we recognise that, as the member suggests, these things are best done through employers rather than colleges or universities. The new £1,000 incentive will help the private sector, as businesses will have access to that money and will take people on, hopefully at a higher rate than they would otherwise have done.  I did not mention Mr Whitton's point about the entrepreneurial intervention, which is also relevant to the question that has just been asked. I recognise that it is the case now, more than in other recessions, that some young people will express an interest in setting up their own businesses. It is certainly easier to do that today, particularly with regard to information technology and web-based businesses. In recognition of that, we have put together a new initiative that will not cut across existing ones. It will give people education and practical advice in that regard and will move them towards a positive outcome. That initiative has been positively accepted by people in the employers' organisations—including, I believe, Iain McMillan. We are providing other opportunities. We recognise Elizabeth Smith's point—that young people have a different set of options that they want to choose from, and that college and university are not always the best option. We have to ensure that they have that opportunity where nothing else is available to them. However, through initiatives such as the volunteering initiative and the entrepreneurial initiative, we are trying to present young people with different opportunities, and we are hopeful that that will be positively received by them.

The programmes will apply to rural areas as much as to urban areas. There is one caveat, however, which is that we have identified particular hot spots across the country—ones that we could probably all identify—where there is greater need. The same opportunities will be presented across the country, but it is only right that there should be a more intense application of them in the areas of greatest need. On SDS and Scottish Enterprise, SDS represents a coming-together of four organisations. That rationalisation has happened already. Such things are never straightforward and must be worked at over time, and there is a continuing process whereby we are trying to make the situation more rational. I am more than happy to listen to any suggestions that the member might have about how we can do that even better and how we can make services as cost effective as possible, at a time when we are examining public finances. On the budget lines, we have created the initiatives through a combination of new money—I mentioned the £15.3 million that is associated with college places, which is not part of this announcement—and through being more efficient with some things. We have also ensured that the money from some projects that have reached the end of their time and will not be carried forward is applied to that priority. I am happy to get back to the member with more information, if he would like to know exactly which budget lines the money has come from. I do not want to provide the information now as it would prevent other members from asking questions.  I am not entirely sure about the member's point about fifth and sixth year pupils. I will pick that up when I check the Official Report . The 3,000 figure that I mentioned comprises 2,000 of those whom we expect to leave school and 1,000 of those whom we expect to leave college. It is not our intention to keep people in those places if they do not want to be there and we can provide other opportunities for them. However, I am happy to get back to the member with more information, if I have not answered his question.

The Scottish Futures Trust is managing Scotland's schools for the future on our behalf. It will bring extensive expertise to bear to ensure that efficiencies are realised through authorities working together to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort and to maximise the number of schools across Scotland benefiting from improved facilities while delivering value for money for our investment.

The second question is quite speculative, so I will have to take some time to come back to the member with the answer, which I am sure will take a fair bit of working out. However, he is right to point out that the SFT has identified that savings can be made by authorities working together. I know from my own experience that small councils found it extremely difficult and expensive to put together private finance initiative projects, because they had to take on all the paraphernalia of consultancy fees and devote large amounts of their senior officers' time to them. They were often replicating work that was being done in a neighbouring authority. Having authorities work together is one way in which the SFT can bear down on costs. By centralising some of the expertise that it has, not least in relation to architecture and the design of schools, it can also increase both the efficiency with which we build the schools and the number of schools that we can build. The other point that Derek Brownlee rightly raises relates to construction costs. I think that some of the confusion over costs has arisen because we have announced our programme of school building at 2009 prices, even though what councils receive will be at the price they have to pay—obviously, the costs will be inflated over the years of the construction. The SFT has identified a reduction in construction costs of perhaps 20 per cent because of the recession. It is right that we take the maximum benefits of low construction costs while they are there. I will get back to Derek Brownlee on his second question in due course.

In essence, what the member says is true. We have said to each council that has presented a proposal for either a secondary or a primary school that we will replace the school—it is not exactly like for like as it takes into account the development of the school roll over time—but we will not fund as part of that programme the additional costs of, for example, new community or  leisure facilities. We are taking that approach because it maximises the number of schools and the number of pupils we can benefit throughout Scotland. We have taken more than 100,000 pupils out of sub-standard schools already and aim to do much more than that in due course. One of the constraints that we face is the legacy of previous private finance initiative/public-private partnership costs, £60 million of which was unfunded, which has created a legacy cost for individual councils. As Lord Myners said, "There is nothing progressive about a Government who consistently spend more than they can raise in taxation, and certainly nothing progressive that endows generations to come with the liabilities incurred by the current generation."—[ Official Report, House of Lords , 8 June 2010; Vol 719, c 625.]

Perhaps the key fact to bear in mind is that we are spending more—around £700 million per year on average—than the previous Administration did. Also, we are bringing schools to fruition more quickly than the previous Administration did. It took that Administration six and a half years, I think, even if we give it the first two years of the Labour Government in the United Kingdom. We must try to maximise the number of pupils who can benefit from the programme. I do not criticise the PFI/PPP schools themselves, but I criticise the funding method, which has left us a legacy under which, before they spend 1p on a teacher or any school materials, councils spend 5p in every £1 towards PFI/PPP costs. We cannot simply allow that figure to rise over the next few years if we are not going to damage our children's education, so it is right that we maximise the value for money that we can get for the programme, which means trying to get as many pupils as possible out of poor conditions.

The Scottish Government has had no discussions with representatives of East Dunbartonshire Council specifically regarding capital provision to build new primary schools. The Scottish Futures Trust is in continuing discussions with the council regarding the replacement of Lairdsland primary school, which will receive funding from the Government under our Scotland's schools for the future programme.

The funding that has been agreed with the SFT and the council is based on a base cost of £2,350 per square metre, which has been derived from a review of current construction costs. We are confident that that covers the costs of the replacement of the existing school. It may be that, as in some other cases, there has been some confusion about additional facilities, although it has always been made clear that we would not fund those. There is a great deal of discretion in the SFT programme if the council wants to provide further leisure facilities, libraries or community facilities, and the cabinet secretary has asked the SFT to be flexible in applying that discretion. The costing must be fair because we must be fair to councils throughout Scotland. It is adequate to provide for the funding of the new school. The cost of the new school is comparable with the amount spent per square metre of school space in previous PFI/PPP schemes, so I am confident that East Dunbartonshire Council will be able to provide the facility. There is no question but that we live in straitened times. The former Chief Secretary to the Treasury said that there is no money left, but we have money left. We put money aside for the school building programme and it will ensure a new school for East Dunbartonshire Council.

In the interests of transparency, and in light of the note from the Chief Secretary to the Treasury of the out-going Labour Government that said "there is no money", can the member at least say whether she thinks that university funding should increase or decrease in advance of her proposed review?

I congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing this debate. The Government has always been a strong supporter of enterprise education and, within that context, entrepreneurial learning. We recognise that there is a strong economic need to help our young people to develop entrepreneurial attitudes. Exposing young people to the excitement of setting up and running their own business is key to our future economic success, and the contribution that programmes such as EDGE make is even more important during a recession.  However, it is also important to note that the EDGE programme is one of many that are designed to inspire and motivate young people to think about self employment and entrepreneurship as a viable career option. The current postponement—and it is a postponement, not, as the motion says, a cancellation—of the programme will not inhibit the significant range of other support that is provided by the Government and its agencies to promote entrepreneurship in our school pupils and university students. In answer to the point that Willie Coffey raised, I should say that my understanding is that Scottish Enterprise is currently discussing changes to the EDGE programme with Scottish Government officials, Scottish universities and Skills Development Scotland. We will continue to work with and support Scottish Enterprise and its partners in developing a new delivery model for the EDGE programme. As I made clear earlier, Scottish Enterprise has postponed the proposed delivery of EDGE in 2010 rather than cancelling the scheme and is working with partners to identify an improved model that will put the programme on a better long-term footing and ensure that it provides even greater value for money, which is something that every student of business will appreciate the need for. The Scottish Government is not involved routinely in decisions that are connected to the delivery of specific Scottish Enterprise interventions. Those decisions are matters for the agency to make, taking account of value and the impact of its spend. We are just coming out of a recession. The nightmare of the recession might be coming to an end, but the nightmare of the constraints on public finances is only just beginning. That is the environment in which we have to live. The EDGE programme is one of many that are designed to inspire and motivate young people to think about self employment as a viable career option. The postponement of EDGE will not inhibit the significant range of other support that I mentioned. One element of that support is the Government's determined to succeed strategy for enterprise education for ages three to 18, which has entrepreneurial learning as one of its four key strands. That is part of our commitment to ensure that young people have access to information about all aspects of entrepreneurial learning: private; social; and cooperative. We also have a range of resources for teachers, including online resources and a continuous professional development package that is accessible through the enterprise in education website that is located within Learning and Teaching Scotland.  Sandra White is right to point out that many of the figures concern projected or anticipated outcomes. We expect Scottish Enterprise to be able to give us a more up-to-date evaluation, which is essential to its decision about how to take forward the programme. We look forward to getting that, and I am happy to ensure that Sandra White and anyone else who is interested can see it as soon as it is available. The work has been supported by our entrepreneurial focus group, which is made up of representatives from determined to succeed, Learning and Teaching Scotland, the Social Enterprise Academy, the Co-operative Education Trust Scotland, the Prince's Scottish Youth Business Trust, the British Franchise Association in Scotland and Young Enterprise Scotland. The group supported a national event on 11 May at the Glasgow Science Centre, at which all 32 local authorities had the opportunity to meet organisations such as the business gateway and Shell LiveWIRE who can help support them in the delivery of entrepreneurial learning. We might not always appreciate this, but Scotland is seen as a world leader in enterprise in education and entrepreneurial learning, Last November, determined to succeed hosted a three-day international conference highlighting enterprise in education and entrepreneurial learning in our school system to delegates from countries such as the United States, Denmark, Spain, Holland and Estonia. It is important to mention curriculum for excellence, which is allowing all our pupils to enjoy entrepreneurial and enterprising education that better prepares them for life and work. We are mainstreaming enterprise in education in a way that has not yet happened in many other countries. Work with employers is a core element of determined to succeed and will be incorporated into curriculum for excellence as we go forward. Enterprising approaches to teaching and learning sit at the heart of the curriculum for excellence, which enables all our young people to develop the skills for learning, skills for life and skills for work that they need to be successful. I could mention many other programmes, such as the Deloitte employability initiative, which we are working with through Scotland's Colleges. I am happy to provide more information on that. In conclusion, I do not think that anybody can be in any doubt about the Government's commitment to and investment in school pupils and students alike; indeed, we have a worldwide reputation as leaders in enterprising and entrepreneurial learning, as demonstrated by the response to our determined to succeed excellence through  enterprise international conference, which was held last November. Through determined to succeed and the curriculum for excellence, we have put enterprise in education and entrepreneurial learning at the heart of our education system. We agree that EDGE supports our aims to develop a can-do, will-do attitude in our young people. It is important to note that, as I said, the programme is being not cancelled but postponed as Scottish Enterprise reviews the model and takes positive steps to realign the programme to ensure that it meets the needs of our young people and the businesses that support it. As Sandra White said, by taking into account the needs of all EDGE partners, Scottish Enterprise hopes to provide an alternative delivery model, which will deliver benefits to all those involved.  Scottish Enterprise is best placed to make the important decision about the future of the EDGE programme. However, there should be no doubt that giving our young people opportunities for entrepreneurial learning in the global economy is extremely important to us all. Working with our partners, we hope to create an environment that excites young people, engages them in entrepreneurial learning and helps them to develop those attitudes in whatever career they choose to follow. We need to develop young people with skills and ambitions for Scotland to achieve our key aim of sustainable economic growth, and we will continue to work with our schools, colleges and universities to ensure that that happens.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

Employment policy is, of course, reserved to the United Kingdom Government. However, the Scottish Government is taking every action possible within the scope of its responsibilities. In particular, skills and regeneration funding is supporting people across Scotland, including those in Mid Scotland and Fife. For example, in Fife, where the employment rate of 72.9 per cent is below the Scottish average, European social fund funding totalling £1.7 million has been awarded to the community planning partnership to help to tackle unemployment in the coming year. That is in addition to the £3.5 million that was allocated from 2008 to 2010.

In Fife, PACE activity has helped 434 employees, who were supported through intervention by Advanced Systems, the Co-op Group, Wincanton, Wallaces Express, Torith, Thomas Mitchell Homes, Ethel Austin, Fife Council and Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs. There is a great deal of work going on, but I am happy to look at the issue of whether people are sufficiently aware. John Park might be aware that we have recently produced a very simple leaflet for small employers to ensure that they are fully aware of the options that are available to them. I am sure that John Park would want to acknowledge that in the case of a recession that has been imposed on us by elsewhere and a cut in the money that we have to deal with it, it is difficult to ensure that everybody gets the right solution. Perhaps it would be better if he took some advice from the Labour Party member who phoned Iain Gray this morning, who said that the Labour Party should accept responsibility for its own failures and stop blaming the Scottish National Party.

The Scottish Government is supporting local authorities and schools to promote positive behaviour and relationships and to create peaceful learning environments. Curriculum for excellence provides opportunities for a broad, flexible and individualised curriculum that contributes significantly to keeping children and young people motivated and engaged in relevant and enjoyable learning. The Government provides support to local authorities and schools through funding the positive behaviour team with £600,000 a year and the pupil inclusion network Scotland with £50,000 a year. Strategies and techniques supported by the positive behaviour team include nurture, restorative practice, solution-oriented approaches, staged intervention, cool in school and the motivated school. "Behaviour in Scottish Schools 2009" research indicates that overall perceptions of positive behaviour, low-level negative behaviour and serious indiscipline and violence have improved across the board, particularly in secondary schools.

Substantial progress is being made towards that goal. Indeed, at the event in Aberdeenshire to which Elizabeth Smith referred,  an online resource was announced that will give schools much easier access to outdoor learning. In the past, one of the major obstacles to outdoor learning was the fact that, because of fears about health and safety issues, because of cost or just because of availability, some teachers were not sufficiently aware of the opportunities. The online resource that we have produced should help to address those issues and contribute towards achievement of the target.

Scotland's schools must be inclusive, welcoming places, where everyone can work and learn irrespective of their sexual orientation or gender identity. Good relationships and positive behaviour in schools are fundamental to the delivery of the curriculum for excellence. The Scottish Government has funded Learning and Teaching Scotland and LGBT Youth Scotland to develop a toolkit to provide schools and teachers with the confidence, skills and support to prevent homophobia and deal with homophobic incidents. Every secondary school in Scotland was issued a copy of "A Toolkit for Teachers—Dealing with Homophobia and Homophobic Bullying in Scottish Schools" in February 2009. We have also part-funded Stonewall Scotland to develop a DVD resource of the play "FIT", which was launched in March 2010. The film complements the toolkit for teachers and can be used as a resource to explore issues to meet a range of experiences and outcomes in the third, fourth and senior phases of the curriculum for excellence. Furthermore, the Government has developed national guidance on the Equality Act (Sexual Orientation) Regulations 2007, which make discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation unlawful in a number of areas, including learning settings.

I can confirm that Learning and Teaching Scotland has distributed a copy of the "FIT" DVD to every secondary school in the country. We will explore with Learning and Teaching Scotland how we might further highlight that resource, and my colleagues and I will continue to promote that excellent film at every opportunity. Respectme and the positive behaviour team are also aware of the DVD and respectme has highlighted the "FIT" DVD alongside other anti-bullying films and resources on its website.

The Scottish Government supports those who work directly with children and young people and with schools to prevent and tackle bullying effectively. In conjunction with the Scottish anti-bullying steering group, which the Scottish Government co-ordinates, we have recently consulted on a national approach to anti-bullying in Scotland. We wholly fund respectme, Scotland's anti-bullying service, with £339,500 per annum to 2011. Respectme provides advice, information, resources, support and training to develop, refresh and support implementation of anti-bullying policies and to build capacity to prevent and deal effectively with bullying. We also provide £160,000 per year until 2011 to support ChildLine Scotland in running a bullying helpline for children who are directly affected by bullying. The Scottish Government has issued guidance, "Safe and well", which outlines that every school and education authority should have systems in place to support school staff in cases of bullying and harassment.

The member will appreciate that I cannot comment on a particular case, nor on the police's decision whether to proceed to prosecution. I refer the member to the agencies that I mentioned in my first answer. We have a comprehensive plan in place, which builds on the United Kingdom Government's plan to tackle cyber-bullying. It is not the technology that bullies people; it is individuals. The agencies that I have mentioned, the local authority and the school have to tackle the individuals involved. As I said, it is difficult for me to comment on a particular case, but I am more than happy to meet the member to discuss whether all that could have been done up to now by the agencies has been done and, if not, what we can do about that.

No, I am nodding.

As we know, the Scottish economy entered recession in the middle of 2008 and returned to growth in the final quarter of 2009. Through our economic recovery plan, the Scottish Government's response to the economic downturn has been flexible and dynamic. We have supported people and businesses through what has undoubtedly been a challenging time. We believe that we have acted decisively to support our economy and our construction sector. Last year, we maximised and accelerated some £3.8 billion of capital spending to support infrastructure investment and some 50,000 jobs across Scotland. In addition, we are clear that our modern apprenticeships programme is of paramount importance to a strong economic recovery for Scotland, as it equips people with the training and skills development that are needed to gain long-term employment. Over the past year, we have acted quickly to put in place incentives to support businesses to take on a new apprentice, to recruit an apprentice who has been made redundant, or to protect an apprentice who faces the threat of redundancy. Indeed, our ScotAction programme represents the most comprehensive support  package for apprenticeships in the UK. More than 20,000 people in Scotland started modern apprenticeships last year and are now receiving training and skills development to help them into long-term employment. Almost 3,500 of the starts were in construction-related jobs. We will continue to prioritise investment in skills and training this year by offering a minimum of 15,000 modern apprenticeship starts and a minimum of 34,500 training opportunities overall—and we will do more if we can. At present, 79 companies and 160 modern apprentices in the construction sector benefit from the wage subsidy that is available through our safeguard an apprentice scheme. Given the continued uncertainty in the labour market, we will continue to offer both that and the successful adopt an apprentice scheme through to March 2011. I hope that that answers a point that was raised by Marilyn Livingstone. Today's debate has raised a number of issues that I want to address. First, I thought that Andy Kerr's opening speech was a very poor start to the debate. Coming from a council where we are used to much higher standards of debate, I was disappointed that he managed to get through 13 minutes of a speech without mentioning Labour's recession. Speaking for 13 minutes without acknowledging the 13 years of the failure of the Goldman Sachs-type Government that we have had in the UK takes some skill in itself, so perhaps that justified the tiny mention of skills that he made at the end of his speech.

The point was asked about and answered earlier on. We prefer to have less gold plating, but certainly not the Goldman Sachs-type Government that we have had from Andy Kerr's party in the UK over the past 13 years. I regularly talk to people in the sector skills councils and representatives from the construction industry, and there is no question but that there is a great deal of support for the Scottish Government's ScotAction programme. There are one or two who have different views on how we could best go about addressing the problems, but without exception people are clear about the cause of their concerns in the construction industry: it is, first and foremost, Labour's recession. They know that that is the big problem. How we try to deal with it is obviously a matter of debate.  Last year, in agreement with the Labour Party, we aimed for 18,500 apprenticeships, and we have exceeded that with 20,000 apprenticeships—the figure will be beyond that by the end of the year. From my discussions with the industry, I think that it will be troubled by Labour's new policy development to guarantee apprenticeships. That is incompatible with the employer-led apprenticeship scheme that we have. That scheme was not followed in England, where people now wish that it had been. It will be interesting to see in the coming days how Labour members explain the change in policy and how they will fulfil a guarantee of an apprenticeship for young people. On our part, we guarantee, and are happy to work with others who support it, the idea that there is a training opportunity or apprenticeship for people in that age group. However, not everybody can be guaranteed an apprenticeship under the current scheme. It will be interesting to see what happens. As for the Lib Dems, I do not deny that there is something to be said for the idea of encouraging refurbishment and not always new build—if only that had been the case in the eight years of the Labour-Lib Dem Administration, when every PFI project channelled in the idea of new build rather than refurbishing existing buildings.

It is true. The three new projects that we have in Clackmannanshire are all new build, and the five PFI schools in my constituency are all new build. In many of those projects, there were other options, but they were not taken. It is a late conversion from the Lib Dems to favour refurbishment over new builds. I have mentioned before the Lib Dems' idea of applying VAT on new houses. Everybody in the construction industry says that the problem is a lack of access to finance, especially for first-time buyers. The idea of addressing the problem by whacking VAT on new houses is complete nonsense. Ian McKee made the point that both Labour and the Lib Dems support minimum alcohol pricing down south but oppose it up here. It is not good enough to have the one-word answer, "Devolution". The Lib Dems have to explain why the situation up here is different, but they have failed to do that. It seems that there is simply political posturing from the Lib Dems, who are the shapeshifters of Scottish politics—they will take a different point of view depending on the issue and the support that they will get for it.

Ross Finnie can misinterpret my words as he will. [ Interruption .] I am attacking the Lib Dem proposal to apply VAT to new house building. I hear from some of the sedentary interventions from Labour members that they seem to support the idea, too. Let us see whether they will propose that in the last two weeks of their election campaign. It is simply the case that the policy will not fly. It is exactly the wrong thing for the construction industry in Scotland. As I said, we have started more than 20,000 apprenticeships during the current year. I would take some of the criticism from Labour members a bit more seriously if they had actually voted for the apprenticeships that we have had this and last year. However, they did not do that—they voted against them. I say to Sarah Boyack that there is no credibility in attacking the boiler-scrappage scheme, which we are having to introduce—[ Interruption .]—once we get the consequentials. You failed to vote for it. People throughout the country know that you failed to vote for the scheme, so you have no credibility on it whatsoever. Marilyn Livingstone and one or two others raised a point about having to explain to apprentices in her constituency why they have lost their job. She asked Keith James Brown; perhaps she should ask James Gordon Brown. He is from Fife too, and by far the biggest cause of people losing jobs just now is Labour's recession. Labour members know that, but they have failed to mention it throughout all the interventions that we have had from them.

Marilyn Livingstone is still failing, even given another chance to accept responsibility for the recession that the Labour Party has caused. [ Interruption .] I actually think that she made a valuable contribution when she spoke, but I have the right to answer some of the points that she made. Linda Fabiani and Ian McKee made excellent speeches, and there were some humorous speeches from elsewhere.  When Mr Whitton sums up, Labour will have one final chance for an apology for what has happened.

There are millions of people across the UK and hundreds of thousands in Scotland whose lives have been really badly affected by the recession. Labour cannot go through a debate on the economy—a debate that it called for and for which it wrote the motion—and fail to apologise for what the Labour Government has done to people in Scotland. Finally—

Labour can try to ignore the elephant in the chamber, and the Lib Dems and Tories can fight among themselves, but as a Scottish Government we will continue to do what we can to help the people of Scotland get through Labour's recession.

Will the member give way?

I thank Mr Purvis. Does he think that it is right for someone who proposes the application of VAT to new house building to accuse anyone else of making "perverse decisions"?

I thank the member for taking this intervention, and I acknowledge her work in the cross-party group on construction. Will she acknowledge that, when she talks with representatives on that group, they tell her that their main problem lies in adequate finance for people to buy houses in the first place? If Labour is proposing a guaranteed right to an apprenticeship for young people, how does the member propose that Labour will fulfil that guarantee in the absence of employers taking on those apprenticeships?

I point out that the programme will continue. There will be 15,000 new apprenticeships this year—we had 20,000 last year. Will the member confirm what Andy Kerr said earlier: that the Labour Party now supports a guarantee to apprenticeships—a right to apprenticeships? That is a departure from what employers want and from the way that things have been done in Scotland for a long time and it is not sustainable.

Even in these difficult times we have increased college sector funding in 2010-11 by no less than 6.9 per cent—a rise of 4.6 per cent above inflation. Decisions on the funding of individual colleges are a matter for the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council.

John Park is right to identify a serious issue, which we are taking seriously not just in relation to Carnegie College but throughout Scotland. I have been asked by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth to oversee a task group that is considering the issue. I have spoken to the principal of Carnegie College and have agreed to meet him—although I await his formal invitation. Our problems are the budget cuts and the increase in demand for college courses. Our contribution to that is to pay a higher proportion of our budget towards colleges than has been paid by any previous Administration and to increase student support, as a number of members, including Claire Baker, asked us to do. I think that Carnegie College found out yesterday that it will have a 15.6 per cent increase in student support funding this year. We are doing our bit; our problem is the pressure that Labour's recession has put on our budgets and the college sector.

The Government, together with our partners in the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local authorities, is committed to children and young people throughout Scotland receiving two hours of quality physical education every week. The two-hour commitment is an integral part of the curriculum for excellence and it is being introduced by local authorities in schools, in addition to physical activity and sport. To support that, we agreed funding of £1.8 million with the University of Glasgow and the University of Edinburgh for the period 2008 to 2011 to provide a postgraduate certificate in physical education. About 657 primary teachers have enrolled on the course and 381 of them had completed it in Glasgow by December 2009. Those teachers are making a significant contribution to improving the quality of PE in our primary schools. The new curriculum framework opens up opportunities for children and young people to participate in a wide range of activities in and around the school day. We provide significant funding to councils through the concordat and through the £12 million active schools programme, which supports schools and councils in their work to increase the amount of PE, physical activity and sport that are offered to pupils. About 2,500 schools throughout the country are involved with activities that take place in and around the school day.

Jim Hume is well aware that the onus of delivering two hours of PE every week is on us in conjunction with local councils. He is also aware of the legacy of constraints that we inherited from the previous Administration, in relation both to the number of teachers who are properly trained to deliver physical education and the facilities in which physical education can take place. We have increased massively—by around 25 per cent—the number of teachers who are trained to deliver PE. In addition, there is a political impetus behind the commitment that was not present before we came into office. If Jim Hume believes—as I am sure he does—that this is a good thing for us to do, he could spend his time more productively on working positively towards success, so that all our children benefit from the policy, instead of endlessly wishing for failure.

We have had no recent discussions with Aberdeenshire Council regarding the replacement of Kemnay academy. However, the Scottish Futures Trust has been in regular dialogue with the council to progress the Ellon academy and Mearns academy school building projects, which the Government is supporting through the new school building programme. We anticipate that we will shortly begin discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to identify the next schools to benefit from the new school building programme, with a view to making an announcement later this year. Like other schools in Scotland, Kemnay academy will be considered as part of that process.

As the member has acknowledged, Aberdeenshire Council was the only local authority in Scotland to have two secondary schools in the recent announcement on  capital investment, so the area is benefiting greatly from Government support. The member will also know that £1.7 million of work has been done to take the existing Kemnay academy from condition C to condition B, although I am aware that the council still sees the school as one of its top priorities. As I said, the school will be considered as part of the forthcoming discussions on the next tranche of schools to be refurbished or rebuilt. As has been mentioned already, our ability to continue with the plans that have been announced will be coloured by what happens in any new emergency budget at Westminster. I enjoin the member to ensure that, if he is lucky enough to be elected to Westminster, he makes the same representations as he is making here in the Scottish Parliament.

I think that the member will find that the Government bears two thirds of the costs of the two schools that have been proposed, not the councils. Perhaps he should check that fact. I am sure that the member is aware of the legacy of buildings that the Government has to deal with. In a time of substantial financial constraints, it might not be possible to deal with all of that in the course of one session, so perhaps the best thing for Mr Rumbles to do would be to campaign for the re-election of a Scottish National Party Government so that we can continue the work. It is worth pointing out that Ellon and Mearns academies were the top priorities for the council when we took office, and we met the council's requests.

Will David Whitton acknowledge the fact that Rathbone Training, which he has just mentioned, is one of the co-funders of the event that he has been so critical of, as are South Lanarkshire Council and North Lanarkshire Council?

Will the member give way?

I, my colleagues and Government officials meet the Scottish funding council regularly to discuss a wide range of issues, which include the progress that is being made in developing the New Campus Glasgow project and the proposed merger of the colleges involved.

Pauline McNeill knows that such matters are dealt with through the funding council—that arrangement was inherited from the previous Administration. The funding council's role is first to receive the business case that the colleges are preparing, which should go to the funding council shortly. If one implication is that the new college requires a grant of more than £50 million—that is extremely likely—ministers will have to sign that off. However, the business case will be discussed first with the funding council, which will consider the future provision of courses throughout Glasgow. A lot of work is being done on that, but it is right for the process to involve dialogue between the colleges and the funding council. Ministers will become involved subsequently.

The Stow College matters to which Sandra White refers have been substantially discussed with the funding council. At this stage, it is right for discussions to take place between the college and the funding council. If Stow College changed its stance about the proposed merger, that would involve ministers further down the line. Issues including the future provision of courses at Stow College are being considered. The funding council is undertaking a consultation, to which responses are being made, and I understand that trade unions are involved. I am happy to look at the issue and to give Sandra White further information about exactly how the funding council is proceeding.

The planned refresh of the skills strategy offers the opportunity to consider further the learning and training needs of unpaid carers and older young carers with partners such as Skills Development Scotland and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council.

That will be part of the refresh of the skills strategy, which I mentioned. I appreciate that Cathy Peattie will have lodged her question before last week's debate on the skills strategy, in which that issue was raised, so I refer her to the response that I gave then. A substantial amount of work is being done through the Princess Royal Trust for Carers—the Scottish Government has given £200,000 for young carers. Skills Development Scotland and Jobcentre Plus are working on giving personalised responses to people who are in that situation through information, advice and guidance. They are developing a much more responsive format and will continue to do so. That will be highlighted in the refresh of the skills strategy that will appear in the next few months, and which all members of the Parliament supported last week. We also acknowledge that there are, in relation to Westminster benefits, some problems that cut across some of what we are trying to do. We will see how best we can address those, too.

The Scottish Government is helping to create the learning environments needed for positive behaviour with opportunities for more engagement, motivation and enjoyment. Curriculum for excellence provides opportunities for a broad, flexible and personalised curriculum to develop skills for life, learning and work. That contributes significantly to keeping all children and young people engaged and involved in their education. I congratulate schools and local authorities on achieving significant reductions in exclusions—which fell by 24 per cent in the past two years—and on implementing longer-term and meaningful solutions to develop responsible citizens.

I acknowledge the problem that Stewart Maxwell identifies. It is also true that additional support for pupils who are looked after has been provided to a greater extent than was the case in the past. There has been a drop in the number of exclusions for pupils in that category, although we recognise that there is substantial room for improvement. Last week I had the chance to go to Lochend community high school in Glasgow, where exactly that type of work has been taking place. We intend to ensure that where best practice is happening in schools such as Lochend, we distribute it and promulgate it throughout the rest of the education sector in Scotland. We will encourage people to use the best practice that has achieved a 24 per cent drop in two years and we will apply it even more vigorously to areas where there are continuing problems.

I would certainly wish to do that. That reduction in exclusions is a tremendous achievement. It underlines the fact that sometimes the solutions are complicated and take a long time to come to fruition. The scepticism that surrounded publication of the figures last week does no credit to the school or the headteacher that Patricia Ferguson mentioned, or to many other schools and headteachers throughout the country. There is a great deal of very good practice going on. I am happy to endorse what the member said.

It is certainly the case that any exclusion that results from violence, especially violence with weapons, is to be regretted and has to be a focus of activity. I am aware from schools that I have spoken to that that is happening. It was also highlighted in the report, "Behaviour in Scottish Schools 2009", which Liz Smith will know about and which was published a few weeks ago. From that report, it is perfectly clear that teachers throughout Scotland feel that they now have at their disposal far more resources and training to deal with such situations. It is also true to say that we have to continue to focus on such behaviour, because physical violence against those who seek to teach our children is never right.

The staff head count for Skills Development Scotland at 31 March 2009 was 1,542, or 1,438 full-time equivalents.

On the discrepancy that Jeremy Purvis has identified, it is quite correct that SDS had a head count of 1,542, or 1,430 full-time equivalents, as detailed in the SDS 2008-09 annual accounts, as at 31 March 2009. The public sector employment statistics for quarter 1 of 2009 show SDS staffing to be, as Jeremy Purvis said, 1,560, or 1,433 full-time equivalents. The SDS would have provided data in quarter 2 of 2008-09 in relation to those statistics. However, the accounts were laid before Parliament in December, following completion of Audit Scotland's scrutiny in quarter 3 of 2008-09. Given the time lag, the SDS annual accounts have been developed over a longer timescale, which has allowed its human resources systems to be updated, which would explain the slight discrepancy of 18 in head count and five in full- time equivalent terms between the two sources of information. On staffing, I am happy to take up the point that Jeremy Purvis has raised and to provide more information, although it is worth pointing out that the voluntary severance scheme that was implemented, with four organisations being brought into one, has resulted in substantial savings, which will stay with Skills Development Scotland during the process of the voluntary severance scheme. We have exempted front-line staff from that process—they are being kept there. The resources that have been made available through the savings from the voluntary severance scheme have stayed on front-line delivery. I will be happy to get back to Jeremy Purvis about the other points that he raised.

Those concerns have not been addressed to me by the Scottish Training Federation. The so-far superb performance of Skills Development Scotland in the hugely ambitious programme of apprenticeships take-up this year suggests that those staff have the resources and expertise to deal with the environment that they are in. The voluntary severance scheme was implemented, as I have mentioned, as four organisations were brought together into one, making services more efficient. Front-line staff were, as I said, exempted from that. It is up to Skills Development Scotland to ensure that it has the right expertise and resources at its disposal to do what we ask it to do. It seems to be managing to do that so far.

I start by making the obvious point that it has been a good and constructive debate, in contrast to some of the previous debates on the subject. That means that, in general, we have a fairly good consensus on skills, which is important for one reason in particular. Over the past year, we have faced difficult times and we will continue to do so. It is because of the fact that we are in such serious circumstances that many people are struggling. People would not take it well if we were to knock lumps out of one another and make points for the sake of making points, so it is worth acknowledging the constructive manner in which the debate has been held. The point has been made a number of times in the debate about everyone's desire not to have a lost generation, as has happened as a result of previous recessions. I point out that some of the problems that have been identified, not least by David Whitton, who spoke about people who are extremely hard to reach and bring into the jobs market, arise from the recession of the early 1980s, which was one the worst. The people concerned may not even have been born then, but we are still dealing with the consequences of that generational change. Of course, that makes it harder to deal with the effects of the recession with which we are now dealing. We are dealing with inherited problems.  I will try to deal with as many of the points that have been made as possible; I apologise if I do not reach all of them. Liz Smith talked about training being focused on employer needs. We support considerable business involvement in training design and delivery, and we work with sector skills councils in particular. I acknowledge the work that has been done on that by Jackie Hepburn—who is in the gallery—in particular. We work closely with sector skills councils on the design and promotion of modern apprenticeships and on other training programmes and qualifications. Last year, we held a business-led apprenticeship summit, which John Park mentioned, to ensure that we focused on additional opportunities in which business demand was greatest. We would be interested in a further summit this year—John Park mentioned that, too. I take on board his constructive suggestion about having an annual summit, which we will certainly consider. Obviously, that would involve a wider skills and training agenda than there was at the apprenticeship summit last year. Liz Smith talked about a skills academy. We generally support the idea of a skills academy model if it adds value, avoids duplication and focuses on key areas, but that is not the same as supporting a skills academy in a physical building. That said, we support that model and the employer involvement that it implies. Christina McKelvie, Claire Baker and David Whitton talked about carers and the representations that all members received relating to the debate. As part of an overall carers strategy, we are developing a young carers strategy for publication in the first half of this year. That strategy will consider young carers in transitions, including those who are seeking further skills development through further education, higher education or employment. It is also worth saying that we provided funding of £200,000 to the Princess Royal Trust for Carers for three young carer initiatives, including a skills development strand. I take on board the comments that were made. We generally support the idea of being as flexible as possible to ensure that we reach that otherwise hard-to-reach group, but the representations that we all received made it clear that some of the problems relate to the benefits system, which sometimes cuts across what we are trying to do. John Park has made constructive suggestions on adult apprenticeships and being flexible to me and to the cabinet secretary, and we will consider them. Marilyn Livingstone spoke about the number of architects and planners that we are producing and the money that is going towards that. The issue is quite complex. There are quite a lot of arguments  behind the Scottish funding council's treatment of the matter. I am happy to go into more detail in writing to Marilyn Livingstone on why the funding council is doing certain things. If she is still unhappy, I will happy to discuss the matter further with her. We have heard what Iain Smith said about rural colleges a number of times before. I intervened to say that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning allocated the additional consequential money to the funding council with the agreement of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, and the funding council takes its own decisions. A number of rural colleges did not benefit from that, but, since then, I have had a number of discussions with individual principals of rural colleges, who have said that, although they did not benefit on that occasion, if the distribution had been done according to a formula, the amount that they would have received would not have made a substantial difference to what we are trying to achieve for economic recovery. At the time, it was about getting the biggest bang for our buck. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will consider each case on its merits in future if there are moneys to be distributed and that he will ensure that we get the best possible response from those moneys. There was no prejudice in any way against rural colleges; the intention was to deal with the areas of greatest need. Iain Smith also mentioned the graduates for business scheme. That is not within my portfolio, but I am happy to say that, through the Scottish funding council, we are giving £3.5 million to support graduate skills and employability. That support focuses on work that is related to learning and training, enterprise, entrepreneurship and workforce development. Iain Smith will know that an alternative scheme is to come forward by the end of June, which will, I am told, result in an improved offer for graduates, not least because it will be applied more consistently throughout the country. Claire Baker, who also mentioned the graduates for business scheme, spoke about student support, additional places in college and more investment in facilities. I agree with her points but, as I tried to make clear in my response to Marilyn Livingstone, we have done a great deal in that area already, although we are constrained by having a fixed budget. Adam Smith College, which Claire Baker mentioned, has received additional money for places—the figure throughout the country was a 9 per cent increase—and additional money for student support. The college has also received an additional £1.6 million to help with a new facility, which several members mentioned. That will be fantastic, because it will bring the best possible facilities for training apprentices and  people for the renewables demand that is coming. Additional support has been provided, but we must have regard to the overall budget in doing that. However, I take the points that Claire Baker made. Hugh O'Donnell made several points about Skills Development Scotland. It is true that the corporate plan cannot provide every possible detail that he would like. That will be dealt with by the operational plan and the communications plan. However, I take on board his points about the call centre and I will speak to Skills Development Scotland about that. I reiterate that the focus for Skills Development Scotland had to be on taking the necessary action to get people into apprenticeships and training and back into jobs. In the body's first year, it would have been wrong for us to have pushed it too hard on documents such as the corporate plan. Gavin Brown spoke about the tourism industry. I worked for many years in that industry and have an understanding of the problems that he highlighted. However, he will find—he probably knows this in any event—that one of the issues is that wages in the industry tend to be low, which perhaps has a big impact on retention. I take on board the points that he made and undertake to consider them, but it is worth saying that a great deal of work is going on throughout the country. For example, North Highland College has a superb facility in Dornoch that is coming to fruition. [ Interruption. ]

That facility in Dornoch takes into account the needs of catering staff and front-of-house staff, which is an area that perhaps has not been given as much emphasis in the past. It is all very well having fantastic chefs and providing great food, but the front-of-house staff have to be there to provide the service. I take on board Gavin Brown's points and I undertake to read the reports that he mentioned and consider the review group's discussions. The debate has been constructive. The Labour amendment is very constructive—that tone has been mirrored in the debate—and we are happy to accept and support it. The same applies to the Conservative amendment, which reflects the point that several members made about the importance of colleges and vocational training. We understand that point and a great deal of work is being done on the issue. We will continue that work and we are happy to accept and support the Conservative amendment. We are in a serious situation for the country. We had a chance to reach unanimity and show the  country that the Parliament is united on the need for a proper skills strategy. Therefore, it is unfortunate that we do not have unanimity because of the Liberal Democrats. Some of the points in their amendment are perfectly valid, particularly that on college places—Margaret Smith will know that we are considering the issue seriously—but there is a carping note. Margaret Smith has never said a truer sentence in her life when she said, "I could be churlish". I agree with that. I ask the Liberal Democrats to try to ensure that the Parliament has a united approach. I ask them, even at this late stage, to withdraw their amendment, so that we can have that united approach. I thank everyone for what has been a positive debate.

First, I confirm that SDS was informed about the decision well before the announcement took place. On Hugh O'Donnell's point about the coincidence of the timing of this debate and the corporate plan, ministers had no role in the timing of the corporate plan, the decision on which was taken by SDS. We are trying to ensure that SDS concentrates on activity that helps people back into work. In a much more benign economic environment, SDS would have considered its corporate plan, its forthcoming operational plan and its communications plan, but it has had to concentrate on what needs to be done just now.

I would like to give some clarity to Iain Smith's point. The allocation of the consequential money was given to the funding council and it was asked to prioritise its onward distribution to the places that have been hardest hit by the recession. That money was for that purpose and future allocations will not necessarily follow that pattern.

I take on board the point about support for colleges, but will Marilyn Livingstone acknowledge that, as well as the additional money for student support, which increased by about 9 per cent in the past year, we provided Adam Smith College with revenue support for course provision and capital investment in the new part of the college, which I visited last week? We provided  more than £1.5 million to make that happen, which was added to the well-husbanded resources of the college itself. An awful lot of support is going in over and above student support.

We are aware that the preconceptions about apprenticeships that exist, to an extent, among women and employers have to be challenged. We and Skills Development Scotland are responding to a recent suggestion by the construction industry that we should do something about that. Future campaigns will try to tackle that preconception. On the question of vocational teaching in schools, will the member acknowledge that that is happening in many schools throughout Scotland, especially with regard to motor vehicle repairs and hairdressing and the associated business skills? I take the member's point that we might need to move forward on a more structured basis.

Given what Margaret Smith has said about young people, does she welcome the fact that all £28.1 million of the consequential funding was allocated to colleges on the basis that they would target young people in the most affected areas of the economy? Surely that must be a good thing.

Margaret Smith said that that money was removed and wrapped up in local government funding. It was not removed, but it was wrapped up in local government funding. That is consistent with our approach—which I think is also the approach of the Liberal Democrats—of giving local authorities the maximum amount of discretion. That money was not removed; it is still there.

It is a real pleasure to speak in this debate on the skills strategy for Scotland, on the very day that the skills and strategy of a young Scot have meant that we have someone in the final of the Australian open. Congratulations to Andy Murray. Today's debate comes at an important time in Scotland's transition from the economic downturn of the past 18 months to what we all hope will be a strong and sustained recovery. As we seek to accelerate Scotland's recovery and to take the fullest possible advantage of new opportunities as they emerge, it is critical that our skills and training support is substantial, sustainable and flexible. Even as we see some positive signs, the reality for many Scots firms is one of continuing challenges in sustaining their business. The reality for many Scots is one of on-going job insecurity. The reality for many of our young people is one of uncertainty about their future prospects. That is why none of us can afford to be slow to react as we move forward into this critical year for our recovery. We must work together to deliver support quickly and effectively, where it is needed most and to those who most need it. The Government is determined to ensure that we have in place appropriate and effective training and educational provision to take advantage of new opportunities as they emerge. That is why we are prioritising skills investment in the draft budget, with investment of more than £2 billion in our colleges, universities and national training programmes. We have already seen the difference that a flexible approach to skills investment can make in tough economic times. Through our ScotAction programme, we have directed some £145 million to support training for work, training in work and training from work to work. We have expanded the modern apprenticeship programme, making available an extra £16 million to create an additional 7,800 opportunities in 2009-10—on top of the 10,700 that were already in place—taking the number of new opportunities to the extremely ambitious level of 18,500. Funding to support those new places has been allocated in the draft budget, to ensure that those who started their training in 2009-10 will be able to continue in 2010-11.

We work closely with ConstructionSkills, which is a strong sector skills council, and regularly meet employers in the industry, who have a good track record on apprenticeships. In addition, we realise that a number of small construction companies may not have the same capacity as larger companies to access apprenticeships, or even to be aware of them and to find out where they are. We have produced a short, direct, simple leaflet for such employers, to ensure that they are able to access apprenticeships. The member will be aware of this morning's very positive news that there is a more positive outlook among construction employers in Scotland than in the rest of the United Kingdom. We are doing what we can in that regard, although there is obviously more to be done. We have expanded the modern apprenticeship programme, making available 7,800 opportunities in addition to the 10,700. Next year we hope to be even more ambitious, by offering a flexible range of training opportunities to accelerate the recovery. A key priority group for the Government, the Parliament and the country is, of course, our young people. Too often in previous recessions, young people have suffered most and the effects have continued for them while the rest of society has moved on. Scotland's young people deserve better. We are determined not to repeat that past mistake. The 16+ learning choices model is our guarantee of an offer of a place in learning to every young person who wants it. Local partnerships, led by local authorities, are working together to ensure that the range of opportunities that is available to young people meets their needs and supports them into further learning and employment. This year's school leaver destinations return, which was published in November, told a much better story than we might have feared during the recession, with an increase in the proportion of young people going into further and higher education and training. School staying-on rates are also significantly higher than in previous years, which is perhaps not surprising during a recession. However, as we would expect, the proportion of young people going into employment has fallen. This is not the time to take our foot off the gas. If we want to secure a sustainable economic  recovery for the benefit of everyone in Scotland, we must provide the right support where it is needed. There is no question but that we need to be prepared for the summer of 2010, given that more young people will be coming out of school and college into a labour market that is likely to remain tight. We must all be prepared to support those young people into further learning, training and employment. Our young people must have a flexible range of options in the year ahead, and continuing support to sustain their learning choice. The draft budget puts in place the funding to provide that, and we must all get behind the efforts that are being made to deliver those options. The Government has been very impressed by the way in which colleges have responded flexibly to increased demands. That remains a priority in the year ahead. Skills Development Scotland's continuing training budget has been protected. When four organisations come together, it is natural that there will be some efficiency savings and those are now being delivered. However, as we have always said, front-line services will be maintained. SDS is well placed to respond flexibly to emerging demand. If the evidence shows that another year of focusing on providing high numbers of modern apprenticeship starts is key to accelerating recovery—we believe that it is—the draft budget provides for that. Using skills to support growth is not all about money. It is equally important to provide the right support to those who need it most and to ensure that Government and its partners work together to deliver that support as effectively as possible. As I said, we must be prepared for the summer of 2010. More young people will be coming out of school and college on to the labour market, which—according to every estimate that we have heard so far—is likely to remain very tight for the foreseeable future. We must be prepared to support those young people into further learning, training and employment. Since coming to power, the Government has had a single purpose: we want to create a more successful country, in which everyone shares the benefits of sustainable economic growth. In the economic climate in which we have found ourselves, the need to focus on doing all that we can to support the economy has never been more important. We understand that skills are a critical element to economic growth in a country such as Scotland. There is a great deal to be said for the work that the former Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning did on skills utilisation, which has now been taken over by the current cabinet secretary. That work aims to ensure that we get competitive benefits from the skills that we have in our workforce.  For existing businesses to be more successful, we need a large pool of individuals with both the skill set and the mindset to drive innovation and to deliver greater profitability. To attract new investment to Scotland we need a highly skilled, adaptable workforce that can contribute to the success of businesses that choose to invest here. In a public sector that faces huge challenges, we need individuals who can drive up public service productivity to unprecedented levels. It is difficult to anticipate properly the skills that any economy will need in the future, but if we can get it right, the competitive benefits—the advantage over competitors—can be huge. There is no question but that the Government's approach to skills development and delivery has been tested to the limits in the past year. We are in an unprecedented recession, just narrowly coming out of it in the past few days—at least, that is what the data suggest. Having a single skills agency managing a range of programmes from within a single budget has allowed us to act quickly in response to a rapidly changing environment. Certainly, people who have been involved in the area for a long time tell us that focus on and scrutiny of training and careers opportunities are far greater than they were in the past, as a result of a single agency being in charge. As I said, our colleges have been hugely responsive to an unprecedented surge in demand and we have acted quickly to support them. We have sustained a positive story on school leaver destinations, and the rate of increase in unemployment has decelerated much more quickly than might been have anticipated a year ago. However, this is not the time to take our foot off the gas. If we want to secure a sustainable recovery for the benefit of everybody in Scotland, we must provide the right support where and when it is needed. In years to come, I want to be able to look back on how we worked collectively to respond to the recession and I want to be able to take pride in the success of our approach. A flexible approach to skills and training was right before the recession and has definitely been right during the recession. I am convinced that it will be right as we seek to accelerate recovery. I commend the motion to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees that flexibility and responsiveness to the needs of businesses and employees are critical elements of a successful skills strategy in helping tackle the challenges of the recession and the recovery and believes that the Scottish Government must maintain its focus on developing practical initiatives that help people and businesses with training for work, training in work and training from work to work.

As other members have done, I thank Claire Baker for giving us the opportunity to congratulate the Open University in Scotland in this its 40 th year. Its success in growing innovative and accessible part-time education in the past 40 years has been remarkable. It is an excellent example of what can be achieved with imaginative thinking in meeting learning needs in Scotland and throughout the UK. Bill Kidd's comments about the environment in which learning takes place in the OU leads me to look with envy on its record on class sizes. High-level learning and skills are integral to achieving our overall purpose of having a more successful country with opportunities for all of  Scotland to flourish through increasing sustainable economic growth. However, that can be achieved only if we develop and use the skills of our people to best effect. For many people, part-time learning will be the best option to improve and develop their skills. Some choose part-time learning because they need to continue to work while they learn; others have caring responsibilities or issues with access or disability. As we have heard, part-time study also offers a second chance to people who previously were disaffected with education, and it can be the route to enhance or develop new career prospects or directions. Alongside those varied individual motivations for engaging in part-time study, as Bill Kidd said, demographic drivers in our economy and society will increasingly focus attention on part-time study opportunities to improve skills utilisation. The Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Act 2009 gives employees the right to request time off to train. It is crucial that we achieve the right balance between full-time and part-time learning and that we extend the range of available part-time and flexible learning opportunities. As we all know, part-time learning plays an increasingly important role in today's economic climate as Scotland faces the challenges of the economic downturn. We have developed an extensive economic recovery plan to help Scotland's people and businesses through the difficult period. A key plank in the plan is the provision of flexible help for vulnerable individuals. As Bill Kidd and others have said, the inclusive nature of the Open University—which is suggested by its very name—is crucial. The impact of the downturn on the need and demand for retraining and upskilling varies considerably in different groups. We recognise the financial pressures that learners face, which Claire Baker mentioned. We also recognise the need to maintain Scotland's world-class education system. People need to be able to learn new skills to contribute to Scotland's future economic success. We must ensure that individuals can access relevant learning opportunities to support retraining and upskilling and that financial assistance for learners is flexible enough to support individuals now to help sustain and improve our skills base for future growth. Part-time and flexible adult learning will be vital, which is why the Government has taken action to provide assistance for part-time students. Claire Baker mentioned some technological innovations that are relevant to the OU today. The one that I remember the best is VCRs—video cassette recorders. I remember when people were condemned to watch programmes at 2 o'clock or 3 o'clock in the morning. When VCRs came along and people worked out how to programme them,  they could set them to tape through the night and watch the programmes at their leisure. We might find that most people who are good at VCR programming—not that we need to be any more—were OU students in the past. In July 2008, we introduced a £500 part-time grant, which replaced the previous £500 part-time loan. That major new funding of £38 million will benefit up to 20,000 students a year. The grant complements a solid existing base of financial support for part-time learning through individual learning accounts. To better align ILAs with the aims of our skills strategy, we have extended funding to work-related learning and to adult literacy and numeracy provision. We have removed the minimum personal financial contribution that was required from learners and made ILAs fully grant based. We have also widened access to the scheme for learners and learning providers and extended course choice. We have launched a pilot part-time postgraduate initiative, which provides grant funding for tuition fees and can currently support up to 150 part-time students. We have extended ILA eligibility to 16 and 17-year-olds and increased the income threshold from £18,000 to £22,000, which extends ILA support to an extra 250,000 people, making nearly half of the adult workforce eligible.  We all understand the challenges that are ahead. I am confident that we can grasp the major opportunities that are before us. We must work together and continue to focus on building a single skills system, to benefit individual learners and employers and to achieve the vision of a smarter Scotland with a globally competitive economy that is based on high-value jobs.  Meeting closed at 17:30.

Subsequent to the announcement on 28 September that Wick high school would be one of the first 14 secondary schools to benefit from the new £1.25 billion school building programme, discussions have taken place between the council and the Scottish Futures Trust on how best to take the project forward.

I am happy to give that assurance. The member will be aware that the council is undertaking a feasibility study to ascertain whether a refurbishment or a rebuild would represent best value for money, and consultation with key stakeholders is continuing. The feasibility study is due to be completed in mid-January 2010, and matters will be taken forward as swiftly as possible thereafter.

First, I congratulate Rob Gibson, Jamie Stone and everyone else who is involved in the campaign for Wick high school. I refer to my previous answer. The feasibility study, which is continuing, will answer some of the questions, as will the continuing discussions with the Scottish Futures Trust. Ultimately, however, the decision is entirely a matter for Highland Council, which I understand is still at the stage of considering what work needs to be done at the school. For that reason, I am unable to comment further at present.

Learning and Teaching Scotland is working with a range of financial institutions and other organisations to support the financial education of all young people in schools.

As Bill Butler mentioned, he has asked a series of questions on the matter. He will be aware from the answers that were given that a partnership review group was established and will report back to LTS in the middle of next year. The group's membership will not include the Royal Bank of Scotland.  On RBS and its suitability to take a role in financial education in our schools, there has obviously been a substantial corporate failure by RBS in its strategic management, but it is also true that RBS contains a large number of staff whose knowledge and experience enables them to provide young people with up-to-date facts about a wide range of financial products and services and about money management and debt. In any case, membership of the Scottish centre for financial education is a matter for Learning and Teaching Scotland. It is right that we draw on whatever resources we can to ensure that our children have the best possible financial education.

Will the member give way?

Claire Baker referred to the need for additional powers over local government. Following on from Peter Peacock's comments about the need for additional levers, can she specify whether that means that the Labour Party supports the reintroduction of ring fencing? If not, what levers would Labour use to force through policy?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Further education bursary, discretionary and child care funds are reviewed annually by the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council through an in-year redistribution process, which considers both pressures on and savings in college student support funds. The process is supported by Scotland's Colleges. The Scottish funding council is aware of the issues, having already increased this year's student support budget by 9.3 per cent and having also brought forward this year's in-year redistribution process, which will be concluded shortly. The Government met representatives of the Scottish funding council yesterday on the issue and is considering solutions. An announcement will be made in due course.

The member is correct to draw attention to the increase in resources for colleges. I also highlight the £28 million that has been made available to the Scottish Government through consequentials, which has all gone to colleges this year. The exact proportion of the funding that is allocated to discretionary and hardship funds will be for the colleges themselves to decide, but that will be based on the decision of the Scottish funding council. As for when the announcement will be made, it is imminent—it will be made very soon.

I repeat that additional money is being made available to colleges this year, including the £45 million that I mentioned. The proportion of the Scottish budget that is now going to colleges is higher than it was under the previous Administration. The Scottish funding council has already provided an additional £6.7 million this academic year to help colleges respond to an increased demand for FE student support. That brings the SFC's investment in FE bursaries, child care and discretionary funding to a record £79 million—a 9.3 per cent increase on 2008-09.

Demand for student support is difficult to predict. In order for the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to match its funding as closely as possible to demand, it reviews student support each year through an in-year redistribution process. The SFC asked colleges to report on their respective positions on further education student support in the current academic year by 30 October 2009. It is currently assessing the returns and will make clear its plans in December.

The decision on the distribution of funding is for the Scottish funding council to take. The funding that was allocated—the £28 million that I mentioned in an earlier answer—was given to the funding council, and it was asked to target that funding at the areas hardest hit by the recession and at young people. It did that successfully. The funding did not go to every college—that much is true. Sometimes, it will be more appropriate to ensure that things are done on the basis of the old formula. However, such decisions will be taken as circumstances arise. There is no question of any discrimination against any particular college. All colleges' needs are taken into account. As I said earlier, we are providing an extra £45 million this year, and we are allocating a larger proportion of the Scottish budget to colleges this year than was allocated under the previous Administration.

I was really looking forward to Des McNulty's last two minutes. I thank members for what has been a stimulating, engaging and lively debate. My notes suggest that I should say that the level of historical knowledge in this Parliament is truly impressive. I would say that it is, in most cases, but I will come back to that issue later. There seems to be widespread agreement about the importance of learning about Scotland's heritage, history and culture, and a strong recognition that Scotland's history provides a  wealth of material that can inspire our children and young people and enable them to develop the critical skills that are essential for the challenges of the 21 st century.

I would like to make a start to my speech first. Although there seems to be widespread agreement about the importance of learning, there is perhaps not the same consensus about the importance of today's debate. It is important that we debate this issue and discuss the important new resource that we have. Around St Andrew's day, it is natural for many of us to reflect on a sense of history, especially at the end of this homecoming year. I would like to remind everyone how we are actively promoting learning about Scotland's history and equipping our young people with the knowledge and skills that they need to be successful learners, competent individuals, effective contributors and responsible citizens. First, learning about Scotland's history is firmly embedded in the curriculum for excellence's experiences and outcomes, which were published in April following extensive engagement and which provide a clear framework for the biggest transformation in education in a generation. We have glow, which is a world-leading secure schools intranet that provides fantastic opportunities to develop innovative teaching and learning practices. It is paving the way for an avant-garde education system that will inspire—and is inspiring—other countries to look to Scotland as an example of a leading education system. We also have, as has been discussed today, the Scotland's history online resource. Last month, through Learning and Teaching Scotland and in partnership with our national galleries, museums, library and archive sources—the sources do not come from some SNP back room, but from those nationally accepted resources—we launched Scotland's history, which is a world-leading resource that benefits all learners who have an interest in Scotland. The site has had more than 20,000 visitors in the first month, and there have been almost 100,000 page hits to the resource. That is a great start, and it reflects the quality of the materials on the site. It is worth repeating Fiona Hyslop's point that those materials came about as the result of concerns that history teachers expressed about the lack of materials. History teachers welcomed the materials when they were produced; there is not some ministerial plot to force materials on  teachers, as it was the teachers who asked for them. All those resources build on the exceptional work that schools have done this year on homecoming. The cabinet secretary has already mentioned the winners of the homecoming award. In August, I was fortunate enough to visit one of the other finalists, Dallas primary school, which I understand showcased its work last night at Stirling castle. That brings us back to Rob Gibson's point about some of the excellent work and rich tasks that have been done in schools as part of the curriculum for excellence. The homecoming research by pupils of Dallas primary school discovered that a former pupil of the school, Thomas Dallas, became a vice-president of America in 1867, and gave his name to Dallas in Texas. Another Dallas boy, Scotty Philip—the research does not explain whether that was his name before he went to America or if he adopted it once he was there—travelled to America in the 19 th century, married the Indian Crazy Horse's sister-in-law, and then saved the American bison from being hunted to extinction. The historical research that those young people undertook to unearth that information was exceptional—I saw the whole process and the narrative that they followed. The pleasure of learning about their own environments and what people from their own area—a very small area—had done gave them a real sense of pride, place and identity. Rob Gibson was right to highlight some of those points. Some of the proposed amendments to the motion have been mentioned. Murdo Fraser's amendment suggests that we are promoting "a nationalist agenda through the use of public resources and the teaching of history." That was the same line that he took when I visited Bannockburn for the official launch of the funding from the National Trust for Scotland for subsidised school visits to Bannockburn, Culloden and the Burns birthplace museum. I should say, as Murdo Fraser said to Margaret Smith, that Culloden was not a fight between Scotland and England. It really is important, given all the learning that Margaret Smith told us she had undertaken at school and university, that she revisits that and gets the facts right.

Perhaps Margaret Smith is writing her own version of history. It is worth pointing out that, in many countries in which there has been a battle that achieves national freedom, there tends to be a celebration of it. Perhaps Scots are different in that respect, but I do not think so. The money that was put aside for the visits and that has been put into the online resource—around £60,000—is completely overshadowed by the £200,000 that we have committed to the Holocaust Educational Trust visits. The idea that we are simply concentrating on Scottish priorities and a Scottish emphasis is wrong, as I said to Murdo Fraser. It is disappointing that the same argument has been trotted out with regard to our world-leading online resource, which, as I said, has been developed by Learning and Teaching Scotland in partnership with national galleries, museums, libraries, archives and other sources. As Rob Gibson pointed out, those are national resources that I understand have the support of members on all sides of the chamber. The idea that that work is part of a nationalist plot is a nonsense. To be fair, Margaret Smith mentioned the idea of a Scotland-England battle a couple of times, and it was mentioned by other members too. I did not hear anyone on the SNP side of the chamber talking about Scotland-England battles. I heard members talking about the need to understand social change, the environment in which big historical events took place, and the national and local context for those events.

I agree with the first part of that, but the point about Scotland as an entity should not enter into the debate at all. It just makes a nonsense of the teaching of history. I think that most countries in the world would appreciate that. I also think that Johann Lamont got her arguments slightly confused when she condemned the entire SNP for talking about oppression. I did not hear anybody talking about national oppression during the debate, although members might have mentioned social oppression. However, she went on to talk about the clearances and the clan gathering. There is a bit of confusion in what she was trying to say. She condemned us for talking about something that she was more keen to talk about than we were.  The vital point was made that the resources that have been provided were not dreamed up by the SNP. They came about as a result of a request from teachers who were concerned that there has been a dearth of materials in the subject for many years. We responded to that and provided the materials. People quoted Tom Devine, who has welcomed the website as a powerful tool—I think that those were his words.

I have been here on Thursday morning after Thursday morning to debate education with Elizabeth Smith. We have debated many of the issues. It is within the gift of all the Opposition parties to debate things that they want to debate, and indeed they have done that on many occasions. However, there is no reason why we should not discuss Scotland's history on an occasion that is close to St Andrew's day and towards the end of the year of homecoming. Margaret Smith's amendment seeks to widen out the debate to include the curriculum for excellence, implementation of which was mentioned a number of times. Not everyone will have the same experience, but my experience is that a huge amount of work is being done on the curriculum for excellence. I mentioned Dallas primary school, but I could have mentioned Monifieth primary school or 101 others. Now that we are in the year of implementation, it is evident that there is real enthusiasm and a real embracing of the change that is coming about. I do not deny that there were some anxieties initially.

There is an element of truth in that, particularly in the distinction between secondary and primary schools. That is perhaps natural, given the subject-specific nature of our secondary school teaching compared with primary school teaching. Last week, I was at a conference at Aberdeenshire Council that was attended by 3,500 people who are involved in education. It was a proactive, enthusiastic conference: people are looking forward to the changes. Uneven progress is bound to happen when there is such a major change, but we are now seeing good examples  being shared among schools and councils, so I am pleased about the progress that is being made. Johann Lamont asked whether Scotland's history is being reclaimed. It has certainly been neglected in the past. As Rob Gibson said, most people's experience of being taught history in Scotland's schools was not good. I certainly had to wait until I went off to university to get a reasonable understanding of what I, unlike Des McNulty, am happy to call the Scottish enlightenment. Many academics call it that, and I do not see the problem with doing so, even though it took place, obviously, in a European and global context.

Do I have time, Presiding Officer?

I mentioned that the Scottish enlightenment took place in a European context. The interchange between thinkers throughout Europe was extremely important. Scotland's young people, in particular, need the opportunity to access resources that they have perhaps not had in the past. That point is made not only by me but by teachers of history. Where appropriate, we should also celebrate Scotland's history. As we heard from Elaine Murray and others, it is a story of immense achievement. I do not think that she mentioned James Kilpatrick—is that his name?—who is from her area and who invented the bicycle. Our history is a story of immense achievement in industry, medicine, science and law, and also in global exploration, as I am sure Margo MacDonald would remind us, for bad reasons as well as good. Our history also includes literature on a scale that belies the size of a nation such as ours. As a Government, we want to build on the achievements of the past to ensure a progressive, successful, confident, flourishing and sustainable Scotland for our young people. We want our children and young people not only to be inspired by the remarkable achievements of their own people but to be knowledgeable about things that were done wrongly or mistakes that were made, including the Darien venture. After all, people learn from previous experience. We want everyone to be moved and motivated to play an active part in this success story so that, as Elaine Murray pointed out, our young people can become the engineers, scientists and historians of the future.  Thanks to the Government's lead, we are helping young people to understand Scotland's place in the world and where they come from, and we are giving them the confidence, enthusiasm and inspiration to write the next chapter of Scotland's history. I am happy to support the motion.

Will the member take an intervention?

In relation to the trips that he is talking about, does Murdo Fraser accept the view of Tom Devine, who said: "If this is under the supervision and organisation of both schools and NTS, I would certainly trust them to be responsible"? Given that Murdo Fraser cheered when Ken Macintosh said that the stone of destiny being returned to Scotland was a nationalist shibboleth, can he explain Michael Forsyth's role in that event?

I congratulate Ted Brocklebank on securing the debate. I welcome the opportunity to highlight the Government's continued commitment to the improvement of the school estate. Since May 2007, 110,000 pupils have been lifted out of poor condition schools and over 230 schools have been refurbished or built. We have lifted over 13 per cent of Scotland's school estate out of bad or poor condition. In addition, we have announced a new school-building programme that will involve investing a further £1.25 billion in the school estate the length and breadth of Scotland, delivering around 55 new schools. Auchmuty high school in Fife, which has been mentioned, will be one of the new schools that will be built as part of that programme. We are confident that schools and communities in Fife will benefit from the investment that local and national Government are making in the school estate. I appreciate that there is a deal of local support for a new school to be built to serve the community of the Tay bridgehead and acknowledge that that is an on-going issue. However, I also acknowledge the points that were made by Iain Smith, who made a persuasive argument for the proposals that Fife Council is pursuing. I make it clear that this is a matter for Fife Council, which is responsible for the provision and maintenance of school buildings in its area and for deciding what priority is to be accorded to work on particular schools. Given that responsibility, ministers must stand back from involvement in discussions on the merits of options for work on individual school buildings and cannot intervene in council business to influence which schools are identified as priorities for  replacement or refurbishment or decisions on the establishment of new schools. On 28 September, the Government, jointly with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, published its new school estate strategy, "Building Better Schools: Investing in Scotland's Future", which provides a new route map to ensure that all of Scotland's school estate is up to the required standard. Our shared vision, with COSLA, sets out the high value that we place on places of learning that people and communities can enjoy using and be proud of and that enrich the communities that they serve and the lives of learners and their families. The strategy sets an ambitious joint Government-COSLA target to ensure that no less than 90 per cent of children in Scotland will be educated in good-condition schools—schools in conditions A and B—with firm plans to lift the remaining children into better-condition schools. As Iain Smith indicated, it is absurd to suggest that either the council of the past two years or the Government of that period are responsible for a huge change in the past two and half years in the number of people who are being educated in C-category schools. Ted Brocklebank mentioned that this has been an issue for 50 years. For the majority of that time, the Governments have been either Conservative or Labour, while the council has been run by the Labour Party.

We cannot but conclude that the fact that schools have fallen into those categories has a lot to do with what happened during the previous eight years and earlier, rather than with what has happened in the past two and a half years. It is absurd to say that it is the result of what has happened during the past two and a half years and has nothing to do with a lack of investment previously. The strategy that we have set out sets clear aspirations for Scotland's school estate: schools that are fit for purpose in condition, suitability and sufficiency; schools that are well designed, accessible and supportive of our intentions in relation to the curriculum for excellence; schools that strengthen the communities that they serve, enhance people's health and wellbeing and facilitate sustainable economic growth; and a sustainable estate that makes a full contribution to meeting climate change targets. Schools should be efficiently run and should maximise value for money. Having an estate that is both flexible and  responsive to future changes in demand is in the interests of us all. Pupils, parents, teachers and communities across Scotland, including Fife, are entitled to a school estate that delivers those aspirations for them. I recognise that it is for Fife Council to determine the shape of the school estate within those parameters. Liz Smith suggested that the council has been dragging its heels. That does not sit well with the fact that, for the majority of the 50-year period during which the issue has been discussed, according to Ted Brocklebank, we have had Conservative or Labour Governments and a Labour council in Fife. The member suggests that it was a pressing issue, but nothing happened during that time. Two and a half decades of nothing, according to Ted Brocklebank, stand against two and a half years of an SNP-Lib Dem council in Fife that has made substantial progress. The Government has increased substantially support for capital spending by local authorities across Scotland. This year and last year Fife Council has received £94.3 million for investment in infrastructure, including schools, according to its priorities. We believe that, under the concordat and more generally, local authorities should, where possible, have the power to decide their own affairs. Fife Council should choose its priorities for investment in its school estate, as it does for other areas of its estate and as other councils across Scotland do. Ministers welcome Fife Council's investment plans for its school estate, with £140 million-worth of investment identified within the council's capital plans. The extent to which investment in a new secondary school at the Tay bridgehead features in Fife's plans for future investment in its school estate is a matter for the council, which will be accountable for its decision. I am happy to respond to the debate in those terms.  Meeting closed at 17:40.

There is currently no specific community learning and development modern apprenticeship framework. Organisations delivering CLD may access support for apprentices undertaking other frameworks such as learning and development, management and business administration. The Scottish Government has supported the development of work-based training in community learning and development and is committed to ensuring flexible provision that builds a skilled and confident CLD workforce.

I congratulate Cathy Peattie on her recent appointment to an Opposition spokesperson's post. I recognise the work that she has done with the Linked Work and Training Trust Central, which obviously also covers my area. There are potentially two routes through which this could be progressed. One is through Skills Development Scotland and the apprenticeship model. As Cathy Peattie said, it could also be progressed through the funding council. There are issues to do with that. The funding council currently designates as part-time students people who are taking the bachelor of arts in community learning and development degree programme, so it does not attract funding. As I have spoken with Cathy Peattie already, I am happy to facilitate a further discussion with her, me and the funding council, if that would be helpful.

Earlier today, the cabinet secretary for education and lifelong learning launched our new scheme—invest in an apprentice—which is the latest support package available through ScotAction. Invest in an apprentice provides a financial incentive of £2,000 to small and medium-sized enterprises in the energy, manufacturing, food and drink, and textile sectors that recruit a 16 to 19-year-old apprentice. We believe that that is another demonstration of our responsiveness to the needs of our employers, and that it will open up job opportunities for young people. It is the third phase in our ScotAction programme and, like other apprenticeship support schemes, it is supported by the European social  fund. It is obviously aimed at the sectors that have been particularly affected by the economic downturn and at sectors in which there is a real potential for growth as the economy recovers.

The Scottish Government sees modern languages as key to achieving its overall purpose of creating a more successful Scotland with opportunities for all to flourish through increasing sustainable economic growth. Learning a new language encourages children and young people to extend their horizons as they explore the language and its associated cultures. By broadening and deepening the learning experience, curriculum for excellence provides opportunities for young people to learn modern languages and become confident and competent linguists who are well equipped with the skills and capacities that are needed in the 21 st century globalised world.

I am aware that Irene Oldfather has had an interest in the issue for a long time. We take modern languages seriously. There has been substantial investment in modern languages, including recent investment in Cantonese and Mandarin through the Confucius hubs. The issue of initial teacher education is really for the General Teaching Council for Scotland to consider, but there is something in what Irene Oldfather says, so I am happy to consider the issue further and take it up with the GTC on her behalf.

The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has clearly laid out the role that Scotland's colleges have in contributing to economic recovery. The Government has always been a strong supporter of our colleges. The contribution that they make to providing better opportunities for the people of Scotland becomes even more important during a recession. They help to provide—and will continue to do so—the skilled workforce that we need if we are to achieve the sustained economic growth that we all want in Scotland. Our colleges continue to reposition themselves to address the new circumstances and challenges that have been brought by the recession, and to engage with students, employers and communities to develop the confidence and employability of our young people. As a result, we will see more confident individuals, stronger communities and competitive businesses that are able to tap into the full potential of their employees. Some of the points that have been made are worth repeating. In January, the funding council allocated £7 million in 2008-09 and 2009-10 to support colleges' participation in our partnership action for continuing employment. With more choices, more chances, every young person has a choice of provision at every level for every style of learning everywhere in the country. Our 16-plus learning choices scheme offers a suitable place in learning well before the individual's school leaving date, at any transition point during the senior phase. Over the period 2007-08 to 2010-11, this Government plans to invest £2.685 billion in the college sector—a 17 per cent increase on the previous Administration's investment. I say in  response to Jeremy Purvis's point that it is important to try to focus on the crucial figure, which is how much—what proportion of the budget—was spent on colleges under the respective Administrations. Under the previous Administration, it was around 2.3 per cent and under this Administration it is around 2.37 per cent. We have also accelerated capital spend—£8.5 million for colleges from 2010-11 into 2008-09 and 2009-10. As a number of members said, we have brand new, purpose-built, world-class facilities, such as Anniesland College, South Lanarkshire College and Stevenson College—the cabinet secretary mentioned other colleges in her opening speech. We have also heard a great deal of mention of the UK budget consequentials of £28.1 million that has been allocated to colleges to support young people and capital investment. That money was for the areas of greatest need—that was the guidance that was given by the cabinet secretary to the funding council, which was in charge of the final distribution. The draft budget for 2010-11 includes a £45 million increase on 2009-10, which is more than 5 per cent above inflation. I want to address some of the points that were made during the debate. As the cabinet secretary made clear, we acknowledge the point that was made by the Conservatives in particular that rural colleges have concerns. I met the college principal, whom Mary Scanlon described as "a first-class principal"—I certainly agree—of North Highland College in Thurso. Those concerns have not been ignored, but have been listened to. The guidance that was given to the funding council instructed it to focus on young people in the areas of greatest need. When speaking to the principal of Northern College and other principals in rural areas, I had the impression that their concerns are not limited to the funding allocation from this set of budget consequentials. They also feel that they sometimes suffer as result of their remoteness and size, which affect the extent to which the funding council hears their voices. The cabinet secretary and I have listened to those concerns and will take on board the points that are made in the Conservative amendment. It is worth pointing out how well our young people did in the recent Worldskills International tournament in Calgary. We had our biggest-ever representation in the UK delegation, which achieved its highest-ever place in the tournament. The Scottish representatives accounted for two of the three gold medals that were won; had Scotland been accounted for separately, we would have had the top results in the world. That is a fantastic achievement by the young people who were over in Calgary.  I have spoken to many principals, both publicly and privately, who recognise the pressures that the recession creates, some of which have been mentioned by members. However, they also see in the recession an opportunity to place colleges up front and at the centre of public life in Scotland. As Kenny Gibson in particular pointed out, colleges believe that vocational education deserves parity of esteem with academic education. It does. Margaret Smith referred to differences in child care funding between Scotland and England, where such funding is an entitlement. It is, but the system that we have was supported by the previous Administration. I am grateful to Margaret Smith for acknowledging the additional moneys that the cabinet secretary has managed to invest in the area. David Stewart mentioned Dornoch, which I have visited, and the work that has been done there on the Scots diaspora. Also worthy of mention is the work that has been done on hospitality, for which a new facility is about to be created. The North Highland College has concentrated on front-of-house training for our hospitality industry, which is an area in which we were not so strong in the past.

I am coming to that. It is for UHI to decide on the precise timing of its application for university title. The institution wants to be sure that it can meet the Scottish criteria for university title. I assure David Stewart that Scottish Government officials are supporting that work and will continue to do so. Jeremy Purvis made an important point about the loss of Skillfast-UK. In the response that I sent to Lord Mandelson in the UK Government, I made clear the importance and uniqueness of Scotland's textile sector. We have made the point that is critical that there is in the textile sector a strong employer voice in respect of skills. If Skillfast-UK is not performing effectively, strong alternative arrangements must be put in place to deliver that. SDS is involved and will engage with the sector over the coming weeks and months. I am scheduled to meet the member's colleague shortly to discuss the issues. As the cabinet secretary commented, no one can fail to acknowledge the commitment that Scotland's colleges have shown in their response to the economic recession. At our request, and in response to the demands of the recession, they have reprioritised their learning provision to ensure that what they offer gives students the best possible chance of employment.

The document to which the cabinet secretary referred, "Skills for a Successful Scotland", is testament to the work that colleges have done, and to their commitment to assisting both individuals and businesses in maximising their potential. However, as a number of members have said, we cannot become complacent. We must continue to expect our colleges to deliver for our key sectors, for businesses across Scotland and for individuals who are affected by redundancy. The sector will need to continue to speak to employers locally and nationally to ensure that it is providing the skills that are required. Colleges will need to take account of the needs of individuals to ensure that they have the right skills to enhance their employability prospects. As a Government, we will continue to show our support for our colleges, as they play a central role in supporting our future economic success.

I am grateful for the opportunity to sum up on behalf of the Government, even if Mr Foulkes does not want me to. The Government is committed to improving Scottish education, which is absolutely crucial to our purpose of increasing sustainable economic growth. We will improve Scottish education through curriculum for excellence, and our teachers are the agents for change that will bring about those improvements. Despite what has been said, we have achieved record low class sizes and pupil teacher ratios. There are increasing numbers of children in classes of 18 or fewer, and fewer children in classes of 25 or more. Further, record levels of funding are being directed to local government—whether or not the Opposition likes that fact. We have a legacy from the previous Administration that we need to address. We have an oversupply of teachers and confusion about maximum class sizes. This Government is taking action to sort those out.

No. I am just starting. We have cut student teacher intake targets for the session that has just started, and we will do the same for the intake in autumn 2010. We need to restore a reasonable balance between teacher supply and demand. We will take the tough decisions that are necessary to achieve that. We will make regulations to limit P1 class sizes to 25 from 2010 and review the current unsatisfactory mixture of class size control mechanisms.

It is clear that the demand for teachers has to match the supply. We have taken action to reduce numbers by 500 because of the oversupply. The member knows full well that some decisions were taken three and four years ago—we are trying to correct some of those false assumptions.

On the point that was made earlier about morale within the teaching profession, along with the cabinet secretary I had the chance yesterday to speak at the Scottish learning festival. Not one single teacher, not one person looking for a job in teaching and not one headteacher made comments that fit with the Opposition's assertions. However, I was repeatedly told the extent to which teachers are fed up with the apocalyptic nature of statements made by Opposition parties, and the effect that that is having on morale in the education community.

In relation to retaining teachers and local government, I refer members to the statement from COSLA's education convener, who said: "We also acknowledge that money was retained with the local government settlement at a level equivalent to maintaining teacher numbers at 2007/08 levels." I would have thought that the Opposition would acknowledge that. I would also have thought that Karen Gillon would acknowledge the fact that in South Lanarkshire there has been an increase of nearly 50 per cent in the number of classes with fewer than 18 pupils in P1 to P3—that was not recognised in her speech.

I still hear no acknowledgement from Karen Gillon of the 50 per cent increase in the number of P1 to P3 classes going below 18.

No, the member is missing the point. It is clear that the Opposition has nothing positive to say. Do Opposition members wish to make any suggestions? There have been one or two suggestions from the Conservatives, including the idea of abolishing free school meals, which I will not accept. Do Opposition members want to reintroduce ring fencing in local government? Their councils and their councillors do not want that. Will they introduce amendments to the budget that will result in even more resources going into teaching? I do not think so. It is important to realise that the teachers who finished their probation year in 2008-09 undertook training in numbers that were decided in early 2007 or early 2004. It is also important to realise that nine out of 10 teachers whose probation year  was 2007-08 were employed in some form by the end of the following school year.

The Government's overriding priority is to ensure that there are enough teachers to deliver the education system that we want in this country. That is not a definite science. It has been difficult for previous Administrations. It is interesting to note that the number of teachers going straight from training to permanent employment has been in decline since 2005, and that—as Bob Doris said—around 10,000 primary and secondary school teachers are over 55 and could retire at any time. When that happens, it is important that we meet the resulting demand. To listen to the overwrought rhetoric of some members, we would not think that teacher unemployment is lower now than it was in the early years of the Labour-Lib Dem Administration. Most important, it is necessary for any mature debate on the issue to recognise that the employment of teachers is undeniably—despite what has been said—a matter for local authorities. Rhona Brankin forgot to mention some other facts, for example that £2 billion of cuts in education have been proposed south of the border. There have been proposals from the Lib Dems to abolish tuition fees—

We have heard nothing more from the Liberal Democrats about the proposed £800 million cut in the Scottish budget. Members have a choice to make: either they choose the past way of doing things, with central Government pulling the strings, or they come with us into the future and work in true partnership with local government.

Where is your solution?

rose—

The figures for Glasgow City Council show that it intends to spend 1.4 per cent less on education this year than it did last year. Moreover, on the point about loss of talent, members might be interested to learn that this year's probationer of the year was employed by  Glasgow City Council on a temporary contract only after it was exposed that the council was not going to use any probationers.

I put on the record straight away the Government's regret that, in these difficult times, anyone is unable to find the job that they want in the profession that they have chosen. We know from the latest figures that 13.4 teachers per 1,000 in the workforce in Scotland are claiming jobseekers allowance. That figure is too high. However, it is important to note that it is still lower than the equivalent figure for England, which is 14.8, and significantly lower than the figures for Northern Ireland and Wales. [ Interruption. ] Labour members might be interested to know that that comes against a background of perhaps £2 billion of cuts by the Labour Party to education in England, so the figure there may worsen. As members are well aware, we are in a critical position in relation to the education system here in Scotland. The curriculum for excellence is a once-in-a-generation opportunity to ensure that our education system equips our children to meet the demands of the future, and the teacher workforce is crucial to its delivery. We have provided record levels of funding for local government, despite what Rhona Brankin says, and, through our concordat-based partnership with local government, we have made substantial progress towards our ambitious class size reduction targets. The average primary class size is 23.2, which is a record low. At 13.1 pupils per teacher, the pupil teacher ratio is also at an historic low for the second year running, and the proportion of P1 to P3 pupils in classes of 18 or fewer rose to a record high of 13.25 per cent in 2008. The largest class sizes have been tackled first and the proportion of P1 to P3 pupils in classes of more than 25 went down to a record low of 23 per cent in 2008.

Through the concordat with local government, we have committed to making year-on-year progress in reducing class sizes. As the figures that I have just given show, we have made record progress—in fact, substantially more progress than was possible under the previous Administration.  As I have said, that kind of achievement does not come easily. It has been made possible by record levels of local authority funding; in 2008 to 2010, for example, £23 billion has been made available. I am the first to acknowledge—and have said on previous occasions—that we would like to have seen more progress. However, we are working constructively with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local authorities to identify the further progress that can be made over the coming months and years. Indeed, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and Adam Ingram have been meeting councils to that end.

I am sorry—I do not have that much time. Despite the financial pressures that formed the backdrop to last week's budget announcement, the total package of funding for local government in 2008 to 2011 comes to £35 billion, which is £4 billion more than in the period 2005 to 2008. The 2010-11 element of that investment is £12 billion, which represents an increase of £127 million on the figure for 2009-10.

No. It is also worth noting that COSLA has given a continuing commitment to pursue the commitments in the concordat. An important point that members will be aware of is that teacher employment is a matter for local authorities, which is as it should be. Despite the examples given by Rhona Brankin—

No. Despite the examples highlighted by Rhona Brankin—[ Interruption. ]

There are numerous examples throughout the country of the very significant progress that has been made. Indeed, 18 of our 32 local authorities have made progress on class size reduction. I should point out that those councils include not only West Lothian, which is SNP led, but Midlothian, which is Labour led. I am sure that Rhona Brankin will welcome that.

No. However, the converse is also true. We need look no further than Glasgow City Council to find an authority that is haemorrhaging teachers and whose class sizes are increasing. Rhona Brankin did not mention this, but I think that it is worth noting that, out of the 226 probationers who became available in 2008-09, Glasgow has employed only 75 in temporary posts in the new  school term and not a single one on a permanent contract. As for the drop in teacher numbers to which Rhona Brankin referred, I point out that four councils—Glasgow City Council, Renfrewshire Council, North Lanarkshire Council and Aberdeen City Council—account for almost half the total figure. Renfrewshire and North Lanarkshire have made positive commitments to reducing class sizes in the coming years, and we all know about the situation in Aberdeen. The one council that stands out is Glasgow City Council, and it will be interesting to see whether the Labour Party acknowledges that point when it comes to the summing-up speeches. Of course, the time lag between taking decisions on student teacher intake numbers and those teachers seeking employment after serving their probationary period is such that the vast majority of those decisions were planned for by the previous Administration. The 2008 teacher census, which we published in March, showed that there were 1,000 fewer teachers. However, we took immediate action to address the situation by reducing by 500 the student teacher intake targets for autumn 2009.

Obviously, there is a relationship between class sizes and the number of teachers. I have detailed already our progress on class sizes, and I am happy to come back to the issue when I sum up. That is why, as the cabinet secretary announced yesterday, we are proposing to make regulations to limit primary 1 class sizes to 25 from the beginning of the 2010-11 school session. The previous Administration issued a circular with the intention of limiting P1 class sizes to 25—

As I said, the previous Administration issued a circular—[ Interruption. ]

The circular set out the intention of limiting P1 class sizes to 25. However, local authorities have subsequently found that it is scarcely worth the paper that it is printed on. [ Interruption. ]

That is why we are making regulations to limit P1 class sizes, which the previous Administration did not do. We will consult on those regulations later this year and, in parallel with that, we will review the current unsatisfactory mixture of arrangements governing class sizes at all stages. This Government is committed both to class size reduction and to our target of class sizes of no more than 18 in P1 to P3, and we are taking steps to ensure that progress continues to be made in that direction by legislating to clear up the ambiguity that was left by the previous Administration. We are also very concerned about the plight of the significant numbers of unemployed teachers and, again, we have plans to address that. This time last year, the Labour Party brought a similarly half-baked motion to the chamber and it is a pity that, in the meantime, Labour members have been unable to develop their thinking. Their motion offers nothing positive. It offers no solution to the challenges that the education system and unemployed teachers face. It complains, but it does not contribute. The Government is offering solutions. We are serious about Scottish education and, for that reason, I urge members to support the amendment in my name. I move amendment S3M-4910.3, to leave out from "the most recent" to end and insert: "that Scotland benefits from a record low in average class size in primary schools, that the number of P1 to P3 pupils in classes of 18 or under is increasing and that the Scottish average primary class size is considerably smaller than those for England and Wales; welcomes the record levels of funding provided by the current administration to local government and the commitment set out in the concordat to reduce class sizes but notes that the employment of teachers is a matter for local authorities; welcomes the continuing commitment of the Scottish Government and local government to work together to make further progress on class size reduction; highlights with concern that the previous administration took no legislative action to support its class size reduction policy and notes the recently announced intention of the Scottish Government to introduce regulations for a maximum class size of 25 in P1 from the beginning of the 2010 school year and to review more generally how class sizes are governed, and also recognises the action of the Scottish Government to ensure a better balance between supply and demand of teachers."

As existing funding systems already ensure that funding follows pupils and as many placing requests are granted, there is no need for vouchers, which would add only an unnecessary layer of bureaucracy. Driving up standards is a key priority for this Government and we are in the process of implementing curriculum for excellence, the biggest reform of education in Scotland for a generation.

Under the current law, there is choice in the system. Although I believe that that is extremely important, I do not agree that having an internal market would benefit the education system. I should also point out that more than 95 per cent of children attend their local school out of choice, and there is no evidence that parents want the voucher system that has been suggested. Interestingly, if in the very unlikely event that a system along the lines of the Swedish model were to be progressed, the current system in independent schools would mean that they would have to dramatically reduce their own income. I am not sure that that part of the proposal has been thought through. The member is right to say that such a move would lead to polarisation and make it extremely difficult to manage schools. I was visiting a West Lothian school on the very night that the proposal hit the media and I was told that it would drive a wedge into communities and make it difficult to sustain the link between local schools and communities. I do not believe that the system is good and think it extremely unlikely that it will ever come to pass.

The Swedish have a right to the system that they think best suits them. Of course, in Sweden, the system has its critics, who think that it leads to further inequality. We are content that the way in which we will drive up standards and make our schools more attractive is through the implementation of the curriculum for excellence, which will improve teaching and learning in our schools. That is our system. It has  the broad support of teachers and the education community, and we intend to continue to support it.

As Alex Johnstone will know, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning announced in June £800 million of additional capital support for a £1.25 billion new school building programme, which follows on from the current £2 billion of school investment already being supported by the Government. The cabinet secretary made it clear in Parliament in June that the Scottish Futures Trust will have a central role in co-ordinating, facilitating and managing the new programme, working alongside the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local authorities. We are now engaging with COSLA, councils and the Scottish Futures Trust to identify the first tranche of secondary schools to benefit, taking into account the distribution of needs across Scotland; the best available information about schools' condition and unsuitability to deliver the curriculum for excellence; additionality; and authorities' plans, priorities and readiness to proceed.

The current condition of schools in Aberdeenshire has been the firm responsibility of the council over many years and is a result of how it has gone about making capital investment in its school estate. It is true to say that the additional moneys that have to be found every year to service the debt inherited from previous private finance initiatives and PPP projects constrains our ability to find new investment for schools. Despite that Aberdeenshire, like every other council, will look to benefit from the new tranche of available funding. It will be considered by COSLA, the Scottish Futures Trust and the cabinet secretary, who will make her announcements in due course. At that time, we will consider how we can best bring the worst schools—they are unevenly distributed throughout Scotland—out of their current situation so that they are more suited to teaching the curriculum for excellence. It is certainly the case that debt inherited from PPP projects is one of the major constraints that we face.

I am surprised that, after eight years of nirvana under the two previous Governments, we have a situation in Aberdeenshire as bad as that which Mike Rumbles describes. I cannot say what the outcome of the process that I described will be. I repeat that decisions will be made taking into account the distribution of needs nationally; the  best available information about schools' condition; the core facts in school estate management plans and other intelligence; the best information on schools' unsuitability to deliver; and additionality. Schools that are not already part of a funded programme will be prioritised. Of course, we will also have regard to authorities' own priorities in this process.

We already have a substantial building programme. [ Interruption. ]

I think that we expect to have proceeded with more than 300 schools, which exceeds the number of schools that were commissioned under the previous two Administrations, which is a very good basis on which to start. The Scottish Futures Trust will allow us to bring new efficiencies to the programme. We have a part to play in ensuring that moneys are allocated according to the priorities that I have just mentioned. At that stage, it will be for schools and authorities to take things forward as quickly as possible.

At present, the Scottish Government has no plans to introduce a social or community year to young people between school and higher education. However, we are closely engaged with the Bologna process and will ensure that any educational developments are consistent with the principles underpinning the emerging European higher education area.

The Scottish Government is committed to supporting young people to achieve their potential through recognised awards for volunteering. Youth achievement awards and awards scheme development and accreditation network certificates are both levelled against the Scottish credit and qualifications framework, and the Duke of Edinburgh's Award scheme is also well recognised. The Government supports Youth Scotland in its work to develop and promote those awards in Scotland in line with national outcome 4, the curriculum for excellence and the four capacities. Through supporting organisations such as Youth Scotland, Volunteer Development Scotland and the Duke of Edinburgh's Award, the Scottish Government is committed to building capacity in the voluntary youth sector to enable all Scotland's young people to take advantage of the opportunities available to them. Given the member's interest, it is worth mentioning that at a recent conference on the Bologna process, Scotland was the only one of the 46 countries to achieve full marks in all the action lines under the Bologna process. That shows some of the progress that we are making.

That decision was made some time ago. We are content with the distribution of resources to the projects and initiatives that are currently taking place. We have no intention of revisiting the decision.

It is clear from today's debate that there is cross-party agreement on—if nothing else—the health benefits that are to be gained from encouraging children, young people and adults to be more active. However, as several members have mentioned, there are worrying signs that Scots are becoming less and less physically active, despite the public understanding the benefits. I would not risk trying to speak for the Health and Sport Committee in any way—especially as its members are so serious and influential—but the central message that I took from its report was that this issue needs to be taken seriously and responsibility must be taken for it. I hope to address that, as well as some of the points that have been raised. We all agree on the importance of the message being underpinned by concrete action across the public sector and beyond. Nurseries, playgroups, schools, higher and further education establishments, parents, the medical profession, youth workers, sports governing bodies, local sports clubs and local authorities have a vital role in ensuring that appropriate physical activity is incorporated into their services for young people. It is vital that physical activity forms part of all young people's lives and that there are appropriate opportunities to stimulate and develop the interest and commitment that will provide a foundation for sustained physical activity. On 1 September, we published a games legacy plan for Scotland that sets out our aspirations for  the periods before, during and after the 2014 Commonwealth games. The plan includes a new physical activity programme to encourage people of all ages and abilities to become more physically active in the run-up to 2014 and beyond. That relates to the point that was made that we should not concentrate too much on the competitive and elite elements of sport, but instead should ensure that we use the example that some people provide to produce a legacy that benefits the entire population. The legacy plan also seeks to improve the use of and access to the facilities that are available for physical activity and competitive sport through the development of the community sports hubs that we have heard about today. The new school estate strategy, which we expect to publish later this month, will reaffirm the joint commitment of the Government and local authorities to improve access to school facilities, which members have mentioned a number of times.

I will move on to teacher training shortly. Our original commitment of £1.8 million for teacher training will continue right through the process. That is, of course, set against a background of tight public expenditure, which should give members an idea of our commitment. The Minister for Public Health and Sport yesterday met the body that Mr McGrigor mentioned, and the Government is engaging in continuous joint working with it to achieve the desired outcome. The health and wellbeing aspect of the curriculum for excellence, which we have heard about today, sets out the sport, physical activity and physical education experiences and outcomes for all young people during their school days. An important element of that is the requirement for all schools to work towards delivering two hours of physical education a week. The commitment to deliver the new curriculum—and therefore the two-hour physical education commitment—has been secured through the concordat and endorsed by every local authority during the 2009 single outcome agreement process.

I want to make some more progress. The Government is committed to driving home the need for schools to make good progress in delivering at least two hours of physical education each week. We have emphasised that in our  meetings with local authorities. Adam Ingram, Fiona Hyslop and I have, between us, now met every single local authority in Scotland. To return to Jamie McGrigor's point, we have developed in conjunction with Glasgow and Edinburgh universities a postgraduate certificate course for existing primary teachers to enhance their physical education skills. Around 600 primary teachers have already participated in the course, and the total funding of £1.8 million that I mentioned has been agreed with the universities for the period 2008 to 2011.

Decisions on the employment of teachers and the training of teachers in physical education are matters for local authorities. However, we can ensure that additional funding is provided so that the training is available to them. To return to the central point about taking the issue seriously, when I appeared before the Health and Sport Committee Ross Finnie spoke about his visit to East Renfrewshire to find out what had been done there, which obviously had impressed committee members. I visited East Renfrewshire shortly after, and I was similarly impressed by what had been achieved, not least what had been done with the timetable, which has been mentioned. I say to Liz Smith that a number of local authorities throughout Scotland have now copied that: they like what has happened in East Renfrewshire and they are pursuing it. However, it is for local authorities to decide whether they do that or not.

I do not think that 29 councils are not delivering on the targets. If I had time, I could list the progress that each council has made. For example, Helen Eadie, who would not let me intervene in response to her comments, might be surprised to learn that in Fife in 2005, not a single primary school was offering two hours of physical education, and now 23 are. Many secondary schools are also doing that when they did not do so before. That contrasts with the points that some members have made about a lack of progress. I met representatives of ADES at the Health and Sport Committee's suggestion, and put forward as a template what has been done in East Renfrewshire. Members will realise that in education in Scotland there is some resistance to the regular presentation of East Renfrewshire  models, not only because of the excellence of that local authority but because its socioeconomic make-up is not entirely typical of every authority in Scotland. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has—as I said when I appeared before the committee—asked HMIE to comment on progress towards the target of two hours of PE a week for each pupil in every single report that it produces. As a result, the inspectorate has rewritten the procedures that it applies in relation to the target. I said that we have met every council in Scotland. I should mention that progressing the target through the curriculum for excellence was not only this Government's idea; it was Peter Peacock's idea. That is how he said it should be delivered. Of course, the curriculum for excellence has taken some time to come to fruition—not least because of the request to delay it for a year, but also because of earlier delays. The single outcome agreements all mention the curriculum for excellence. Apart from the six agreements that have been mentioned, they do not mention the target of two hours of PE a week because they do not go into that kind of detail. The method for delivering the target is through the curriculum for excellence. In contrast to the point that Ken Macintosh made, the target was in "Building the curriculum 3", which was published in 2008, so it was not a late addition, as has been suggested. The school estate strategy will start to address some of the concerns that have been raised about the lack of facilities, which I understand and accept. Many schools have said that the available facilities are a reason why they find it difficult to address the problem, although other schools have been happy to move beyond the school gates and use surrounding areas, as happened when I was at school. A lack of appropriate facilities is not an excuse for not meeting the target, but we understand that it is a constraint. Through the work that we have done with HMIE, ADES, East Renfrewshire Council and others to promote what East Renfrewshire Council is doing, huge progress has been made, although we cannot tell other councils to do it. I am convinced that there will be massive progress in the course of the next year when curriculum for excellence has been implemented.

We are heartened that the committee's report broadly supports the Government's approach, and we have found many  of its recommendations helpful in considering how we may step up our efforts. I am also heartened by the feedback that I have received from councils about their commitment to delivering two hours of PE a week for all pupils and about the steps that they are taking to meet the target. I appreciate the challenge that the target presents to some schools, but let me be clear that the improvements that are being made to the school estate, the number of teachers who are receiving additional support in teaching PE and the increased flexibility through curriculum for excellence will help us to increase both the number of those who are using the pathway and the number of signposts that are in place for others to follow.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am confident that local authorities will be able to demonstrate significant progress in securing two hours of quality physical education for every pupil by the end of this parliamentary session. We have been assured by every local authority's commitment to deliver the curriculum for excellence through the 2009 single outcome agreement process. Our expectation that schools will continue to work towards providing two hours of physical education is embedded in the curriculum for excellence, which is in turn embedded in the national performance framework.

I will not comment on the West Lothian Council report—which I have not seen—and especially not on Richard Simpson's interpretation of it, given that his interpretation of what I said to the committee is so far wide of the mark. The committee asked when we expected to fulfil the pledge, and it was 2011 that was mentioned, not 2010. We intend to achieve that goal by meeting councils. I met one today that has already achieved more than two hours of PE every week for every pupil in its schools. Many other councils are already achieving that. I appreciate that there was not much progress from when the target was first set in 2004, but progress is happening now. In addition, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has asked Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education to report more transparently on councils' progress in achieving the target. It will not be left until the last minute—perhaps Richard Simpson should have more faith in some of Scotland's councils to deliver it.

I am willing to look into that further, but it has been said before that physical education, as distinct from physical activity, is a part of the structured curriculum and that teachers should have specialist training to deliver the subject. There is a commonly understood distinction between physical activity and physical education, but there is still some ambiguity about it, which came out to some extent during discussions with the Health and Sport Committee. I will consider how we can clarify it further.

There is no evidence to suggest that shared headships impact negatively on the education of children. Some local authorities view the sharing of a headteacher by two schools as preferable to having a teaching headteacher. Shared headship can be a means of protecting the viability of the smallest rural schools.

I am aware of the situation that John Lamont mentions, and I have been in correspondence with him on it. All I can say is that it is up to each individual authority to decide how best to proceed. There are sometimes advantages from shared headships, not least of which is that a head who is not teaching has more time for management. It can also result in a better calibre of applicant for the post. Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, which has looked into the issue, says that whether a shared headteacher post works really comes down to the quality of the headteacher. The decision is for councils to take—the Scottish Government does not impose a decision or direct councils on this. Councils sometimes decide to have shared headships in the best interests of the teaching in a particular school and to keep rural schools available and open.

Like other members, I congratulate John Park on securing the debate and giving the Parliament the opportunity to mark Anne Frank day. It gives us a chance not only to commemorate the life and tragic early death of a remarkable young woman but to stand united against racism, discrimination and intolerance in all its forms. A number of members have mentioned how present that threat can be, for example in the results of the recent European elections, not just in this country but, sadly, even in Holland. Anne Frank's 13 th birthday, on 12 June 1942, was the day on which she began to keep a diary. One of her first entries, on 20 June 1942, reads: "It seems to me that later on neither I nor anyone else will be interested in the musings of a 13-year-old schoolgirl." Since its initial publication in 1947, Anne's "musings" have inspired, moved and educated successive generations of young people and adults. She lived a short but dramatic life, suffered an early and tragic death, and left a first-hand testimony of the hardship of life under Nazi rule, including an invaluable record of the daily tribulations, hopes and fears of two years in hiding. Like other members, I applaud the work of the Anne Frank Trust UK in bringing her story to Scottish schools. We want our young people to grow up with an understanding of the world and their place in it. We want them to understand what it means to be Scottish but at the same time to admire and accept the identities of others. That means taking a stand against racism, discrimination and intolerance in all its forms. Educating young people about the Holocaust can contribute greatly to that aim. Holocaust education is important not only in its own right but because it opens windows to wider aspects of citizenship education. It provides rich opportunities for analysis, discussion and debate. Holocaust education sits well with the Government's policies in the curriculum for excellence, which has as its aim the idea that young people should become successful learners, confident individuals, effective contributors and, crucially, responsible citizens. Pupils will be able  to learn across the traditional subject divides and benefit from learning experiences inside and outside the classroom. As a counterpoint to Jackson Carlaw's point, in addition to Holocaust education, children nowadays visit world war 2 battlefields much more frequently, which helps to educate them on the consequences of war. Learning about the life of Anne Frank and reading her diaries can not only open young people's eyes to a different world but help them to reflect on the problems and challenges that they and their society face today. The Government is giving the Holocaust Educational Trust annual funding of around £214,000 for the next two years to run the  lessons from Auschwitz programme. We also run a number of other initiatives, some of which I will mention shortly. On the point that was made about meeting the Anne Frank Trust, I can confirm that Scottish Government officials will meet the trust on 23 June. Through that funding, around 400 senior pupils each year will be able to visit the Auschwitz-Birkenau death camp. Government funding will enable pupils to travel to Auschwitz for only £49 each. I speak from personal experience when I say that those visits are a profound experience for those involved. I went to a night that was organised by Beaconhurst school in my constituency to hear two young women talk about their visit to the death camp. Many people were there—parents, local politicians and others—and no one was left in any doubt of the impact that that trip had had on them and on those at the school who heard about it. Each participant in those trips will share their experiences with their school and the wider community. That is the point—the trip is not just for the individual themselves. On 16 June, the First Minister will speak at a gathering of previous participants who have gone on to become student ambassadors for Holocaust education. We have also been working closely with the Holocaust Educational Trust to ensure that those visits benefit pupils from across Scotland. We want to ensure, as I have mentioned, that the visits are closely aligned with the curriculum for excellence and the work of Learning and Teaching Scotland, through which the funding that I mentioned earlier is disbursed. The Scottish Government—the present Administration and the previous Administration—has supported Holocaust memorial day every year since 2001. The most recent event, which was in Paisley on 27 January 2009, attracted Government support of £25,000. Learning and Teaching Scotland has enabled teachers who are involved in Holocaust education to go on  professional development study visits to Amsterdam and Berlin. Those trips have included visits to the Anne Frank museum in Amsterdam and Berlin's Anne Frank Zentrum, an educational museum. We have also funded "Testimony", an exhibition about the Holocaust that features the personal recollections of Scottish survivors. That exhibition can be used in schools and communities to support Holocaust education. As is evident from the speeches this evening, people remember the Holocaust and all the victims of Nazi atrocities with the positive aim of preventing anything like that from happening again. Tragically, however, nearly 65 years after the end of the second world war, genocide remains a threat in—as Hugh O'Donnell mentioned—places such as Bosnia, Rwanda and Darfur. Like most people, I believe that education is one of the keys to ensuring that genocide is not allowed to take place again. We must ensure that young people grow up with an understanding of the events of the Holocaust and of how and why it was possible for it to happen. Therefore, we welcome the contribution of organisations such as the Anne Frank Trust, the Holocaust Educational Trust and the Holocaust Memorial Trust, and I encourage them to work closely together, along with Learning and Teaching Scotland, to ensure that all of our young people receive a clear and consistent message about identity, tolerance and respect for others. I would like to give the last word to Anne Frank, who was born, as we have heard, on 12 June 1929 and who died in March 1945. Three months before her 16 th birthday, she wrote: "what are you supposed to do if you become part of the suffering? You'd be completely lost. On the contrary, beauty remains, even in misfortune. If you just look for it, you discover more and more happiness and regain your balance. A person who's happy will make others happy; a person who has courage and faith will never die in misery!" She also wrote: "It's difficult in times like these; ideals, dreams and cherished hopes rise within us, only to be crushed by grim reality. It's a wonder I haven't abandoned all my ideals, they seem so absurd and impractical. Yet I cling to them because I believe, in spite of everything, that people are truly good at heart."  Meeting closed at 17:44.

As the First Minister made clear to Parliament last month, this Government is determined to avoid another lost generation of young people. The top priority of our robust more choices, more chances strategy is to help young people to stay in learning after the age of 16, since that is the best way in which to improve their long-term employability. We are doing that by rolling out the 16+ learning choices programme across the country, with the aim of offering every young person an appropriate offer of post-16 learning and support. We are also boosting provision in order to support the efforts of local partnerships. Last week, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning announced an additional £28.1 million for colleges over the next two years.  Last month, we announced new activity agreement pilots in 10 local authorities for unemployed school leavers and, prior to that, we announced nearly £10 million for the inspiring Scotland project, which involves 23 voluntary organisations that are ready to deliver more opportunities and support for particularly vulnerable 14 to 19-year-olds.

I do not agree with Margaret Smith's first point. The 16+ learning choices programme is extremely effective and has been well received by the partners with whom we have been in discussion. Indeed, it was formulated with their input. There have been gaps in provision for a number of years, but we are working to address that. The initial response to the 16+ learning choices programme and the input that we have had from partners suggest that those gaps will quickly be filled. Given that we have entered an unprecedented recession, it is a difficult time for the more choices, more chances strategy and the 16+ initiative, but we believe that both projects will be effective in limiting the effect of the recession and in ensuring that young people in the relevant categories are well placed to come out of it with the necessary skills and opportunities.

The 78 European social fund projects that the First Minister announced in April are expected to help 75,000 people to gain or sustain employment opportunities through training and skills development. Of those people, 4,596 will benefit from projects that are aimed specifically at those who live in Glasgow. In addition, 65,535 people will be supported by projects that will operate across more than one local authority area, including Glasgow. The remaining 4,869 will be supported by projects that will be delivered entirely outside the Glasgow area.

I am happy to do what Margaret Curran asks. The European social fund projects are aimed at people who are trying to gain employment for the first time or to sustain employment opportunities that they already have through further training and skills development. The delivery timescales will depend on other partners, and I am happy to get back to Margaret Curran with that information.

I can confirm that that is my understanding, but I am happy to get more information on that specific project. I repeat that  some of the projects are led by other partners and that we do not hold all the information centrally, but I am happy to get back to Sandra White with that information.

Unlike in England, students in Scotland do not have to pay tuition fees. As a result, English students have to pay an additional £3,000 each year and leave with greater debt than Scottish students—and that is despite their generally studying for a year less. In fact, for the first time since devolution, the average Scottish student loan debt fell in 2007 and now stands at £5,354 compared to £9,580 in England. Our consultation, "Supporting a Smarter Scotland: A consultation on supporting learners in higher education", closed on 30 April 2009. It sets out a number of options on how to improve student support with the additional £30 million that this Government has allocated in 2010-11. It has also provided an opportunity for all interested parties to set out what their priorities are. We are currently analysing the responses and will make further announcements on this area of policy in due course.

Through reducing the charges on loans and debts for students, the Government has managed down debt for the first time since devolution. In addition, we have provided an additional £44 million, which is twice as much as was provided under the previous Administration. Far from misunderstanding the question, I do not really understand where Mike Rumbles is coming from. He said in his manifesto: "The next step for student funding is to take further action to reduce the burden of debt for young people and ensure that fear of debt is not a barrier to excellent education." Either the Lib Dems are saying one thing in their manifesto and another thing elsewhere or, not for the first time, Mike Rumbles is a stranger to his party's policy. We are taking effective action on student debt, but we are also taking effective action by providing funds for students in hardship.

Claire Baker will know from the discussion that we had in the debate last week that the cabinet secretary has taken on board the points that have been raised and the responses that have been received so far. However, the consultation has closed only recently, so further consideration has to be given to the responses. The amendments and the motion that were passed following last week's debate were indicative of a large degree of common ground between the parties. I am sure that that point is not lost on the cabinet secretary, who is currently considering the request to meet Opposition parties to discuss these issues.

Murdo Fraser has essentially repeated the point that he made during last week's debate. On what he says about additional debts  being incurred by students, we acknowledge that there are problems and we have to move from a situation of concentrating on debt alone to recognising that Labour's recession means that there is an increase in hardship, which is why we have increased funds to universities to deal with that. It is important to bear down on debt. It is not the case that there is evidence of huge additional debt through private borrowing by students. If that were so, it would not be the case that the average debt has fallen and that, for the first time since devolution, bankruptcies in Scotland among students have gone down.

The path is green, which was launched in May 2008, was an innovative approach to encourage young people to consider green jobs and opportunities in the renewables sector. As a campaign, its success can be demonstrated by the awards it has won and by the increased level of awareness that it has helped to create among key groups. More important, as an example of good practice, the model is planned to be extended across the wider science, engineering and technology sectors. The new programme—the path is SET—will encourage young people to prepare for and pursue careers in science, engineering and technology. The path is SET programme is currently being developed and will be launched later this year.

The Government is doing a great deal to encourage young people into the areas that the member mentions. In February, we launched our do something creative, do science campaign to tackle stereotypes about science and the career opportunities that are available to those who study science. That included £140,000 for a pilot scheme, £2.56 million a year for four science centres and £225,000 to fund Scotland's science festivals. We have had on-going discussions with officials from Skills Development Scotland—as recently as last week and again this week—and I am happy to take up the points that the member has raised when we next meet them.

The Leuven/Louvain-la-Neuve communiqué setting out the next stages in the Bologna process was agreed on 29 April. It highlights priorities for the European higher education area over the next three years in areas such as mobility, lifelong learning, quality assurance and employability. The stocktaking report, which is produced for each ministerial meeting on the basis of reports from the 46 participating countries, indicates progress against the various Bologna action lines. Scotland reports separately from the rest of the United Kingdom and achieved maximum scores for all action lines—the only country to do so.

Much of the action that is being undertaken by the Scottish Government was highlighted in the debate on student hardship earlier today. On the Bologna process, however, the communiqué that I mentioned emphasises the social characteristics of the process and aims to provide equal opportunities for quality education, and the Scottish Government has signed up to that. We agree that access to higher education should be widened by fostering the potential of students from underrepresented groups and by providing adequate conditions for the completion of their studies. That involves improving the learning environment, removing all barriers to study and creating the appropriate economic conditions for students to be able to benefit from the study opportunities at all levels. We have done as much as that in relation to addressing student hardship by removing graduate endowment fees. Obviously, with regard to the question of the appropriate economic conditions, not all of the levers are in our hands, but we have done as much as we can, within the budget that is set for us, to improve diversity at our universities.

The Scottish Government is extremely supportive of academic freedom, and our actions have underlined that point. Murdo Fraser started off by asking about mobility and the ability of students to take the courses that they want. That was also a concern of ours in the Bologna process. There is a move across the 46 countries that are involved in the Bologna process to increase mobility. We did not agree with some of the proposals in that regard, because there were no effective measurements for them. At the same time as we have been promoting the freedom of students to move between institutions in different countries, the actions of this Government have underlined our commitment to academic freedom.

The latest figures for participation in the Erasmus programme, which are for 2007-08, show a 44 per cent increase on the previous year in total outward mobility for Scottish students and a 29 per cent increase for Scottish staff. We recognise that low numbers of Scotland's students participate in the programme. The 1,500 participants represent 13 per cent of those from the United Kingdom as a whole. Early figures for 2008-09 indicate that the increase will be maintained. We have implemented a number of actions to help to increase participation. For example, we recently committed to ensuring that Scottish students who are eligible for tuition fee support from the Student Awards Agency for Scotland retain that entitlement for all recognised exchange programmes.

Today's debate has, like the previous recent education debate, been wide ranging. As Hugh O'Donnell almost said: "It's like déjà vu all over again." However, as several members have mentioned, higher education is important, so it is important that we send the clear message to students and graduates that the Government values highly the contribution that they make to society. We will do, and are doing, all that we can to support students at what is perhaps the most important stage of their lives. Although this might not be obvious from some comments in the debate, the Government has already done a great deal, as the cabinet secretary said, to address both hardship and debt. Before I reiterate some of our policy decisions that have demonstrated our support for students, let me just contrast those with the position of other parties. First, we have the £500 million of cuts coming next year and each year afterwards from Labour—

Lord Foulkes might want to wish that away, but that is the hard reality that faces this Government and the people of Scotland. On manifesto commitments, the Lib Dems have recently ditched their idea—not even a manifesto commitment—of making £800 million of cuts. It would be interesting to know how they would fund the things they want while taking £800 million out of the public purse. For the Conservatives, of course, the £500 million in cuts cannot come soon enough and would be brought forward. That is the background against which the decisions that we have taken—

No. The abolition of the graduate endowment tax has saved 50,000 students £2,300 each year. It is worth mentioning that in the context of the different attitude to debt that now exists in society. People are more frightened of debt than they were, as Ian McKee mentioned. The prospect of taking on debt is always a disincentive, but it is much accentuated when we have, as a country, a massively increased debt that will overhang our students in future years.

The cabinet secretary's amendment already commits us to considering the proposals. It is worth mentioning that a loan of £1,000 costs the Scottish Government £310 in addition to the £1,000, whereas a grant of £1,000 costs us £1,000. Obviously, that must be a factor in our considerations. As the cabinet secretary and Christina McKelvie mentioned, we have provided £16 million a year to institutions to alleviate student hardship. That is an increase of 14.6 per cent, which is a huge rise. For the first time, we have also uprated the higher education discretionary funds in line with other student support. I will pick up one or two others points that have been made in the debate. Pauline McNeill might be interested to know that we have had no further requests from the University of Glasgow for the additional hardship funds that we have provided. The same is true—I mention this for Karen Whitefield's benefit—for the University of the West of Scotland and for the University of Edinburgh. In recognition of the increased demand on such funds, we have provided additional funding that is being used to meet that additional demand. Other members pointed to the obvious need for the recession to feature in our decisions. We cannot take decisions without acknowledging both the recession and the increased demands that are being made on the education system. On the issues that Hugh O'Donnell raised, if he writes to me, I will respond to the serious points that he made about the increased demand on colleges and so on. Those issues are not part of this debate, but perhaps reflect the debate that he wanted to have. The budget cuts of about £500 million that we face mean that we will have to make hard decisions. Despite that, we are adding £30 million  to student support, which has given rise to this and previous debates. The consultation process has been open to everybody and we want to take account of everyone's views. I therefore question why Labour's motion gives us only three weeks to analyse the responses and to make decisions. That is not a proper way in which to deal with the responses that have been received from a wide range of people.

No. Margaret Smith would not take an intervention from me. The Labour motion does not give us sufficient time to consider those responses, but the Liberal Democrats went even further in wanting us to make decisions before we had even finished the consultation. There is, at present, a competition to find a new quote from the people of Scotland to put on the Parliament building. The last thing that we want is for it to be, "What's the point of consulting us?"

I have already taken an intervention. I would like to make progress.  The Scotsman interviewed four universities, and only one—the University of Abertay Dundee—said that it had requested additional discretionary hardship funding in the current year. I think that I am right in saying that that request was met by the Government. In the current year, institutions have requested a total of £882,000 in additional discretionary funds to tackle student hardship, which is about £226,000 less than was requested in the previous two years. By and large—although it is not true of all universities and institutions—universities are meeting their increased demands from the resources that are provided by the Government. The Government has made it clear in the debate that we take student hardship seriously. That is underscored by our commitment of additional resources to tackle the problem. We have invested a great deal of additional money in student support—far more than the previous Administration. The cabinet secretary mentioned the £22 million under the previous Labour-Lib Dem Administration and the £44 million under the present Administration. In addition, we have run a consultation on how best to spend the £30 million in additional funds that have been allocated. The Labour Party is pressing us to commit to a specific approach before we have given due consideration to all the responses. We do not want to do that, at this stage. We are trying, as has been mentioned, to be conciliatory in our amendment and to take all views into account. We  will consider Labour's proposal, but we must consider the wide range of other proposals, as is only fair to those who have taken the time to respond. We are happy to work with Labour, the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats, but we call on them to make specific proposals and to say where they would take money from to fund their proposals. One or two members have said that they would provide more than the £30 million: it is incumbent on them to say from where that money would come. It is essential that we work together for the benefit of students in Scotland. As our amendment is, the motion is relatively conciliatory at the start, and talks about a cross-party approach. However, as Ian McKee said, it quickly degenerates into an attack on one party, which is perhaps not the best basis for a cross-party approach. The amendment that has been moved by the cabinet secretary states that we want to work together on the issue. I ask the other parties to respect that and to vote for our amendment.

Will the member give way?

I point out that Murdo Fraser's last statement goes against his manifesto commitment that students would be able to borrow as much as they liked because they would have increased earning potential in future years.

Will the member give way?

Claire Baker implies that the Labour Party would make extra resources available. Given the cuts of £500 million that are coming next year, would she raise extra resources by reintroducing the graduate endowment tax?

Will the member give way?

When it suits you.

We have said that we are disappointed with the results of the 2008 teacher census and the implications for teachers after their probation year. This year, we are providing an additional £4 million to enable local authorities to employ an additional 100 teachers. We will also discuss with each local authority its plans for teacher employment and class size reduction.

Yesterday, I had a discussion with a local authority that has had difficulties in encouraging teachers to apply for vacancies that it has advertised twice. That underlines the point that the situation is different in different parts of the country. I emphasise that, as I am sure Ken Macintosh knows, councils—not the Scottish Government—employ teachers. We have given councils an extra £9 million, which should allow them to employ enough teachers to reduce class sizes, but that has not happened in the past year. We have taken action by holding a series of meetings with local authorities, which are on-going. If Ken Macintosh is genuinely concerned, rather than just trying to throw political mud, perhaps he could have a word with some of his local government colleagues to ensure that local government employs the teachers about whom he professes to be concerned.

Teacher workforce planning takes account of the number of teachers who are leaving the profession for a variety of reasons, including retirement. The expected number of leavers each year is based on historical trends. For example, the number of probationers who are to start in 2009 had to be set by using leaver rates from 2005-06. Sudden changes in retiral patterns can imbalance supply and demand. The teacher employment working group considered the issue and recommended research, which is now under way, into whether the changing economic climate is affecting retirement decisions.

Yes, that was discussed. I refer Elizabeth Smith to a previous response that I gave on the issue. We are talking about an inexact science, because there is a long time lag between planning for the education and training of teachers and employing those teachers. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning in particular is doing as much as she can to work with the working group to ensure that we get planning right in future years.

I welcome the opportunity to respond in the debate on behalf of the Government. I welcome the decline in exclusions by more than 11 per cent between 2006-07 and 2007-08 and congratulate schools and local authorities on their concerted efforts to achieve that. However, like Liz Smith, I am concerned by the increase in exclusions as a result of physical assaults with weapons. Attacks with weapons are plainly wrong. They endanger and distress other pupils, teachers and staff as well as the perpetrators themselves. Apart from the serious physical danger that is involved, they are extremely disruptive to the education of our young people. Although knife incidents in schools are extremely serious, they are rare. We must remember that the vast majority of our children and young people are well behaved and are a great credit to Scotland. However, the Government takes seriously the knife culture that is prevalent in certain areas of the country, and we are tackling it in partnership with other agencies in various ways. Our positive behaviour team, which receives more than £0.5 million a year, is working throughout Scotland with schools and local authorities to promote a range of approaches to improve relationships and promote positive behaviour, from restorative practices to nurture groups. The Government-funded national violence reduction unit, which receives £916,000 a year, has promoted programmes on the dangers of knife carrying. It has received further funding of around £80,000 to develop the medics against violence initiative, under which more than 65 senior medical practitioners will go into schools. At a Government-hosted youth conference on violence and knife crime, we launched the Government's new knife crime youth engagement initiative. We have committed £0.5 million to work with young people to prevent and reduce knife crime, under the new brand no knives better lives.

When an attack takes place with a knife or a weapon, that often becomes a matter for the courts rather than the school system. Any disposal after that is a matter for the courts as well as the school system. We want the minimum possible danger and fear in the classroom, which is what those initiatives aim to achieve.  In the curriculum for excellence, which Liz Smith mentioned, knife crime and risk-taking behaviour are recognised in the experiences and outcomes, under health and wellbeing and religious and moral education. In partnership with the included, engaged and involved steering group and other key stakeholders, the Government is drafting new guidance on exclusion that will consider how we provide more support to children and young people who are at risk of exclusion, particularly those who have been excluded several times. I agree that we need regular information and evidence on physical and verbal attacks on school staff, and on the reporting of those incidents. I welcome the fact that the behaviour in Scottish schools research for 2009 is well under way. We commissioned the survey in partnership with the Scottish advisory group on behaviour in schools, which I co-chair with the education spokesperson of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. We are committed to discussing the findings with the advisory group to inform future policy on behaviour in schools. The survey is different from previous surveys and will give an up-to-date and accurate picture of behaviour in schools. A study is conducted every three years but, when the present one has reported, we will be able to better determine whether it provides sufficient information to monitor violence in schools and whether more frequent reporting or publication would add to our understanding of behaviour in schools. I recommend that members read the questions that are asked in the survey, which are different from those in previous surveys and which will elicit far more valuable information.

The point that I have just made is that the present survey is substantially different from previous ones and will give us a lot more information. As I say, I recommend that members read the questions that are being asked. For example, there are questions about the nature of assaults, such as whether they are racially based and, if violence is involved, what type. The quality of the information that is gathered will allow us to decide on the need to publish on a three-year basis or otherwise. That is the sensible way in which to proceed. However, we are of course  open to all views and constructive suggestions and we will listen carefully to the debate today.

I must make progress. Headteachers and teachers have significant and sufficient powers to deal with indiscipline in schools, including powers to develop and implement school behaviour policies and to exclude pupils, after consulting as appropriate on removals from the register, as the local authority has a duty to continue to provide education. We acknowledge the previous Administration's move to devolve control and decision making on exclusion by leaving headteachers to decide how to deal with each incident on a case-by-case basis. Given those measures, and the generally excellent behaviour of our young people—which should be re-emphasised—I am happy to move that the Parliament "welcomes the 11% reduction in exclusions from Scottish schools from 2006-07 to 2007-08", which I have mentioned. We should also acknowledge "that appropriate support should be provided to the small number of children and young people who persistently misbehave".

That is exactly why we are collecting information on a broader and much more scientific basis, which will be the basis for future decisions. I could read out several quotations from the EIS that do not have the same emphasis that the motion has on the general nature of the problem in schools. The EIS says that such incidents are rare and that teachers generally manage them very well. As I have said, we should acknowledge that headteachers have considerable power over school discipline through their responsibility for school discipline policies and their devolved responsibility for excluding pupils. We take on board Liz Smith's point that we should always rely on the headteacher in such matters. A headteacher in Glasgow, who will remain nameless, has said: "School is the place where the positive messages are delivered." That is an important point. When pupils are taken out of school, they are taken out of the headteacher's control at the same time.  We should agree that the future policy on behaviour in schools should be informed by the survey that is being conducted, which will provide in-depth information. Before members consider pursuing further the aims that are set out in the motion, I suggest that they should read the detailed questions that are asked in the survey, if they have not already done so. We should welcome the comments in Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education report "Improving Scottish education—A report by HMIE on inspection and review 2005-2008", which in relation to secondary schools states: "In almost all schools, climate and relationships are constructive and encouraging. While many schools have small numbers of young people with particularly challenging behaviour, any issues arising are usually handled effectively." Liz Smith said that the vast majority of young pupils and students behave very well, but her motion does not say that, and that is the basis for the amendment in my name. For that reason, I ask members to support the SNP amendment. I move amendment S3M-4067.3, to leave out from "as called" to end and insert: "welcomes the 11% reduction in exclusions from Scottish schools from 2006-07 to 2007-08; acknowledges that appropriate support should be provided to the small number of children and young people who persistently misbehave; further acknowledges that head teachers already have considerable power over school discipline through their responsibility for school discipline policies and their devolved responsibility for excluding pupils; agrees that the future policy on behaviour in schools should be informed by the survey currently being conducted by the University of Edinburgh on behalf of the Scottish Government, which will provide in-depth information on this area, and further welcomes the comments in the HM Inspectorate of Education report, Improving Scottish Education 2005-2008, in relation to secondary schools, which states "In almost all schools, climate and relationships are constructive and encouraging. While many schools have small numbers of young people with particularly challenging behaviour, any issues arising are usually handled effectively. Most schools have clear and concerted strategies for promoting positive behaviour"."

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I welcome the opportunity to respond on behalf of the Government and to move the amendment in my name. Since this Government took office, we have debated many Opposition motions that were misconceived and that, by trying to score narrow party political points, often missed the bigger picture. However, this particular motion is rare indeed, given that it so completely and profoundly misses the point. I noticed when she spoke that Margaret Smith mentioned the curriculum for excellence, which her motion does not. We in Scotland are in a unique, and perhaps historic, position in relation to our education system in so far as we are faced with a once-in-a-generation opportunity to transform education for Scotland's children and ensure that the education system of the future equips our children, and their friends and peers across Scotland from whatever background, to meet the demands of the future. It is a once-in-a-generation opportunity to drive up standards in Scottish education through ensuring the provision  of a single system of lifelong learning, from the early years through school and beyond, that puts the child—the learner—at the centre. That opportunity is the curriculum for excellence, and it is instructive indeed that in a motion of "War and Peace" proportions those words, that concept and that opportunity do not appear. I will come to the issues raised in the motion about teachers presently, but it would be remiss of me not to remind Margaret Smith what the curriculum for excellence is about and why it is such an important opportunity. At its heart, the curriculum for excellence is about raising standards of education for all children and young people. The standards embedded in the experience and outcomes that were published on 2 April—a hugely important milestone for the programme and for Scottish education that seems to have escaped the Liberal Democrats completely—are demanding and stretching.

When the member spoke, she said it was important to focus on "outputs"—I would say "outcomes". I made the point at the start that in my view the motion misses the point completely. The biggest change for education is the curriculum for excellence, but for some reason the Liberal Democrats seem immune to that point. The member did not even mention the experiences and outcomes published on 2 April. Standards that are demanding and stretching are appropriate for an education system that is ambitious for its learners and a nation that is ambitious for its people. It is unfortunate that the Liberal Democrats appear ambitious only for themselves. The curriculum for excellence will drive up standards—

I repeat the point that I believe the outputs mentioned by Margaret Smith are extremely important; that is why I mentioned the curriculum for excellence. On the question of teachers raised by Margaret Smith, the most recent final outturn figures we have available are for 2007-08 and show that net revenue expenditure on education by local authorities continued to increase to more than £4.4 billion, up more than £180 million on the previous year.  For too long in Scotland we have rested on our laurels in relation to education. I acknowledge the fact that successive Governments have raised the level of investment in schools—as Margaret Smith mentioned—and in education, and we now invest record amounts of resources in education, more than 40 per cent more in real terms since the advent of the Parliament. Despite all that investment, however, a range of national and international reports and indicators tell us that we have not yet made the progress that we might expect. John McLaren, who is well known to the Labour Party, said before the previous election: "England has continued to progress while Scotland has stood still since 1999". Very worryingly, international comparisons for standards tell us that, while we have reached a plateau, some of our competitor countries have forged ahead. We are being overtaken, and unless we raise our game we will be left behind. The curriculum for excellence is the means by which our game will be raised. This Administration works in partnership with local government. Margaret Smith made the point that we have signed up to various commitments, but so have her councillors across Scotland in signing up to the concordat. Perhaps she should remember that fact. The Administration, in partnership with local government and a wide range of other partners, is making excellent progress. The experience and outcomes were published on 2 April, and two more of the key building blocks of the programme of transformational change, on assessment and on skills, will be published in the coming months. I will make an important announcement about qualifications in due course. The importance that we place on education is clear. At the start of the Administration, we invested an extra £9 million in teachers for the curriculum for excellence and in general terms.

No, I will not. A total of £4 million was specifically invested to allow teachers to come in to help us with the implementation of the curriculum for excellence. In that context, we should ask where the Liberal Democrats would have us concentrate our efforts. They would have us return to the culture of compliant central direction that I described, and with a vengeance. The Government will not take that route. We believe that our new relationship with local government is the right one and that local decision making in education authorities and in schools  about how to drive forward improvement and raise standards will pay the highest dividends. Of course, that means we need to have a robust, honest and frank relationship with local government and COSLA. We have exactly that. I make no secret of the fact that the Government was disappointed by the results of the teacher census published on 24 March. We said that publicly at the time and I have said it since privately in discussions with COSLA and local authorities. We were also disappointed that the proportion of children in P1 to P3 classes of 18 or fewer increased by only a marginal amount. However, we should not let that disappointment cloud the facts that remain. Average class sizes in P1 to P3 in Scotland are at a record low, which Margaret Smith did not mention, and pupil teacher ratios across Scotland are also at a record low. Councils have made significant and important progress in reducing the proportion of children in P1 to P3 in the largest classes of more than 25. Immediately that the Government took office—and to clean up the mess we had been left by the Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration—we invested £9 million in providing 300 new teaching posts in schools, funding that was baselined into the settlement. We have invested record amounts in local government in Scotland—£23 billion for the period 2008 to 2010—and local government knows that, which is why—

No, I will not. We are investing £4 million in new resources to create 100 new teaching posts for the next school year, which means that 100 teachers who would not otherwise obtain employment will be given jobs in the classroom and 100 experienced teachers will be freed up to support the curriculum for excellence implementation plans that authorities are pulling together. We established the teacher employment working group, and to her credit Margaret Smith acknowledged the difficulties in teacher planning. Although that group concluded that the system was fit for purpose, it recommended a closer liaison between national and local planning. We are taking that and the group's other recommendations forward. Let us not forget that when the teacher census was published on 24 March we acted, as all responsible Governments would, to ensure that we have enough teachers to fill vacancies and maintain a pool of supply teachers but not to train more than we need.  These are the real facts of this debate. The Liberal Democrats say they would have employed 1,000 more teachers. How can they square that with an £800 million cut in public service expenditure?

No, and if the member put it in front of maths teachers, they would not accept it either: the sums do not add up. There is a certain degree of disconnect between what the Liberal Democrats said they want to do and the fact that they wanted to cut expenditure by £800 million. I hope that, when Rhoda Brankin speaks on behalf of Labour, she mentions the £500 million cuts that we all have to face—some say it will be substantially more than that in future years. My ministerial colleagues and I are engaging with COSLA and councils to discuss how progress on teacher numbers and on reducing class sizes can be improved in the next school year. That dialogue will continue, and it will deliver results.

No. The half-baked plan set out in the motion before us today will not do that. Unlike the Liberal Democrat plan, our dialogue is not solely focused on inputs. Our dialogue will focus on how through the curriculum for excellence—which is missing from the motion—we can deliver the transformational change in Scottish education that our children and society depend on for our continued prosperity. I move amendment S3M-4007.1, to leave out from "the index" to end and insert: "spending on education has risen by more than 40% since the advent of devolution; further notes that, despite a decade of investment, standards of attainment and achievement have only been maintained while key international competitors have improved; welcomes the recent report by HM Inspectorate of Education, Improving Scottish Education 2005-2008 , highlighting the need for further and faster improvement in our education system; believes that the focus on inputs under previous administrations masked the lack of significant improvement on standards of attainment and achievement; further believes that the reform of the curriculum is a critical step in improving standards of attainment, and calls on the Scottish Government to maintain progress towards implementation of the Curriculum for Excellence."

There is no teaching qualification in the Scots language. However, the higher education institutions that offer initial teacher education are committed to preparing all new teachers to deliver the curriculum for excellence, which contains a clear commitment to the promotion of Scottish history, culture and languages. Therefore, all teachers should be prepared to build on the diversity of language that is represented in the communities of Scotland and value the languages that children and young people bring to school.

As Bill Wilson knows—or as he kens fine, as I should perhaps say—local authorities are responsible for allocating budgets to their schools to meet the demands and priorities in their local area. It is for schools, in the light of the curriculum framework within which they operate, to determine how best to organise the syllabus for all subjects, including Scots in schools. There is no extra funding for Scots and the Scottish Government has no plans to increase significantly investment in Scots in schools. The member will be aware that, at the Equal Opportunities Committee's meeting on 24 February, it agreed to refer points relating to the Scots language audit report to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. Those included the suggestion that the Government consider commissioning further research to explore attitudes to the Scots language in teaching and the finding that provision appears more frequent in primary than in secondary schools. I can confirm that Scottish Government officials met on 18 March to consider how further research could build on the findings of the recent Scots language audit to provide an understanding of the barriers to provision in secondary schools.

Scottish ministers have not yet had discussions with Aberdeen City Council on teacher numbers. However, my education and lifelong learning ministerial colleagues and I will soon meet each local authority in Scotland to discuss,  among other things, teacher numbers and class sizes.

We will discuss those issues when we meet the council. There is a date for the meeting next month that I hope the council will confirm. As I said in my previous answer, if the council's finances had not been left in such a parlous state through the Labour Party's offices, it would have been much easier to deal with the issues. The Labour front-bench spokesperson, Rhona Brankin, said when the teacher numbers were released that she would have ensured that there were 53,000 teachers. That would involve a cut of 600 across Scotland—I am not sure how Richard Baker thinks that that would help Aberdeen to maintain teacher numbers. This is a serious issue, which we are addressing through additional investment—not least in providing 100 new teachers to undertake work in relation to the curriculum for excellence. We will address those issues when we meet Aberdeen City Council.

The issue is being addressed—the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning is examining the issues, not least the fact that some of the figures that we have received on teacher numbers have proved to be less than accurate when compared with those held by the Office of National Statistics. We will raise the issue when we meet Aberdeen City Council.

I did not think that I would be speaking as early as this in the debate, Presiding Officer. That said, I am happy to respond to the points that Margaret Mitchell made. I congratulate her on raising the subject for debate today and on bringing to the attention of the Parliament the work of the organisation. If I may, I will concentrate on the work that the Scottish Government is doing in the areas that are relevant to the organisation. We are committed to providing the best possible care for children and young people in Scotland. It is perhaps a truism to say that children are our future—in fact, it is a line in a song, as much as it is anything else. Nonetheless, it is true. Investing in our children is a way in which to invest in our future; it pays dividends in the long run. Investing in a child's earliest years pays dividends in terms of their physical and mental health. It is for that reason that we have worked with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and other partners and stakeholders to develop the early years framework. Our aim is to maximise the opportunities for all children to get the best start in life, no matter their background or circumstances. We also have a commitment to improve the mental health of children and young people. We work closely with NHS boards and partners to continue to address and progress the recommendations that were made in "The Mental Health of Children and Young People: A Framework for Promotion, Prevention and Care". Full delivery of the framework by 2015 will ensure equity of access across Scotland to services that are designed to meet the particular prevention, care, transition and recovery needs of children and young people. Our aim is to ensure that the right care and treatment are available for children and young people in the right place and at the right time. Our attention to child and adolescent mental health services is also underlined by a new target for NHS boards to deliver faster access to those services. The target will prepare the way for a new waiting time target for 2010-11. To support that, we are focusing attention on the workforce, services, data collection, quality of care, referral protocols and information systems. We have also offered NHS boards £2 million of new money to accelerate the development of specialist CAMHS in-patient services and to support intensive community services. We are investing in children and young people in other ways. In January this year, my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing  launched the "National Delivery Plan for Children and Young People's Specialist Services in Scotland", as guidance to the national health service in Scotland on the planning of sustainable specialist children's and young people's services throughout Scotland.

I concede that the identification of mental health problems in children is an issue. As Mary Scanlon knows, it has recently been discussed in the Parliament; in fact, it was discussed this morning at the Health and Sport Committee. I recognise that identification of children's particular needs is crucial if we are to provide the right services for them. We are investing in children and young people in many ways. I mentioned the "National Delivery Plan for Children and Young People's Specialist Services in Scotland", which will provide guidance to the NHS. The plan was developed following a review of 12 specialist paediatric services that examined many issues, including accessibility of services, future service demands and workforce challenges. We are also committed to the development of two new children's hospitals, in Edinburgh and Glasgow, and are continuing to support the recently built Royal Aberdeen children's hospital and the recently opened children's hospital in Dundee. The Government acknowledges the need to provide sustainable children's services in local district general hospitals throughout Scotland. To that end, last year we announced additional investment of £13 million over three years—from 2008 to 2011—to implement the recommendations of the national delivery plan. We also recognise the commitment to raise the age of admission to children's hospitals to 16 and that the needs of the 12-to-15 age group are different from those of both children and adults. Further guidance on that topic will be published next month; a national conference to address the issues will take place on 6 May. We are also providing funding to voluntary organisations—of which Project Linus UK is a good example—that provide services for children and young people, including those in hospitals and hospices. We have set up initiatives such as the Scottish investment fund, the social entrepreneurs  fund and the third sector enterprise fund to support an enterprising third sector. From the examples that I have given, I hope that it is evident that the Scottish Government supports in many ways the health and wellbeing of children and young people throughout Scotland. Like Margaret Mitchell and others who are aware of the work of Project Linus UK in Lanarkshire, who represent the area and who have a great regard for the organisation and the work that it does on behalf of young people, I have great pleasure and no hesitation in commending, on behalf of the Scottish Government, the work of Project Linus UK and wishing it continued success.  Meeting closed at 17:13.

No. Good literacy and numeracy skills need to be developed from the early years. Curriculum for excellence is our means of ensuring that there is rigorous, on-going assessment of literacy and numeracy skills in primary and early secondary stages, based on clear, nationally agreed benchmarks.

That is exactly the approach that we are taking, but it will be done through assessment and not through testing, which is not supported by anybody in the teaching profession that I have been able to find. In fact, Greg Dempster, the general secretary of the Association of Headteachers and Deputes in Scotland said that "proposals ... to test P7 pupils in literacy and numeracy need to be re-thought ... An 'exam' at this stage would offer nothing other than a baseline for secondary schools or, at worst, an opportunity for the secondary sector to point the finger of blame at primary schools ... It would do nothing to address literacy and numeracy problems, as these are best tackled as early in schooling as possible." That is what we intend to achieve. The curriculum for excellence includes assessment, so teachers will have an understanding of the literacy and numeracy skills of their pupils. In our view, that is the major change going through Scottish schools from August this year to August next year and it is the best way to proceed.

Yes, it will include that. The member will understand that the exact process of assessment is being discussed. However, it is also true that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will announce next week the outcomes and experiences under the curriculum for excellence. That is the next milestone in the process towards achieving an agreed assessment process. For the reasons that I have outlined, we are very much against the idea of testing P7 pupils. There is no support among teacher trade unions or teachers more generally for the testing of children of that age. There will be assessment, but only on the basis that teachers agree to it.

Having spent, along with Shona Robison, an hour and a half answering questions from the committee on that and related subjects, I am well aware of the committee's concerns. I am well aware, too, of the committee's interest in ensuring that physical literacy is developed in schools. As I have said previously, it will be for schools to assess an individual pupil's progress in ways and at times that are appropriate for the young person's needs. Through the health and wellbeing strand of the curriculum for excellence, assessment must take account of the breadth and purpose of the wide range of learning that children and young people experience in that curriculum area. I am confident that, through curriculum for excellence, we will address some of the concerns that the committee raised.

I can only say that there are no plans in the class size strategy to reduce the current provision for specialist learning. It is our view that, through curriculum for excellence, we will improve the ability to deliver those services to pupils who are in need of them. I do not therefore think that the member's concerns are well founded. I am certainly happy to discuss the matter further with her, if she has a concern.

Landsbanki hf has commenced a refinancing of the project on behalf of the NYOP Education (Aberdeen) Ltd consortium. It would be inappropriate for the Scottish Government to comment on matters that are the subject of commercial negotiations.

The Treasury scheme to which the member refers has not yet been implemented fully, but we are considering its implications and the benefits that it might have for Scotland. On the member's point about delays to projects, everyone is well aware that the project in Aberdeen is delayed because of the collapse of the Icelandic  banking system. I point out to the member that schools that he approved in my area in 2002 are still not finished or opened, seven years on, and are massively over budget, so perhaps he should look to himself when he asks such questions.

Widening access to initial teacher education courses, which includes encouraging course providers to offer part-time and distance learning options, is a priority for the Scottish Government. The advice and guidance that is offered to those who are interested in teaching is targeted equally at school leavers, graduates and potential career changers.

I am happy to discuss the matter further with John Lamont, but I should say that a working group is considering the supply of teachers into Scottish education. It is concentrating much more on the skills that are required for schools, rather than on where the supply of teachers comes from. There are currently discussions about how we secure the effective supply of teachers, and there have been discussions in the past about the fact that some teachers and people in some skill sectors find it difficult to get employment. We are trying to address that, too. As I said, I am happy to discuss further the issue that John Lamont has highlighted.

As I have mentioned previously, the annual workforce planning is based on maintaining teacher numbers at 2007 levels, I think, and the concordat that we have signed with local government confirms that funding is included in the settlement for that to happen. We are confident that local authorities, which are the employers of teachers, are equally committed to the terms of the concordat. Kenneth Macintosh is right about the demographic trends within teaching. Entrants who were over the age of 30 comprised 25.7 per cent of entrants in 2006-07, 27.2 per cent in 2007-08 and 25.7 per cent in 2008-09, and roughly 10 per cent of entrants each year were over the age of 40. We are trying to address the issue of secure permanent employment. It is not easy to address the point that Kenneth Macintosh raised about teachers being less mobile, but we are aware of it and we are addressing it through the working group that I mentioned.

Knife crime in schools, while extremely serious, is extremely rare and the vast majority of children and young people in our schools behave well. The schools directorate works with a wide range of partners, both within and outwith the Scottish Government, to create peaceful and positive learning environments in Scottish schools. That work includes the Government-funded violence reduction unit, which promotes  programmes and resources in schools on the dangers of knife carrying as part of its anti-violence campaign, and a youth conference that the Government hosted on 4 March to address violence and knife crime.

I cannot comment on the case to which Jim Hume referred, which is now the subject of investigation by South Ayrshire Council. However, I repeat that such serious incidents are extremely rare and the vast majority of children behave very well in our schools. I accept Jim Hume's point about the need for engagement. At the conference to which I referred, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice launched the Government's new knife crime youth engagement initiative, which commits an additional £500,000 to working with young people to prevent and reduce knife crime, under the new brand "No Knives Better Lives". It will be delivered in schools and the community and over the internet, using a range of communication tools. On Jim Hume's final point about facilities, I agree that the Scottish Government should do what it can, and it is doing that through the renewal of the school estate. However, the provision of facilities is also a question for other organisations, including local authorities.

The behaviour in Scottish schools survey is now under way and will report later this year. The Government, working in partnership with local government and other key stakeholders, has improved that three-yearly survey, which will provide greater clarity on the definitions and experience of serious indiscipline and violence in schools. In addition, the sample size has been nearly doubled to provide more accurate data. That will help to address Richard Baker's point about having clear information in order to determine the size of the problem.

I take the member's point about party politics. However, having made their position clear today, how do the Lib Dems intend to take into account all those replies that are yet to arrive in the remaining consultation period, given that it was the Lib Dems who asked for that consultation?

The debate has been wide ranging. However, it is important in summing up to send a clear message to students and graduates. The Government values the contributions that students and graduates make to society, and it will do all that it can to support them at the most crucial stages of their lives. Maintaining a world-class education system is essential if we are to create a more successful country with higher levels of sustainable economic growth. A number of members have said that we must ensure that access to that education system is based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. We made a commitment on that, and it is what we intend to do. We believe, of course, that student loans are wrong for students and for Scotland. It would be better for students if grants were paid directly to them and better for graduates if they were not forced to leave higher education with thousands of pounds-worth of debt. That is why we have set aside £30 million to support the first phase of the move from loans to grants.

The Scottish funding council is aware of the problems. We are in the middle of a consultation process and further changes should await the completion of that process. I will come back to that. We appreciate that a number of things have changed since we developed our proposals, not least the economic environment, which has  increased financial pressures on everyone. As a result, we are willing to consider the case that students and others have put forward for an increase in the overall amount of support. We welcome views on how the £30 million could best be used overall to help students who are most in need. We have heard views from members, some of which I would like to respond to. Margaret Smith said that she is proud of the Lib Dem record on student funding, but many members have pointed out that the Lib Dem proposal is uncosted. I understand that a proposal was to be put forward by Jeremy Purvis at this week's Lib Dem conference on increasing tax cuts in the UK. I think that that explains as much as anything why we are having this debate. We have been told that there will no longer be £800 million of tax cuts in Scotland, but tax cuts will now be applied in the UK. I have heard one price tag of £20 billion in that context. If we have to try to achieve £20 billion of cuts in the UK, with Scotland taking its share, we will be back to the Lib Dem dichotomy of increasing tax cuts and therefore reducing the revenue that is available to finance them. A massive number of promises have been made.

No. I would like to make some more progress. With her backing vocalists—Frank McAveety and Hugh O'Donnell—Claire Baker made the point that broken Labour promises of the past are irrelevant to the debate. That is absolute nonsense. Students are still paying loans that the Labour Party and the Conservative party created. That is a fact that the Government simply has to deal with. We cannot wish it away, no matter how much members of previous Administrations might like to forget it. The claim that hardship funds have flatlined is not borne out by the facts. As Kenny Gibson pointed out, there has been a 14.6 per cent increase in this year's hardship funds.

I will do so when I finish my point. The reason that the hardship funds are massively increasing has a lot to do with the disastrous economic situation in which we find ourselves as a result of the Labour Party's mismanagement of the economy. I am interested in whether Claire Baker wants to accept responsibility for that.

I have just mentioned the 14.6 per cent increase in this year's hardship funds, which takes the figure to more than £16 million. I am glad that Claire Baker acknowledges the resources that we have put into reducing graduate debt. Of course, someone in Scotland has roughly half the student debt that a person in England has, and in the past two years, the average graduate debt has gone down for the first time. Therefore, we are doing our bit to address the debt that students find themselves with.

No. I have just taken an intervention from the member. If what has been proposed is accepted, students will face massively increased private debt. They would be asked to do that at the same as they are looking at a societal debt of trillions of pounds. Future generations in this country must face Labour's disastrous debt management process for the whole economy, and they are being asked to take on further private debt, too. That is wrong. Murdo Fraser said, rightly, that the Lib Dem proposal is uncosted. It seems that, having had the straitjacket of cuts of £800 million taken away, the Lib Dems are back on another spending spree. Their proposal has no credibility whatsoever. Kenny Gibson mentioned the massive debts that exist, and I have just mentioned the trillions of pounds of future debt that we are accumulating, which consists of public debt for public authorities and private debt for individuals. That is the real problem for students. When they go through their courses and try to learn to create a better future for themselves, they are well aware of the massive debts hanging over them. In the past, Labour has said that it is not possible for it to say anything coherent about its council tax proposals, for example, because it was the wrong part of the electoral cycle. If Labour is not willing to address the difficult issues, such as what it would do about the council tax, it is incumbent on it to start to create future spending commitments, as it would like to give the impression today of having done. However, that is simply not the case. Finally, the consultation is an opportunity—

I agree with the member about the uncosted nature of the Liberal Democrat proposals. Can he put a cost to the proposals in the Labour amendment? How will he reconcile those proposals with the £500 million in cuts that are coming down the line?

On breaking manifesto promises, can Claire Baker outline how Labour fulfilled its manifesto promise not to introduce loans and top-up fees?

After listening to members, I am heartened by the chamber's support for the Commonwealth's work and assure the representatives of other Commonwealth countries in the gallery that, even though they have not been able to attend the debate, colleagues from all parties share that position. I, too, congratulate Karen Gillon not only on securing the debate but on her work in Malawi, which she mentioned at length. Like other members, I welcome representatives from the different parts of the Commonwealth to the Parliament. Karen Gillon said that we might be able to learn something about minority Government from Canadians. All three of my children are Canadian citizens and although I have not learned much from them about minority Government I have certainly learned a lot about being a minority in my own family. I, like other members, have visited a number of Commonwealth countries, particularly Canada, where I was involved in one of the university-level education exchanges mentioned earlier. Perhaps  unusually, I have also visited the Falkland Islands, which I would very much like to return to. I hear that it is much quieter now than it was when I was there. I believe that a former member of the Parliament, David Davidson, also visited the islands. Scotland's historical links with Commonwealth countries are well known. I am pleased that, although the nature of the relationship with our partners has changed, the spirit of working together for peace, democracy, equality and good governance continues as a theme for the Commonwealth today. For her part, Scotland continues to look beyond her borders with a strong sense of social responsibility for those around us, regardless of their place in the world. I believe that that is reflected in our international development policy, which was launched last May and which builds on the historical and contemporary relationships between Scotland and many Commonwealth countries, especially those in sub-Saharan Africa. As Karen Gillon and others pointed out, our long-standing engagement with Malawi continues to go from strength to strength. Through the sub-Saharan Africa development programme we are developing programmes in two other Commonwealth countries—Zambia and Tanzania—and the international development fund has enabled us to support work in developing countries with vulnerable children who are at risk of abuse and exploitation. In looking beyond our borders, we must also keep an eye on what others can teach us. The Scottish Government is determined to increase opportunities for all young people to experience international education in schools and we are working in partnership with organisations to ensure that international education is embedded in the school curriculum. As Peter Peacock made clear, international education presents an exciting range of opportunities for teachers to deliver many of the outcomes and experiences set out in the curriculum for excellence, the programme of change that we are introducing in our schools. If our young people are to participate actively in a global society, they will require a range of knowledge and skills, which international education will develop, to ensure that they not only grow up with knowledge and understanding of the world and Scotland's place in it, but are tolerant, understanding and respectful individuals. Teacher exchanges, such as those organised by the League for the Exchange of Commonwealth Teachers, and study visits have a positive impact on learning and teaching in schools and provide an opportunity for teachers to reflect on their practice. With regard to higher education, we want to continue to attract the brightest and best overseas  academic talent to help us build a smarter, wealthier and fairer Scotland. Our funding of both Commonwealth and Chevening scholarships will enable our universities to attract overseas students and therefore build on their links with developed countries such as Australia and Canada as well as to further relationships with developing countries, such as Malawi. I confirm from my own experience that the year in which I did an exchange course at university was by far the most fruitful year that I had there. It was certainly the most memorable year. The Scottish Government is committed to building on the strong, historic and modern relationship between Scotland and India, as outlined by Ted Brocklebank. We are developing a new programme for the Indian sub-continent that will recognise not only our historical links with it, but reflect modern patterns of migration and cultural diversity in Scotland. The Scottish Government is working to develop those links. Last week, two Scottish ministers—Jim Mather and Mike Russell—met stakeholders to discuss where the Government could add value to the on-going activity and the forthcoming opportunities for strengthening our relationships with India. The Glasgow Commonwealth games in 2014 have been mentioned. The Commonwealth has put its trust in Glasgow and Scotland to deliver those games, and we take that enormous vote of confidence from the international community very seriously. Scotland has been given a mandate to deliver the best games that it can, and I am confident that we will do just that. We are building a legacy plan with health as a unifying theme across a range of areas: health, sport, education, culture, volunteering, the environment, business, skills and employment, and tourism and international profile. The games can help to change people's attitudes by providing opportunities for young people to embody the Commonwealth Games Federation's values of humanity, equality and destiny. The Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament have cultural links across the Commonwealth that are too numerous to list in this speech. Many will have celebrated those links in Burns suppers in the past few weeks. Last month, a contribution of £200,000 from the Scottish Government enabled the Scottish Chamber Orchestra to become the first western orchestra to make a multidate tour of India. "Black Watch", which has recently received a number of honours, played across Australia to critical and popular acclaim. Alongside culture, trade bonds the Commonwealth together. Scottish Development International has offices in India, Singapore, Canada and Australia. Next month, my colleague  Mike Russell, who is an enthusiastic member of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, will attend two Scotland week events in Toronto and Vancouver. We look forward to strengthening those particular links. In conclusion, the world has changed and the Commonwealth has changed with it. The Commonwealth is now more than ever a partnership of equals, as it must be. We live in a world in which we depend on one another for peace and prosperity. The peoples of the Commonwealth will continue to face their challenges. I commend the motion and Commonwealth day in general for recognising that those challenges are better met by independent states co-operating and consulting in the common interest.   Meeting closed at 17:38.

How is the Scottish Government using EU funds to aid the Scottish economy?

As a supporter of the Scottish Government, I am delighted that it appears possible not only for the budget to be passed but for it to be passed with near-unanimous support. If that were to happen, we should all relish the achievement, which would be an achievement for not only minority government but the inclusive politics for which we all stated our support at the outset, even if the latter has not been much in evidence thus far in the debate.  Even though saying this puts me at risk of being accused of crawling, I will say it: the achievement has a great deal to do with the businesslike and straightforward approach of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, not least in the way in which he dealt with the less-than-easy job of negotiating with several other parties—parties whose views diverge legitimately from those of his Government and, indeed, of other Opposition parties. I am sure that, compared with the past few weeks, last year's budget process now seems like a cakewalk and that the cabinet secretary will take even greater satisfaction in the passing of this year's budget bill than he did in the passage of last year's. If it is passed today, the budget will represent an achievement above all for the Parliament. We know that there are many and vocal interests who seem happy only when the Parliament is seen to stumble, and it will be interesting to see how they use this situation to deride the Parliament again—as I am sure they will. I will focus on an area in which, I believe, the budget has been substantially improved since we discussed it last week. It might not cost any money, and it has already been the subject of some derision by David McLetchie, but I believe that the commitment by some parties to co-ordinate their activities to promote borrowing powers for the Parliament is significant. I mention that commitment not simply because it has been the subject of one party's discussions with the Scottish Government over the past week. I mentioned borrowing powers during the debate on the report from the Council of Economic Advisers, and I lodged a consensual motion on the issue two weeks ago. I have sought support from other parties for an agreed approach on borrowing powers, and I hope that those parties will encourage their members to support that motion, especially as we are discussing the matter tomorrow. How powerful an argument it would be if the whole Parliament could agree on the need for more borrowing powers. It is easy to attach party-political considerations and party advantage to the initiative, but any party in the Parliament that harbours ambitions to govern in the future has to pause for only a second to realise how willing it would be to have those powers even in good economic times, far less during the current economic recession. Wendy Alexander has previously mentioned the urgent action that is required to tackle the downturn. That is true both in absolute terms, with respect to how quickly action can be taken to help save and promote jobs, and in relative terms, with  respect to how quickly that can be done compared with other economies. We are substantially behind the curve when it comes to borrowing powers, which are one of the fundamental tools that Governments are currently using to address the economic downturn. As we have heard from civic Scotland—this has been said, for example, by Reform Scotland, the Scottish Trades Union Congress, the Liberal Democrats and, in a previous debate, Malcolm Chisholm—there is general support for the idea of borrowing powers. However, at least not until now, there has been no real urgency on the issue. In last week's debate, I said that the Calman commission could meet quickly to address the matter. There is no reason why it has to wait for its next meeting: it could meet quickly, agree a position—if there is consensus—and work with the Scottish Government, as now appears possible, on a joint approach to Westminster in order to deal with the issue as quickly as possible. Public-private partnership is still a matter of division between the parties, and I do not intend to rehearse the arguments, but they are substantially superseded both by the new accountancy procedures that we will be obliged to follow in the late spring and by the fact that PPP projects down south are being delayed and deferred because of the lack of private finance for funding them. We are perhaps behind civic Scotland on borrowing powers. All sorts of bodies have supported them in the past, and there is no reason why we cannot act quickly now. The fact that we appear to be moving quickly today to agree a budget that was not agreed last week shows that, when the Parliament wants to do something and when there is consensus, we can move very quickly. Members are giving their own reasons for their positions last week, which are not their positions this week, but, whatever those reasons, the severity of the economic downturn is one of the major things that have been playing on people's minds. I do not mean this on a party basis, but there has perhaps been a time lag for some people in appreciating how severe the economic downturn is and how quickly it is happening. If we vote unanimously, or nearly unanimously, in favour of the budget, having moved very quickly through the three stages of the budget bill in one day, there is no reason why we cannot show the same urgency of action on borrowing powers. Despite my sometimes harsh words towards the Liberal Democrats in the past, I appreciate the significance of their commitment to campaign against the £500 million of cuts that are coming down to us. That will be a key subject of political  debate in future years, and to have support against the cuts is important. Considering the various initiatives that members have mentioned—help for apprentices and building works, for example—we could do so much more in the short term if we had borrowing powers. Much more labour-intensive activity would be possible, which would help to soak up unemployment and provide opportunities for apprentices to go into real jobs. That is a crucial aspect in the Parliament's consideration of the current economic crisis. Some parties might have fun having a go at each other today—that is part of the debate—but I hope that we can concentrate on the fact that, at least for a brief moment, we have some unanimity, consensus and a willingness to work in an urgent fashion. I certainly hope that that carries through into the issue of borrowing powers for the Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will give an update on what progress has been made with the United Kingdom Government on allowing fatal accident inquiries to be held in Scotland for Scottish armed services personnel and others killed in accidents overseas. (S3O-5718)

Will the cabinet secretary continue to impress upon those with whom he is obliged to work on the issue the urgency of a satisfactory and rapid resolution, especially given the recent tragic deaths of a number of forces personnel based in Scotland—not only those who were Scottish but all those based in Scotland, predominantly those from 45 Commando in Arbroath—and the opportunity that a solution provides to alleviate the continuing suffering, stress and anxiety of the bereaved families of such personnel?

While listening to the debate, I have tried to discern points of principle in the Opposition arguments against the budget—except, of course, in the case of the Lib Dems, because there was not much point in looking for principles in the first place. The Greens have put their arguments consistently, and their arguments have been consistent with their principles. For them, the debate seems to be about the scale and pace of the change that they seek. Last year, Labour members voted for an amendment to the budget. Then, when that amendment was agreed to, they voted against the budget or abstained from the vote. This year, as we have already heard, Labour has been against the budget, then has been for the budget, and is now going to vote against it. Labour has chopped and changed. It has provided no alternative budget and lodged no amendments. I think that we can conclude that there is no principle behind what Labour is doing today. That point was confirmed by Andy Kerr when he characterised Labour's view of the budget process as a game. It is not a game to council tax payers in Clackmannanshire, who will face a 29 per cent increase in council tax unless there is additional support for council tax freezes. It is not a game to people who would lose investment in infrastructure across Scotland. It is not a game to small businesses across the country that would lose the money from reduced business rates that is helping jobs. It is not a game to people who would lose their jobs without that assistance. It is not a game to town centres such as that of Alloa. Shortly before the election in 2007, there was a report on some of the worst-affected town centres in Scotland, in which Alloa was prominent.  I am delighted that there is to be a town centre regeneration fund, and I very much hope that Alloa will benefit from it. It is also not a game to all those people throughout Scotland who are currently very worried. We heard a great deal from Jackie Baillie about the different methods by which another budget could be produced, but whether or not it was true, it missed the basic point. One of the biggest problems that we face just now in the economy is a lack of confidence. If the Parliament fails to vote through the budget, councils throughout the country will be unable to budget with any certainty. Jackie Baillie's understanding of how local government finance works is a wee bit short of what it should be if she thinks that councils' budgets can be changed as readily as she described.

No, I will not. At a time when there is so much uncertainty in the economy, she seriously underestimates the effect on confidence of not voting for the budget tonight and of public bodies not knowing their allocations or having any certainty in their planning for the future. There has been remarkably little principle in this debate. Last week, we had a debate about borrowing powers. On Sunday, Wendy Alexander said that it was urgent that the Scottish Government did this and that. However, when asked about borrowing powers and whether the Calman commission should look into them quickly, she said, "That is for the future." What a difference we could make with this year's budget if we had borrowing powers—we could use hundreds of millions of pounds for infrastructure investment.

On her first point, Wendy Alexander well knows that, from the very start, the Calman commission ruled out the SNP's option of independence. It is a bit rich to ask for our involvement afterwards. On her point about investment and her preferred method of PPP, she may have seen a report in The Times yesterday that showed that funding for PPP throughout England and Wales has dried up. For example, the M25 projects will not proceed  because the private finance for them cannot be raised. That is Labour members' preferred method and it is falling down around them. It is in Scotland's interests that we have borrowing powers. We could make a huge difference, perhaps a greater difference than anything else in the budget could make, if we had borrowing powers—and there does not seem to be a great deal of opposition within the chamber to such powers. The Calman commission does not have to meet every three months or so; it could meet quickly, reach a decision and make a recommendation. Why is that not being done? Why is there no urgency in dealing with that if there is so much urgency around the other measures that Labour members say they want? Burns has been mentioned a couple of times today, first by the moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland. To my mind, Andy Kerr and Iain Gray are far less men of independent mind and much more wee, cowering, timorous beasties. They should grow up and support the budget.

I welcome Malcolm Chisholm's support for additional borrowing powers. Does he accept that there is real urgency about the matter? Does he accept that our moving quickly on the issue would have a great impact?

As the cabinet secretary said, the council's report has been received during grave economic times. For that reason, it is timely and welcome. As the Scottish Government is currently bringing forward its economic recovery budget, the report suggests key actions to address the current economic crisis as well as the long-term challenges that we face as a country. We have had a public debate that, in addition to concentrating on the current economic crisis, has raised questions about how much the Parliament and the Scottish Government can do; the size of the Government's budget; the extent of its powers; and the discretion—as opposed to standing obligations to spend—that it has within the budget. The report highlights the current extent of our powers and acknowledges, in particular, the absence of borrowing and macroeconomic powers. There is a degree of relative unity among members about the gravity of the situation that we face and the need for action, and recommendation 20, which Jeremy Purvis mentioned, highlights the need to explore alternative borrowing powers outwith the current private finance initiative regime. If it is true that we must be flexible, dynamic, innovative and bold in responding to any crisis, it is particularly true in the current economic crisis. The Parliament must show flexibility, innovation and boldness, and I suggest that the most effective thing the Parliament can do is unite behind the idea of establishing borrowing powers. I know that there are some disagreements about that among the parties, some of which say that the matter is being considered by the Calman commission, which is not yet ready to report. I understand that point, but in response I make the point that we are in a huge crisis. Given the news that we saw on television last night about further job losses and other economic indicators, it is obvious that we do not have a great deal of time to respond quickly and effectively to the crisis.  I do not think that the other parties have substantial objections to the idea or would rule out borrowing powers in principle. If we consider the other actors who have commented on the economic situation and their views on borrowing powers, it is clear that the matter should not necessarily divide the parties in the Parliament. Reform Scotland and the David Hume Institute have spoken in support of borrowing powers, while the STUC, which John Park mentioned a number of times in his opening speech, could not be clearer in its support for the establishment of borrowing powers for the Parliament. Unison and other trade unions also support the idea. We should consider the anomalous position in which the Parliament and the Government find themselves in comparison with local authorities, which have been able to borrow for many years. In theory, their borrowing power was increased dramatically with the move to prudential borrowing and, rightly, the only limit on their potential to borrow is what they can properly service through their revenue streams, as long as they act in a prudential way. The Northern Ireland Assembly can borrow up to between £2 billion and £2.5 billion, and even the Scottish Government, through its projects with Network Rail, can tap into borrowing powers to fund infrastructure projects for the railways. There is no logical reason why the Scottish Parliament, which is perhaps the most powerful of the devolved Parliaments and Assemblies, cannot borrow as well. Our inability to do so fundamentally limits our ability to deal with the current economic crisis. Many people, including the economic advisers, have highlighted the need to bring forward infrastructure projects. The benefit of doing so is that it produces a long-term return to the country and the economy well into the future. Improvements to the country's infrastructure such as road bridges, rail projects, education projects or communication projects produce long-standing benefits, not least because they improve our economic situation compared with our competitors. Borrowing powers are crucial at the best of times, but they are even more crucial at present because we need to establish new jobs and new public works. It is also the case that the economic downturn itself presents a great advantage. For example, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning recently announced £21 million of funding for a new Forth Valley College in Alloa. That college will be built during a tough time for the construction industry, so we will get it for a good price; the existing college will, I hope, then be sold when the upturn comes, so we will get the  best price for it. There are opportunities, but they have to be taken quickly. Yesterday, I lodged a motion on borrowing powers. I seek all members' support for going to the Westminster Government and asking for borrowing powers outwith any debates about fiscal autonomy, independence or further devolution. Our request would be a response to the current economic crisis, and I do not see any reason why any party in the Parliament should oppose that. Such a move is a short-term measure that can be done fairly quickly. There are different views about whether it can be done by ministerial order or whether primary legislation is required, but whichever approach we take, we must respond quickly and imaginatively to the current crisis. Other economies throughout the world have developed quick responses, perhaps taking steps that they would not have taken before. The fact that we talk quite glibly these days about the nationalisation of the whole banking system shows how much things have changed. I end with a plea that we try to achieve some consensus. The public would be grateful if the Parliament could establish borrowing powers that allowed us to take forward infrastructure projects. That would be a bold step towards dealing with the economic crisis.

Like most members in the chamber, I should declare an interest, both as a current member of the scheme—and potential member of the new scheme—and as a taxpayer. I, too, highlight the point that Alasdair Morgan made about this necessary change being made at nil cost to the public purse, or at least as best the estimates can determine. As Alasdair Morgan also said, the debate is the culmination of a detailed piece of work to introduce a highly technical but necessary bill to bring the pension and grant schemes up to date. Members of the Scottish Parliament are not alone in looking at pension provision and seeking to find cost-efficient and effective ways in which to plan for retirement, whenever that may come. In  November 2008, the Pensions Act 2008 introduced measures including a duty on employers to automatically enrol all eligible workers who were not already members of a good-quality workplace pension scheme into such a scheme and to provide a minimum contribution. The 2008 act also allows for the establishment of a new scheme—currently it is known as the personal accounts scheme—which is a simple, low-cost pension savings vehicle that is aimed at those who do not have access to a workplace pension scheme. Everyone needs to plan for their retirement. With that in mind, I turn to the work that was undertaken on the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill. I thank Alasdair Morgan and the members of the Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme Committee for the work that went into producing the bill as introduced. Pensions have become shrouded in jargon and regulatory complexity. As the convener of the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill Committee, which scrutinised the bill at stage 2, I can say that our task was made more straightforward than it could have been by the input and obvious determination of the members of the scheme committee to make the provisions of the bill practicable, workable and relatively understandable. As Alasdair Morgan hinted, a lot of the work was done prior to the public proceedings of our committee. Before the stage 2 proceedings, the committee held an informal meeting with the bill team to give members an insight into the policy development behind the bill. Also, to aid our scrutiny, we sought explanation of and clarification on the various provisions in the bill. A couple of weeks later, with committee members having had the opportunity to chew over the information, formal consideration took place. The only amendments at stage 2 were those that were lodged by the member in charge—in the main, they were technical and tidying-up amendments. For example, it was important to make it clear that pension credit members of the scheme are prevented from becoming remunerated trustees of the scheme. Any member who benefits financially from the scheme should not receive financial benefit as a trustee. Deeming the amendments to be eminently sensible, the committee was content to accept them. I appreciate the point that Alasdair Morgan made in saying that, even if the bill is passed today, our work to ensure that all the new arrangements are put in place is not an at end. Like him, I thank the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee for its on-going work to produce the necessary changes to standing orders. In addition, I thank the clerks to our committee.  I am pleased to have had the opportunity to contribute to the process and to today's debate. I ask members to support the motion to pass the bill at decision time.

I rise to support the motion in the name of John Swinney. I cannot help but mention the inherent irony in Des McNulty's amendment, which refers to "the lack of prior consultation". Many of us remember the lack of prior consultation by Gordon Brown during the Dunfermline West by-election, when he announced that any consideration by the Labour-Lib Dem Executive of a proposal for a £4-plus toll on the existing bridge was pointless because he was ruling it out—even though the decision was one for the Scottish Cabinet to make. That, it would seem, was the level of respect in new Labour for prior and proper consultation on devolved issues. I almost felt sorry for Jeremy Purvis yesterday after the dispiriting and bruising defeat that he suffered during the budget debate. He then woke up this morning only to find that he had to try to defend a contradictory and incoherent amendment, so I almost felt sorry for him again today.

No, I would like to make some progress first. As the Lib Dem amendment says, the new Forth crossing may result in the displacement of "a significant number of other very deserving capital projects" because of the—admittedly absurd—absence of borrowing powers. However, it is unbelievable that such an argument can be made with any sincerity by a party that is committed to carving £800 million out of the Scottish block every year. By my calculations, with £800 million we could build a bridge over the Forth for buses, a bridge for bikes and a bridge for cars, with enough money left over to build an airport on either side. As long as Tavish Scott was not in charge of the project, we could also have free coffee and newspapers for every commuter. Even if inadvertently, the Lib Dem amendment highlights the key issue, which of course is the anomalous position of the Scottish Government in terms of its inability to fund large-scale capital projects in the same way as individuals, businesses, local government and national Governments the world over—by borrowing to  invest. That is the real issue here, not whether there should be a bridge—all parties, with one honourable exception, believe that there should. Whether the bridge will be built is not an issue either, because the Scottish Government has confirmed its timetable and the fact that the money is available to build it. The issue is really about how the cost of the bridge should be funded. Thankfully, it appears that tolls have, if somewhat belatedly, been ruled out by new Labour. It would seem that iron man Iain Gray has overcome those such as David Whitton and Des McNulty who have refused to rule out tolls. Perhaps we can call that faction of the new Labour Party the tollies. However, having adopted the love-child of the Tories and big business—PFI—and having showered it with gifts of hundreds of billions of pounds over a decade or more, the Labour Party, it seems, cannot let it go. Exactly how it could make PFI work on this project is not clear. Without tolls, there is no revenue bribe like that which made the Skye bridge, for example, such a lottery win for the Bank of America—and such a burden on taxpayers and toll payers. With the frozen credit markets, where would the private finance come from, and at what price? Most crucially, without the fig leaf of the off-balance-sheet con, what is the point of PFI? On George Foulkes's "constructive" suggestions, I ask him to consider what funding a bridge project on such a scale would do to the capital projects of the local authorities that he mentions, particularly schools projects. Having been on "Newsnight" with David Whitton, the deputy leader of the tollies, when he declared—solemnly and with an air of real menace—that he would ensure that the issues would come before the Parliament, I find it hard not to be a bit disappointed with the damp squib that is the new Labour amendment. I am also a bit disappointed by the unexplained absence of David Whitton. I do not know how significant that absence is. Today's debate allows for three crucial points to be given prominence. First, the Scottish Government has ruled out tolls, and as a result has elicited a similar position from new Labour. Secondly, as the Tory amendment points out, it is now down to the two Governments "to work together" on the funding issue. Thirdly—and most important—borrowing powers have been brought into sharp relief. Ironically, if we were talking about building a new Forth bridge, as opposed to a new Forth road bridge, borrowing would possibly be available through Network Rail's borrowing powers. That point seems to be lost on Jeremy Purvis.

No, I will not. Local authorities have to undertake prudential borrowing, and it is worrying to think that the person who placed that obligation on them—Gordon Brown—is currently touting debt of about £1 trillion around the international money markets. That is not prudential, and it seems a long time since we heard about dear old prudence. In fact, it seems that, like the phrase "no more boom and bust", we are unlikely to hear the phrase "borrowing only to invest" from the lips of Gordon Brown again.

I will take an intervention from Des McNulty.

That is not the way that I remember local authority funding working. I remember the capital budgets being squeezed from the moment that Labour got into power and being kept at the same level, which produced pressures on revenue budgets as well. Apparently, the only time that it is not right to borrow is when we need to invest in the Forth road bridge—it appears to be right in every other circumstance to give banks billions of pounds. I believe that it is necessary for all parties that are represented in the chamber to declare unequivocally that they support the establishment of borrowing powers for the Parliament as soon as possible. The absence of such powers is a fundamental and inexplicable fetter on the Parliament's ability properly to create and nurture the public infrastructure assets that the country needs. If this debate is to have any purpose, the Parliament must use it to make it clear to Gordon Brown that we are as united as we can be on the view that we should have the fundamental right to borrow to invest in Scotland's long-term future.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it considers the compensation arrangements for small businesses in the event of electricity supply interruptions to be adequate. (S3O-5525)

Is the minister aware of the series of related power cuts that occurred in Alloa in my constituency in the vital trading week before Christmas, which led to some businesses losing thousands of pounds? Does the minister believe that the Ofgem scheme that he mentioned should allow for the repayment of verifiable losses by businesses and, indeed, domestic users?

I return to the member's point about the impact on the developing world. Does he agree that the involvement of churches, including the church in Bridge of Allan in my constituency, in the eco-congregation programme gives an additional moral authority to the campaign on climate change? Does he agree that that also applies because the church has a long track record of working on issues in the developing world?

Will the member give way?

Earlier, Mr Whitton took Brian Adam to task for not respecting COSLA's decisions. Does Mr Whitton respect its decision to vote for a local income tax?

What is the answer?

I thank Derek Brownlee for taking the intervention that David McLetchie refused to take. David McLetchie said that the council tax is not susceptible to changes in the economic environment. One way to make that happen would be through a revaluation. When would Derek Brownlee have a council tax revaluation?

If Mary Mulligan believes that the local government settlement is inadequate, how would she expect it to be made adequate, given the 3 per cent savings that her party supports for public authorities and the £1 billion of cuts coming from Gordon Brown?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Obviously, it is hard to avoid figures in such debates. Like Derek Brownlee, I well remember last year's debate and the dire predictions about the impossibility of the council tax freeze, but it is sometimes better to start with first principles rather than figures. For those who cannot remember, David Cairns used to be a junior minister in the United Kingdom Government but could not stand being in the same Government as Gordon Brown. In The Scotsman of 22 October last year, David Cairns was quoted as saying: "In truth, Alex Salmond has more money than any First Minister has ever had—twice as much as Donald Dewar." That line was repeated by Alistair Darling on 8 November 2007, Sarah Boyack on 2 February 2008, Peter Peacock on 27 February 2008, David Cairns on 19 June 2008, Yvette Cooper, and Wendy Alexander as recently as 11 November. Other Labour members have used the line so often that they give real meaning to the term "ad nauseum". I think that Andy Kerr refers to ramming things home. Perhaps we can leave aside the fact that every Labour-Liberal Administration between 1999 and 2007 received an annual increase of around 4 per cent, which would now look like milk and honey to the Scottish Government. However, we cannot accept Labour's logic, because it ignores rising staff costs, construction industry inflation—which, until recently at least, rose well ahead of general inflation—and, of course, rising prices generally. Increases are also needed to mount new initiatives rather than simply to meet recurring spending commitments, which is the day-to-day work of people involved in governance and delivery.

If Jeremy Purvis wants to ask the cabinet secretary questions, perhaps he should intervene when he is speaking.

I am sure that Jeremy Purvis will get a response in due course. He will get a chance to intervene when the cabinet secretary is summing up. The Donald Dewar soundbite is not a credible comparison; instead, it is an exercise in deliberate misdirection. Labour and Lib Dem members who have tried to blame the Scottish Government for every local government cut—we heard a litany from Andy Kerr—or saving must explain how these two propositions can coexist. Either there is more money to go round or there is less money for local government. They must accept that local government now has more than double the amount that it was given by the First Minister, Donald Dewar, in 1999. The figures are public and are readily available, as they are in the old budget documents. By my reckoning, about £5.5 billion was given in 1999. I remember moving Clackmannanshire Council's budget, which was £40 million. This year, it will be around £99 million. That is not to say, of course, that the threat of cuts does not hang over councils. However, that threat comes as a result of the £1 billion that is pledged by Gordon Brown, who might egregiously boast that he is the man who saved the world but who is more like, in David Bowie's words, the man who sold the world—on a mountain of consumer debt. Further, for those who either deliver or rely on local services—not to mention the employees of Woolworths—it seems clear that Gordon Brown will soon become the man who fell to earth. Of course, the Liberal Democrats also present a real and present danger to council services—or, at least, they would if they stood a chance of being elected to Government. Despite asking for more money for just about everything, they want to cut £800 million out of the Scottish budget. I assume that that is in addition to current savings and Labour's £1 billion cuts. I hope that some of the Labour speakers who are still to come will be able to do what those on Labour's front bench have failed to do, which is to explain how they can suggest that the Scottish Government's roads are paved with gold at the same time as saying that local authorities are supposedly too poor to pave their roads at all.

I have already taken an intervention; if I take any more, I will not get through my speech.

Mr Kerr failed to do so when he had the chance; perhaps someone else can do so. Some might argue that the Scottish Government has had this—mythical—bounty given to it but has cut the share that it passes on to local government. That argument would at least have an inherent logic, which Labour's does not. However, the problem is that the facts get in the way. Not only are local authorities getting an increase this year on last year but, last year, for the first time since devolution, local government's share of the cake increased, and it will do so again this year. When I pointed that out last year, Andy Kerr dismissed it as being irrelevant. However, he should say that to all the Labour council leaders who, like me, argued with his Executive that the share of spending was crucially important to local government and who made challenges about it under the Tories as well as under Labour. He should also tell his good friend and close political ally, Pat Watters, who said, on April 14: "Whatever you think of the overall amount of money available for the public sector in Scotland, local government stopped the decline of its share and marginally reversed that trend." It is a marginal turnaround but it is a turnaround without a doubt, and one that shows the hypocrisy of an Opposition that now feigns indignation about supposed cuts, when the real cut to local government happened when it was in power. It is also true to say that the end of ring fencing is a major gain for local government, and is something for which councils had been arguing for years. If councils decide to make cuts—as Clackmannanshire Council is doing, by cutting school crossing patrols—that is their decision. They have more money than ever before, but they have the right to make cuts. They will stand or fall by their decisions. I warn Labour MSPs who are currently trying to convince Labour councillors to undermine the concordat at every stage—by not employing teachers or by manoeuvring within COSLA—that that behaviour is jeopardising gains that local authorities had been trying to achieve for years under Labour and Conservative Governments. Looking ahead to 2012, I am optimistic about local government. Some councils will stand and others will fall but, for the first time that anyone can remember, they can be fairly judged on their own records. They have to get over the impact of  decades of underinvestment, obviously, but there is a new sense of purpose in councils and a new and fairer balance of opinion in town halls. Most important, thanks to this and other generous financial settlements of the Scottish Government, councils have the ability to deliver first-class services on the front line that meet the expectations and aspirations of the people of Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it will quantify the cuts that would be required to local government and other services in Ochil were they to meet the United Kingdom Government efficiency savings target of 3 per cent. (S3O-5107)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that there is a growing tide of concern and anger about new Labour's cuts in public services, whether through the lowest ever increase in the Scottish block grant from London; new Labour in Scotland's 3 per cent cuts, as outlined by Wendy Alexander; or the straight £1 billion cut to which the cabinet secretary just referred, which was announced by Alistair Darling. Does he agree that that anger is most keenly felt among local councils, voluntary groups and those who rely on those organisations for vital services?

In light of the demand for clarity and detail, will Mr Brown confirm whether his party will support the retention of the £400 million in council tax benefits money if the change goes ahead? Further, will he tell us when the revaluation that the Conservatives now support will happen?

For many people who have no idea what credit default swaps are or who believe that LIBOR is a small west African country, the credit crunch might have seemed a wee bit distant and abstract until now. However, whether it is because of the credit difficulties that many people now face, the daily and mounting job losses or the business crises involving HBOS, Woolworths and so on, few now doubt that the credit crunch amounts to a real and present danger to their livelihoods. Those who still harbour doubts should listen to the chancellor's pre-budget report. The UK economy is flatlining, borrowing is going through the roof, and fewer and fewer Labour politicians are willing to parrot the absurd claims of Brown and Darling that the UK is uniquely well placed to weather the recession. More and more people are realising that, through the crass mismanagement of the UK economy, the UK is uniquely poorly placed among G8 countries to deal with the chill wind that is now blowing. That is especially evident due to the UK's dependence on its housing market, its reliance on financial services and its willingness to spend billions of pounds on nuclear weapons and illegal wars. However, the response from Gordon Brown is that we are not as badly overborrowed as some of the other G8 countries. Why not compare our borrowing with that of Ireland, which is another country that new Labour ministers in particular are always anxious to denigrate? Despite their troubles, the Irish expect their borrowing to rise to no higher than 24 per cent of their gross domestic product. We are looking at double that level here. Borrowing is set to rise to £1.1 trillion in the next  five years, and that figure does not, of course, include the ever-increasing costs—around £216 billion and counting—of new Labour's love affair with the PFI. I know that the scale and novelty of such sums make it difficult for people to fathom the nature and extent of the crisis that we are in, but I am equally sure that many people know in their heart of hearts and in a profound way that we have let down future generations for many years to come. Their prosperity has been hindered by our profligacy. They will be heavily indebted and taxed, and their life and employment opportunities will be inhibited because of the crisis. That is not to mention the increased new Labour threats to public services from the £1 billion cuts that the cabinet secretary has spoken about. People talk about the need to leave a legacy from the Olympics. Immediately after the Olympics have finished, we will be looking at a debt legacy of Olympian proportions. Many of us remember new Labour's nauseating election broadcast 18 months ago in which it was said that every family in Scotland would face a £5,000 bill for Scottish independence. That sum is beginning to look like a bit of a bargain now that new Labour has reminded us that the cost of being part of the union will be £25,000 per family. It is undoubtedly true that the most culpable among us is the UK Government, which has failed to regulate, has perpetuated the lie not only that the PFI is cheap credit but that it is not really debt at all, and has squandered billions of pounds on warmongering. However, it is also true that each and every one of us has played a part in blowing up the bubble of debt. Private debt in the UK, at around £1.4 trillion, is now more than 100 per cent of our GDP.

The Treasury has provided the figure of £216 billion. Alva academy, which is in my constituency, is included. Yesterday, all parents got a text saying that the opening of the new building would be delayed. I think that that is because the expected money cannot be raised to pay for the first PFI instalment. Debt is not always bad—for example, when it is proportionate, when it is used for long-term or essential investment, or when it is used to increase future productivity—but much of our credit splurge has been on a consumer binge.  I am reminded of part of a poem by someone whose words are worth remembering: "The world is too much with us; late and soon, Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers; Little we see in Nature that is ours; We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!" In that context, many people view with ambivalence the UK Government's efforts to encourage further consumer spending, especially among those who can least afford it. I am reminded of the guilt of a post-party hangover. However, most will agree that responsible consumer spending is better than the immoral hoarding of cash by banks. The spending that we should support—as the Scottish Government is doing—includes that which is aimed at helping businesses and individuals, and that which helps to build future productivity and competitiveness, because we can rest assured that, when we come out of the debt tunnel some years hence, we will be in a landscape of ever-greater competition. We should spend to invest, including in our environment. That is crucial. This is the time when we can undertake capital spending that will help us to meet both the aims in our competitive agenda and our environmental imperatives. That is why the Scottish Government's spending on housing, especially affordable housing, on the energy assistance package, and on education—on energy efficient education buildings in particular—is so welcome. Finally, we should not let the debate pass without remembering those who have been happy to usher in the crisis with apocalyptic warnings about how lucky Scotland is to be part of an economic giant such as the UK rather than independent. The only thing that is gigantic about the UK now is its debt. Just as private investors are watching their dividends disappear, we are watching any notion of a union dividend evaporating. It would be far preferable to be a sustainable Scotland than part of a bankrupt Britain.

Leaving aside the issue of the date on which a referendum might be held, is Pauline McNeill saying that she is still in favour of a referendum? If so, will she vote for it when the matter comes before Parliament?

Unlike some members, I am delighted to take part in the debate. The members who have not been able to talk to the motion but who have instead used the debate for other purposes should take a leaf out of the book of Dennis Canavan, who is in the public gallery again and who has tried for many years to have St Andrew's day celebrated properly. I am happy to take part in the debate for two reasons. The first is the long-standing interest that I have had in St Andrew's day since, some years ago, when I was leader of Clackmannanshire Council, I proposed that it should be a public holiday in the council area. The second reason is much more recent and relates to the People's Postcode Lottery. Before anyone suggests otherwise, I have no interests, as yet, to declare in that regard. However, it transpires that today many of my constituents in part of Kinross have become the winners of the first-ever St Andrew's day belter and will share £1 million as a result. As we debate the significance of St Andrew's day and how and why we should celebrate it, my constituents in Kinross know exactly why they will celebrate that special day forever more. I should clarify that my good friend and colleague the Minister for Parliamentary Business, although a resident of the fine town of Kinross, will have to satisfy himself with more traditional reasons to celebrate St Andrew's day. To coin a phrase and to refer to another lottery, he should be aware that you have to be in it to win it. I should also mention that the Kinross residents' win will be celebrated on St Andrew's day with a party in Kinross. As I said, several years ago Clackmannanshire Council established St Andrew's day as a local holiday but, unfortunately, the decision was subsequently reversed by a Labour administration.  When I proposed the idea, I mentioned that it should perhaps be the kick-off for a winter festival that would run through to Burns night. I also suggested, although I would not do so now, that it might be a good idea to make it the first day on which people were allowed to go Christmas shopping. That was a personal ambition, but it did not work then and it perhaps would not go down well today. The day continues to be celebrated in Clackmannanshire. Tomorrow morning, Alva academy will have its second annual St Andrew's day awards, which John Beattie and I will attend. Strathdevon primary school will also hold events. It just so happens that my two sons go to those schools. It is good to hear from members that similar events are happening more widely throughout Scotland. As others have said, although St Andrew's day is a Scottish event, it is also international. The St Andrew's cross furnishes the flag of Tenerife and the Russian naval ensign, as well as the other flags that members have mentioned. St Andrew was crucified in Greece, in the city of Patras, which now honours him and, of course, 30 November. Coincidentally, Patras is traditionally considered to be the birthplace of the Greek revolution for independence and against Ottoman rule in 1821. Before anyone accuses me of trying to make a national holiday a nationalist one, they should consider that, in Greece, there is no distinction between the two. As one of the definitions of nationalism is that it is the idea of supporting one's country and culture, I do not understand why some members are so afraid of being nationalists, or why some are afraid of being Scottish nationalists when they are happy to be British nationalists. The SNP has been charged with using the saltire for political purposes. Those comments were made much more widely in the corresponding debate last year, but they were made again today by Pauline McNeill. The reason why that happens is that, in the past, the unionist parties have been afraid to use the saltire in any literature and have not been nearly as ready to use it as they have been ready to use the union jack. Famously, Tony Blair always had a union jack behind him when making public statements and we should remember his entry to Downing Street, with union jacks supplied by the Labour Party. The idea of a Britain day has been touted by the current Prime Minister. Members would do well to ensure that they are not in a glass house before they start throwing those stones. I recall from my time as an elections officer that, some time ago, Fife Council ordered the taking down of a saltire from one of its schools because it was seen to be eliciting support for the SNP—that was the returning officer's decision. I do not really care whether St Andrew's day is  national or nationalist; such a discussion makes me think of angels, or perhaps patron saints, dancing on the head of a pin. I care that the day is accepted as a celebration of Scotland and its shared heritage with Europe and the wider world, which is sometimes all too easy to forget, and I associate myself with Pauline McNeill's remarks about anti-racism in that regard. Last week I had the chance to speak at a conference in Edinburgh on issues relating to migration to Scotland. I will remember that conference for a long time, not least because, when I left after talking for too long, I found that I had a £30 parking ticket—perhaps we could use such an innovation in Parliament. I mentioned at that conference that when people come to this country, we should take it as a real compliment that they want to make their future here. That contrasts with the fearful tones that we strike sometimes when we talk about immigration. A number of speakers at the conference who are involved with immigration were complimentary of both the Scottish Government's and the previous Scottish Executive's approaches to immigration through the one Scotland, many cultures theme. The point has been made that although Scotland is internationalist, it has its own culture. We have to bear it in mind that many people come to Scotland to celebrate that culture, so we should not be afraid of displaying it or celebrating events such as St Andrew's day. We should be keen to let the world see what we can do through a revitalised St Andrew's day in a renewed Scotland. I am happy to support the motion, as well as Ted Brocklebank's amendment.

Will the member take an intervention?

Has there been any examination of what the impact would have been—or is the cabinet secretary able to give his own assessment—had the 3 per cent cuts that were proposed by new Labour been agreed to? Does the cabinet secretary agree with me that it would have been "spine-chilling"—to use David Whitton's word—if the people who provide the services or who rely on them had to deal with a 50 per cent increase in the efficiency savings that had to be made?

It has become quite fashionable of late for certain politicians to talk about serious times requiring serious people and serious policies, but Labour's—or should I say new Labour's—motion for this debate, unlike its motion for the previous debate, is shot through with inconsistency, hypocrisy and doublethink. It is anything but a serious attempt to question health budgets. At its root, it seeks to put forward a case that health budgets are being cut and that the Labour Party would do something different if it were still in office. Neither proposition stands reasonable scrutiny. The best antidote to cant and posturing is the application of hard facts, although I realise that for the new Labour Party at least, the facts are difficult. First, Cathy Jamieson's motion refers to the "lowest spending increase since devolution", but it pointedly avoids referring to the fact that the health settlement was made in the context of the lowest spending increase to the Scottish Government under devolution. That is a relevant point. If new Labour is to treat the issue seriously, it should recognise that the massive cut in the Scottish budget's rate of growth has an impact on health funding. It cannot then reasonably complain that separate budget heads are not increasing enough; that is simply not a serious point to make. Perhaps that awkward fact could be overcome if new Labour—which, I presume, would have received the same settlement if it had clung to power last May—said that it would have cut other budgets in order to grow the health budget by more than the cabinet secretary has done, but we know that Labour would have sacrificed all other budgets in order to boost education. That is a legitimate aspiration, but it is not legitimate to pretend that it would not have impacted on the health budget. Aside from favouring education over health, Labour would have increased the efficiency savings that the Scottish Government asked of health boards by 50 per cent—that is Wendy Alexander's position and no Labour member has yet acknowledged it—and then  turned those savings into cuts by taking them from health budgets and putting them into education. That takes us to the crucial issue of efficiency savings versus cuts. Anyone who had to contend with the Labour-Liberal efficiency savings that were imposed on Scottish local government during the long, dark years from 1997 to 2007 is well able to tell the difference between efficiency savings that are redirected into the services that produce them and new Labour cuts that involve taking money from those services—as it was taken from local government—and redirecting it to other priorities.

I met Forth Valley NHS Board recently. It has given no indication that the efficiency savings that it is currently making are any different from what Labour previously proposed. In fact, it will get an extra £17 million over the three-year period. Arguments are reinforced by relevant examples. I cite as an example of a cut rather than an efficiency saving the Labour Party's recent scandalous decision in Clackmannanshire Council to cut school crossing patrols. That service will not come back; the money will not go back into it. It is a depressing fact that Labour knows that it is not being serious. It knows that comparisons with England are false because of the fiddling with projections and actual spend to cut Scottish funding in the first place. It did not raise an ounce of protest about that. It was not concerned about the cut to the Scottish Government's budget. It knows that, given the choice, it would take money out of health budgets and it is well aware that the health budget was agreed following the stingiest-ever settlement from London. The fact that Labour did not oppose the Scottish Government's health budget is more depressing still. We all recall Labour's fantastically assertive and decisive leadership when it decided to boldly abstain—I am sorry for the split infinitive—on the budget last year. It is apparent to everybody that there is no real principle, far less substance, in new Labour's motion. Such can be the stuff of opposition politics—that is fair enough—but the motion has nothing to do with a sincere and sustained commitment to higher health budgets.  I am not entirely sure what the Liberal Democrats' position is. However, if they want increased health funding, that will have to be added to the growing list of things for which they want to increase funding and must be seen in the light of the £800 million of savings that their tax-cutting programme would introduce. In conclusion, Labour politicians should listen to one of their own. These are serious times that call for serious people making serious proposals. Labour politicians misread the public's willingness to put up with puerile posturing at a time of rising economic distress. I am sure that Labour will not withdraw its stupid motion, but perhaps Labour members will think a bit more seriously before they submit another one like it.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it is aware of any economies arising from co-operation between local authorities in the provision of school meals. (S3O-4635)

Does the minister share my concern that some councils, such as Clackmannanshire Council in my constituency, which also provides school meals facilities for other councils, appear unaware of the potential opportunities for economies of scale and additional revenue that could be achieved through the free school meals initiative? Is he also concerned that some councils and council leaders seem unaware of the commitment that they freely entered into when they agreed to the free school meals initiative under the concordat? Is he concerned that they may be jeopardising this beneficial and popular policy?

I will now address the motion. One of the most memorable contributions to any debate this year was by Mike Russell on 29 May. Referring to the debate at the time, he said: "it was one of those occasions that do the Parliament no good whatever. Let us be ruthlessly honest about it: this was political theatre for those who are paid to be here."— [ Official Report , 29 May 2008; c 9221.]  When I saw today's motion from the Lib Dems, I was instantly reminded of the idea that this is political theatre for those who are paid to be here. Furthermore, it is political theatre at its most depressing level. In the 18 th century, theatre was considered disreputable among the upper classes, and acting was considered to be lying—a ritualistic deception. We might look at the motion and think that the Lib Dems need both an economics lesson and a history lesson. The crucial period in history, in this context, was not hundreds of years ago, but just a few months ago. That was when the Lib Dems joined the Labour Party's knee-jerk chorus that SNP members were villains and misers and, even worse, that the Scottish Government was supposedly perpetrating the most painful cuts since the French revolution. That was when the Lib Dems shouted for more money for universities, more money for housing, more money for class sizes and more money for hospitals—more, more, more. An observer would be forgiven for thinking of those times as the good old days. Now, suddenly, the Lib Dems want to throw away £800 million pounds like a rattle from a pram. I said in the past that when the Lib Dems speak in the chamber they often act as if they are still in coalition with the Labour Party. Perhaps the previous speech demonstrated that. It is also demonstrated by the fact that when Lib Dems speak in the chamber they frequently look across to the Labour benches for approval. It reminds me of children showing off to their parents. Now they have perhaps started growing up, and here we are in Holyrood, caught in the midst of their adolescent rebellion. The Lib Dems say that the change is not that they have been hit by political growing pains; they say that it is the big bad wolf come a-knocking, and that the UK economy has suddenly turned out to be a house of straw.

I am sorry, but I have only four minutes for this speech.

I am delighted to do so.

I will come to local income tax; Jeremy Purvis can be confident that it will be totally costed in the budget. He should have no fears about that. As I was about to say, I am not here to defend any chancellor of the past 10 years, not even by the hairs on Jeremy Purvis's chinny chin chin, but his is the wrong answer to a very real menace. As Jeremy Purvis should be aware, the Scottish Government cannot just put £800 million pounds on its national credit card, like Westminster can—although we might be forgiven for thinking that that is what got us into this mess in the first place—and £800 million of cuts would have a very real effect on those people whom the Lib Dem motion professes to help. I agree with Jeremy Purvis that local income tax would in effect be a massive tax cut, just like the freezing of council tax, the introduction of the small business bonus scheme—the Lib Dems voted against both those measures—and the Government's moves on prescription charges. I know that, the Government knows that, and I think that even the Lib Dems know that. That is why this debate is political theatre. The Lib Dems are reading lines that many of them do not believe. Theatre is about the willing suspension of disbelief. There are plenty of people who are looking for safety right now, as they face a new age in the UK economy—a UK economy that has been completely misrun by the Labour Party. An unfunded, unrealistic 2p tax cut is designed to play to people's fears and cynically win their votes. As has been said—by Malcolm Chisholm, I think—the Lib Dems know that this is never going to happen, which is why they have put it forward. Their 2p tax cut policy has been drafted on the back of an envelope and it is intended to go no further than the front of an election leaflet. Today, the Scottish Parliament will see that childish act for what it is. I have every confidence that the Scottish people will, too. I am sure that this never occurred to the Lib Dems, but I am sure that that will also be true for the people of Glenrothes.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it not necessary for the member—especially three minutes into a four-minute speech—to address the motion that is before us?

It is slightly alarming to think that Charlie Gordon has a better recollection than I do of the questions that I have asked in Parliament, but I will take his word for what he says. I am pleased that we are debating this issue today. After having read the motion, I had thought that there would be more agreement than disagreement but—alas—that has not been the case. Labour and Conservative members on the front benches—I excuse the back benchers who have spoken—have made fairly puerile attacks on independence. I was genuinely interested to find out what division the Labour amendment sought to highlight, in order to see whether it was anything  more than the usual default position of decrying any lead that is taken by the Scottish Government. It reminded me of somebody—Baroness Thatcher—who I know inspires our current Prime Minister. She said: "Where there is discord, let there be harmony", but instead we seem to have the opposite, in the manufacturing of a fairly synthetic amendment to try to draw a division. The new diversity—which Jamie Hepburn spoke about earlier—within the British-Irish Council has led to a new sense of purpose and energy in engagement with other such bodies, and with other institutions within the European Union. Like Jamie Hepburn and Margo MacDonald, however, I would prefer the title of council of the isles. As one of this Parliament's members of the European Committee of the Regions, it strikes me that the commonalities and the common interests of the nations and Governments in the British-Irish Council are very obvious when one engages in that committee, which has 27 members from the 27 EU member states. One very quickly finds oneself—as I recently did—in the company of people from Ireland, Northern Ireland, Wales and England. At the recent meeting, a Plaid Cymru member of the National Assembly for Wales, a Liberal Democrat member of the House of Lords, a Labour member of North Lanarkshire Council, a number of the Irish representatives and I all quickly found each other's company, because there is a great deal of shared history and neighbourliness between our countries. That is natural, and we will have to keep hold of it even once Scotland becomes an independent state. It will be in all our interests to ensure that we are still good neighbours, and that we collaborate in areas of common interest. One of the lessons from the European Committee of the Regions that the British-Irish Council exemplifies is the fact that interregional and international groupings are the way in which most countries in Europe seek to exert their influence. The Irish, of course, are past masters at that, but I recently had an approach from a French provincial representative who was seeking to establish a new North Sea grouping within the European Committee of the Regions because of the shared interests there. Even large states such as France, therefore, recognise that interregional and international groupings are the way to find common interests and to promote those interests through international bodies. That is very much in the spirit of the British-Irish Council, and there is no reason why the things that that body discusses cannot be used to promote the interests of its constituent parts in other bodies.  It seems to me that the increased prosperity in Northern Ireland since the peace agreement and the development of the council holds out opportunities for the other parts of the body. What is important in that regard is not just prosperity—which goes further than the British-Irish Council and relies on European Union and United States support—but the engagement that now exists. For example, there is now much more familiarity with the situation in Northern Ireland in the other parts of the islands that we inhabit. People in Northern Ireland often felt that they were known for only one thing, but the multidimensional nature of Northern Irish society is much more to the fore these days. That is certainly what they would say. However, I can tell Parliament of the bemusement and, indeed, anger among Irish representatives about allegations that have been made—especially by somebody called Murphy—that denigrate the Irish Republic. Those allegations have really hit home among people in the Irish Government and Opposition parties. That will become more obvious as time goes on. It has been claimed that Ireland is in some way insolvent, yet it has the same problems with budget deficit and debt, on almost exactly the same scale, as the UK Government. This might not be a popular cause, but I also decry the despicable bullying of Iceland by the UK Government. Iceland is not the only country that has had to be bailed out by the International Monetary Fund.

Well—you never know. Future expansion is a wonderful thing. Countries sometimes have to be bailed out by international organisations, as the UK was under a previous Labour Government. To return to the motion, the British-Irish Council is one of the few intergovernmental organisations that is not a club for independent countries only. In that respect, it is an invaluable forum for strengthening intergovernmental relationships—prior, of course, to the establishment of Scottish independence. The motion also refers to specific work on renewable energy. It has almost become a cliché to call Scotland the Saudi Arabia of renewables, but no one doubts that the future lies in low-carbon technologies, not just environmentally but economically. In the 1970s the business to invest in was plastics, in the 1980s it was oil, in the 1990s it was computers, and for most of the current decade it has been banking—believe it or not—but the business investment of the future will be renewables.  If Scotland is to realise its potential in that area, it needs transmission infrastructure. Some people conceive of that as a line of pylons snaking across the countryside from Beauly to Denny, through some of the most visually striking and historically significant parts of not just my constituency but the country. We heard something of that view from Lewis Macdonald. I would much rather endorse the Scottish Government's ambition to carry that power by sea.

The process for determining such applications has been in place for some time, although it is about to be overhauled. The fact that the public inquiry on the project was the longest-ever public inquiry in Scotland perhaps gives us some idea why the project has taken so long. I do not argue against it, but I hope that the line will be undergrounded in my area, at least. As we saw in the Westminster Government's intervention to prevent Scottish Government ministers from even daring to speak to their Norwegian counterparts, responsibility for transmission of power is jealously guarded. Through the British-Irish Council, however, Scotland has a chance to speak for itself. I look forward to development of the British-Irish Council project in the years to come—it is clear that it has still to reach its full potential, as David McLetchie pointed out. It is a young body that was set up in different circumstances from those which it faces now, but it is a forum for valuable work that challenges us all. It is a continuing reminder to Scotland that we do not have to be parochial, and it is the foundation of what we hope will be a rebuilt 21 st century relationship in these islands.

Are the projects that were commissioned under public-private partnerships prior to the introduction of the SFT putting pressure on council and health board budgets because of higher than expected interest payments and inflation?

I, too, congratulate Jim Tolson on securing this debate—well done to him for getting in so quickly. It is good to have the chance to debate this issue on the back of the success of what we prefer to call the Alloa to Stirling line, rather than the Stirling to Alloa line. As Richard Simpson mentioned, he and I are veterans of a successful rail campaign. It is interesting to note the pattern that such campaigns have followed. As the person who proposed the public transport fund bid for Clackmannanshire Council and, subsequently, the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine Railway and Linked Improvements Bill, which was promoted by Clackmannanshire Council, I see an emerging pattern, but there is one difference between the campaigns. A huge number of agencies were involved in the Stirling to Alloa project, which was in a state of considerable flux. Although the current campaign is still relatively fragmented, there is more stability, so it should be easier to get the initiative off the ground. It is fair to say that consideration of the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine link, if we may call it that, is essential to the discussion. That line is mostly used by passengers, but some freight travels on it. If we did not have it, we would not be discussing what we are discussing. For many people in Clackmannan, Kincardine and Culross, the discussion is not about a new connection, but a chance for their villages to get on the national passenger network. Several members have mentioned the popularity of the new line. It has been projected that more than 400,000 people will use it this year, which is far more than the estimates on which the project was predicated. That is testament to the fact that  there is increasing interest in and demand for rail services—I think that Jim Tolson spoke about that. I have had a number of meetings with Ian Chisholm of the south east of Scotland transport partnership, and am pleased that that partnership is proposing a study. I have also met the minister to discuss the matter. Obviously, there are many demands on his budget, especially with the new Forth crossing, but the door has not been closed on considering the project. Today, there was a useful meeting with Network Rail, which some members were able to attend. We found out about the practical problems that exist and the different options that are available, depending on what is intended. We may go for a stage-by-stage approach. Obviously, there are straightening works to be done, and there are additional signalling requirements. Those of us who were involved in the work on the Alloa line will know how central signalling was to the problems that were endured in that project. There is a lack of signalling capacity and expertise, especially in design, in this country. I think that we had to rely on signal designers from India and eastern Europe. Different options are available, but the most essential thing is that we get things off the books with a study. The Scottish transport appraisal guidance 1 study that SEStran, I think, proposed will go only so far; the active involvement of Transport Scotland in a study is crucial. As Richard Simpson said, commitment is not needed; it can simply consider the options and the costs. Such a study would not be definitive by any means, but it would certainly give us a better idea of the passenger demand that exists and the benefits that would result. The wider benefits to central Scotland, not only the benefits that would result to the local area, were crucial to winning the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line. It is also important that we do not forget the options at Rosyth. As a result of the efforts of the minister and others on the ferry link with Europe, a real possibility exists of having a genuinely integrated transport network. Freight and passengers can come directly from Europe and go straight on to Edinburgh or Glasgow. Freight can then go on to Ireland. There is real potential for integrated rail improvements to the transport network in my part of Scotland. In the meantime, we can consider, for example, direct links from Alloa to Edinburgh, which could also go the other way. That would certainly improve that service even further. I am delighted that the motion has been lodged. We are at the start of a process. Through Clackmannanshire Council, I have called for Fife Council to become engaged in the project for two  and a half years. I hope that, following the first study, we will move forward to further success.

The weight of the Conservative motion is about ensuring that clear detail is available on the Government's intentions for its proposed local income tax. It is difficult to argue with that principle. With such a major change, political parties and the people of Scotland should have as much detail as possible as soon as possible. However, we also have the right to expect that the principle of clear and early public information should apply to the council tax benefit issue. The parties that have clung to the hugely discredited and dysfunctional council tax system have shamelessly tried to bolster the threat from Westminster that any kind of deviation from their preferred policy would draw retribution in the form of a £400 million-plus penalty through the withholding of council tax benefits. Derek Brownlee makes the case that we should have clear and early public information so that we can get an idea of the implications for people but, at the same time, he says that there will be no Tory decision on council tax benefit until 2010 at the very earliest. We cannot have the early certainty that he seeks if a big chunk of the money will not be agreed beforehand.

That is a complete red herring, because it is perfectly clear where people stand on council tax benefit. To give an idea of the level of Tory thinking, in response to a perfectly reasonable and valid point from Mike Rumbles, we had the stunning revelation from David McLetchie that houses do  not move. If we come down to that level of debate, it is also true that houses do not pay income tax, nor do they pay council tax. People move and the current system is perfectly able to track those changes, even when people are being paid—or not—from Lithuania. The tactic of the threat to withhold moneys is of a piece with the general themes of keeping us in our place and, by intimidation, discouraging any deviation from Westminster-approved changes. For me, the most disappointing aspect of that approach is that the Scottish branches of the UK parties have used the tactic with such gusto, with some honourable exceptions. Of course, with Labour, the London Labour line was always going to be preferred to independent thought or any notion of the Scottish interest. However, it is beyond doubt that the £400 million belongs to Scotland. Alistair Darling, whose view one would think would count for something, said in 1997 that, under devolution, council tax benefit and housing benefit "will come within the Block for the first time."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 9 December 1997; Vol 302, c 511W.] At this point of the argument, those who are too afraid to let go of the council tax—maybe we can call them the council tax cling-ons—adapt their argument from saying that it is not our money but is graciously dispensed to us by Westminster as part of the union dividend, to saying that it might be our money but it comes with strings attached. Because it is called council tax benefit, they say, we must use it for that purpose. One can understand why those in the Tory and Labour parties who never wanted devolution use that argument, but, more is the pity, it seems to have become a mainstream argument rather than one that is confined to the extreme unionist fringes of those parties. One clear contradiction in the arguments on a local income tax is that some of those who oppose it say that they are in favour of local decision making, of councils taking responsibility for their decisions and of local democracy. However, they make those arguments while defending the hugely centralising effects and intent of the council tax regime. Since the 1970s, successive Labour and Tory Governments have sought to constrain and limit the financial freedom of local government—a fact rather than a matter of party contention for any student of local government. Whether it was the poll tax, rates or council tax, the aim was to control councils by cutbacks, capping or ring fencing. The Scottish Government has made a good start in three of its actions—getting rid of ring fencing, increasing the share of the Scottish budget that goes to local government and providing extra  resources to allow councils to choose to freeze the council tax. From the comments of Labour, Tory and even Lib Dem councillors, I know that their Holyrood counterparts have failed to appreciate how well those actions have been received in local government. Perhaps it is time that they woke up to that fact.

I thank all the members who signed the motion, which allowed the debate to take place. The debate is important for a large swathe of Scotland's population. For propriety, I declare an interest. Veterans Scotland's definition of a veteran is anybody who has served in the United Kingdom armed forces—regular or reserve—and, for a short period a long time ago, I served with the Royal Marines. I would like to say how many are in the veterans community in Scotland, but all that anyone has to go on is estimates. In 2005, research by the Royal British Legion estimated that just over 1 million were in the ex-service community in Scotland. Half those people are former service personnel and the rest are their families. In both categories, most members of the community are at the older end of the scale—three quarters are over 55 and 60 per cent are over 65. Most of our veterans are senior citizens, but tens of thousands of ex-service personnel who are in their 20s and 30s also face special challenges, not to mention the challenges that their partners and children face. This is a members' business debate, so I do not want it to become a partisan session in which the Scottish Government is congratulated on excellent work—perish the thought—but it is important to recognise at the outset that the Scottish Government has gone out of its way to examine the problems that veterans encounter. The Parliament is not responsible for our citizens when they are in uniform, but when they leave service we are responsible for supporting them in their  health, their housing and their chances for learning and training. I therefore welcome the Scottish Government's initiatives in that regard. From my contact with the charities that work with veterans, I know that they appreciate the Scottish Government's intent and genuine effort. I am sure that the minister will be all too happy to detail the initiatives. The growing concern in the Scottish Government and in wider society about the issues that veterans face is mirrored by greater awareness of those problems. Cross-party effort in the Parliament has created the formal cross-party group on supporting veterans. I am delighted to be a vice-convener of that group. Its convener is Jeremy Purvis and it has Labour and Conservative vice-conveners. There could be many reasons for the growing awareness of veterans issues; I will suggest one. Yesterday, The Herald reported that 1,500 Scots are preparing to start a tour of Afghanistan next year. The legacy of fighting protracted wars in Iraq and Afghanistan is bringing home the reality that we as a society need to support the veterans who return from those conflicts. This week, 150 Royal Highland Fusiliers returned from Afghanistan. People join the armed forces for many reasons and—as I can testify—often at a young age. They also take on an obligation that is required by few other paths in life—to put life and limb on the line. I disagree with the Iraq war, but I reject the idea that—whether from malice or ignorance—we should condemn those whom presidents and prime ministers send to fight such wars. In America, where veterans have historically been held in higher and more general regard than is the case here, it is well recognised that the burden of fighting a war and surviving its aftermath always falls most heavily on those who start with the least. I learned recently at a veterans day film festival in Stirling that the number of suicides among Argentinean veterans of the Falklands war is nearly the same as the number of Argentinean deaths in combat in that war. That statistic is appalling and I worry about what the equivalent figure might be for forces from Scotland and the UK. Even without active service in conflict, the military lifestyle is the furthest from a regular 9-to-5 job that can be imagined. It is intense and at all times close and personal. It is no pun to say that it is regimented to the last detail. Moving from that to a lifestyle in which the first stop is most likely to be a college or a job centre is a radical change that can affect a person profoundly. Veterans Scotland brings together 31 organisations and charities whose work is dedicated to helping with all aspects of that transition for many years—sometimes even a lifetime—after. Organisations  deal with specific services, types of welfare and forms of recruitment. The problems in practice are no less varied. Listing all the issues that face veterans in those circumstances would be impossible in an hour, so I will not try to list them all. I mentioned the mental health of the ex-service community. While national attention focuses on alcohol abuse, we should consider whether veterans have a particularly difficult relationship with alcohol and substance abuse, and take that into special consideration in our national strategies. There is also a widespread problem in housing. Although the difficulties that some veterans face are shared by the mainstream, other veterans need adapted housing and specialist help or would benefit from being part of a certain community. Recently, I suggested that veterans housing charities should have first priority, or more favourable terms, when the Ministry of Defence sells off land or property. The idea is interesting, and the Scottish Government could explore it further with Whitehall. I am delighted that the cross-party group has managed to achieve an undertaking from the MOD that it will attend all our meetings. The issues are difficult to address if the Scottish Government or Westminster try to address them alone. Collaboration is important in all of this. There are, of course, many other possibilities. I recommend that all members read Poppyscotland's "Meeting the Need: A report into addressing the needs of Veterans living in Scotland". I am pleased that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has taken forward the concerns that I and others have raised on the location of fatal accident inquiries that result from the deaths overseas of Scottish and Scotland-based personnel. As we have heard, it can be traumatic for families, who wait years for an FAI to take place, not only to have to travel down south but to remain there for the duration of what can be protracted investigations. Furthermore, an FAI can make families relive events that they may have been trying to forget. Much is being done, but much remains to be done. I am sure that other members will add their personal experience and that of their constituents and organisational contacts. I am delighted to have secured the debate and that it has given the chamber the opportunity to debate the subject. Whatever else Holyrood does, Scots who have fought in wars or worn a uniform, and their partners and families, deserve nothing less than to be centre stage in our considerations.

Presiding Officer, I apologise to you and to the convener of the European and External Relations Committee for not being here for the start of the debate. I informed you and the convener as soon as I could that that would be the case. I am, of course, delighted to take part in the debate as a substitute member of the committee. Just 10 years ago, the suggestion that Scotland would by now have an international development policy to debate, let alone one that is generally supported across the political divides—with the exception of Lord Foulkes—would have been met with scepticism and disbelief. Unlike George Foulkes, I believe that we have come a long way towards global citizenship as a country. I am glad to have this chance to take a moment to pause and consider, now that we have begun to shoulder the responsibilities that come from that global citizenship. The report has two themes. One is the review of how the international development programme has worked so far and how it can be improved; and the other is the much wider issue that has been raised of mainstreaming international development practice across all Government activity. Ted Brocklebank, Jack McConnell and others have mentioned Malawi and, during the evidence-taking sessions in the committee, the importance of infrastructure and capacity building in particular was emphasised by those with most direct experience. With regard to the idea of helping others to help themselves and ensuring that projects are sustainable beyond the end of aid, I agree with Jamie Hepburn's point about the need to move beyond the straightforward donor-and-beneficiary relationship. The evidence from Lloyds TSB—perhaps soon to be Lloyds TSB HBOS—and the Hunter Foundation was particularly  interesting because of the way in which they had, in a way, bypassed the operations of the governmental organisations in order to do their own thing. The question of cui bono—who benefits?—is borne in mind by people on the ground more than it is by Government officials. It is interesting to note that DFID spends more on consultants than does any other Whitehall department; by some estimates, it spends up to £700 million on consultants, compared with the £9 million and rising for our entire international development programme. From the evidence that we took, I understand that that is exactly what the organisations that do the most valuable work seek to avoid. The success of the programme, the huge funding increase from the Scottish Government, the cross-party support, and the expansion to the Indian sub-continent and to sub-Saharan Africa were all appreciated, which brings me to the second, broader matter. The saying in the medical profession "First do no harm" is a worthy principle that is as valid for the treatment of the global problems of poverty and underdevelopment as it is for the treatment of the sick and the dying. It comes as no surprise to see in the report that the charities and civic organisations that I have mentioned have pushed that to the top of the agenda. We have heard about the procurement situation. The Scottish public sector spends around £30 billion per year of which, according to the report, around £8 billion is spent on goods and services. As Alex Neil, the deputy convener, pointed out in the committee, not all of that £8 billion can be used in the way that has been suggested, for practical reasons, but it is clear that not enough progress has been made in that area. However, there is a double jeopardy for the Scottish Government. The UK Government has to look over its shoulder at what the European Commission might examine, and we have to look over our shoulder at what the UK Government might say. Robin Harper asked why we do not just write to Westminster. However, why has Westminster not said, "You can do this"? That would be a simple thing to do. Why has no Labour member said that Westminster should have given the lead? The UK is the member state in this regard as it carries out the negotiations between Governments, and it could have given a very simple lead. If the issue is so pressing, why has it not been taken up by the Westminster Government? Guidance issued by that Government would have been ideal. Throughout Europe, people say that the UK Government gold plates legislation instead of taking the most  practical approach, which is why the Dutch have moved so much further ahead than we have. In recent years, equality and non-discrimination have become a thread that runs through every organisation, but we are now also beginning to consider the environmental impact of action. In the Scottish Parliament, any laws that are passed must, as Robin Harper mentioned, include a statement that they comply with human rights. The Scottish Government is also bound by that legislation. In the longer term, a big change would be to add global social impact as another criterion to the list, rather than sitting in a corner that we have marked off as fair trade. We could then take that into account in all our work. As far as I know, the Scottish Government is open, as we all are, to that idea. As a country, we are teaching the importance of citizenship as part of the curriculum for excellence, and we are open to that idea as a country. It is important to take two lessons away from the report: how the programme works, and how we can embed it throughout society and in government. Scotland's actions to fight poverty and relieve suffering on the international stage are one of the many reasons to be proud of this country. We perhaps find most evidence of that in schools, as Robin Harper said. Kinross school, which Jack McConnell visited when I mentioned it to him, and Dunblane high school both have relationships with Malawi, as does the school from East Lothian that appeared before the committee. There is passion and meaning in those relationships when children are involved and have direct experience of the lives of children in Malawi; it motivates them in a lifelong way. The potential for Scotland's contribution to the world would expand a thousand times over if we moved from being treated as little more than a province as we are now—as we heard eloquently from Lord Foulkes—to being a proper member of the global society of independent states. Before the partisan hackles start to rise, however, I will say that, whatever we might be able to do to help international development under a different constitutional situation, I am glad that we seem to be making quite a good job of what we can do here and now.

I thank Nigel Don for his motion, which I was happy to support when it was first lodged, and for the eloquent and reasoned way in which he set out his case. Since last May, I, like many other members, have received a number of representations from constituents who have expressed concerns about this issue from various perspectives. I should say, though, that those representations have focused less on the question of jurisdiction than on equality of treatment with regard to married and unmarried parents and the enforcement of contact orders. As someone who has in the past week or so been accused of lacking experience in certain areas, I find it somewhat intimidating to follow other members who have been involved in passing legislation on this matter, or who have previously practised family law. However, there is also a virtue in bringing a fresh eye to such matters. I do not disagree with members' comments about the difficult and complex nature of such cases and with the observation that, at a time when emotions are running high, it is very hard to focus people's attention on the child's interests. However, we cannot stand back from the consequences that have been presented to us simply because there are extreme difficulties. If we have evidence that the rights of individuals are being left behind or ignored, as the motion and the examples that Nigel Don gave suggest, the law must be examined. Of course everybody wants mediation to happen where it can, and the collaborative initiatives that have been talked about are welcome, but in the final analysis, if the law is not working in the interests of everyone involved and is not protecting everyone's rights, it must be looked at.  Robert Brown knows far more than I do about the sanctions relating to contact orders that are available to the courts, but the representations that I have received suggest, for reasons that Robert Brown and Christine Grahame mentioned, that there is little evidence that the courts are willing to impose penalties. Sometimes that may be for obvious reasons. For example, in whose interest would it be in such circumstances to imprison a parent? However, if a parent wilfully ignores a contact order that a court has made, we must acknowledge that the other parent's rights have been trampled on. If we accept that the interests of the child must be at the centre of things, we must accept that the rights of one of the child's parents not being respected cannot be in that child's interests. It is obvious that when a parent with custody of a child breaks a court order for access, there will be no quick resolution to the problem, and usually no penalty will be imposed on that parent. The parent without custody of the child must then go through the courts again and engage in what can often be a long drawn-out and expensive process—it can also be emotionally trying, as has been mentioned. Obviously, that can have an effect on parents' relationships with their children. Lewis Macdonald rightly spoke about many of the legal issues in the background of the main case that Nigel Don highlighted. However, as far as I can determine, the simple fact is that a parent was deprived of access to their child for seven entire years and was falsely accused of a fairly horrendous crime. That is the information that I have. If that can happen, the law must be examined. In the case of unmarried parents, schools and other authorities often advise the parent who has custody of the child on issues relating to the child, but the other parent is not advised. I also understand that the non-resident parent is not advised of children's panel issues. There are issues, and it is right that, for the reasons for Nigel Don gave, a legal resolution to such problems should at least be considered.

Members should excuse my breathlessness. Traffic from the Forth road bridge was very slow this morning. I speak in support of the motion, which relates to the committee's findings on a complaint against Wendy Alexander MSP. The full details of that complaint are set out in the report that the committee published on 10 July 2008, which also includes a detailed report on the complaint by the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner. It is important to remind members that the committee is unaware of any complaint made to the commissioner until the commissioner reports to the committee at the end of stage 2 of the complaints process, and that his investigation is entirely independent of the committee. In summary, the complaint was that the member failed to register in the register of members' interests within the required timescales 10 donations above £520 in value that were made to her campaign for the leadership of the Labour group of MSPs. Paragraph 6 of the schedule to the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 requires that members must register any interest if the member receives or has received "a gift of heritable or moveable property or a gift of a benefit in kind and ... the value of the gift, at the date on which it was received, exceeds 1 per cent of a member's salary on that date ... and ... that gift meets the prejudice test." Section 3(2) of the act states:  "An interest meets the prejudice test if, after taking into account all the circumstances, that interest is reasonably considered to prejudice, or to give the appearance of prejudicing, the ability of the member to participate in a disinterested manner in any proceedings of the Parliament." The act requires that interests are registered within 30 days of the date on which the member acquires that interest. The Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee considered and agreed the following findings of fact made by the commissioner. Between 15 August and 14 September 2007, the member engaged in a campaign to be elected leader of the Labour group of MSPs in the Scottish Parliament. Donations towards the cost of that campaign were received from individuals and organisations and paid into the WA campaign account, to which the member was not a signatory. Ten of those donations were of a value over the registration threshold of £520 for gifts. They were banked between 31 August and 5 November 2007. Although the member did not have direct ownership or control of the campaign funds, she had a beneficial interest in them. Contrary to a claim that was implied in the complaint, the campaign team was not a company or partnership. The member made no entry relating to the relevant donations under gifts in the register of members' interests within 30 days of their receipt. The member sought and received written advice from the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee clerks on 8 November 2007. That advice was to the effect that registration of the donations in the register of interests was not required. The advice was sought after the deadline for registration of around half of the donations had passed.

From my recollection, the committee did not ask for the advice to be published, but we asked to see it. We were told what the advice was, but only verbally, not in writing.

I must make progress. I am sorry. On 1 February 2008, when the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner's investigation was not yet complete, nine donations were registered voluntarily in the register of interests; the 10 th donation was registered under sponsorship. The committee noted the commissioner's and the member's views on whether the prejudice test had been met. It then considered the commissioner's conclusion that the member's "failure to register as gifts in the Register of Members' Interests, within the appropriate timescale, eight of the donations to her leadership election campaign constituted a breach of section 5 of the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 together with paragraph 6(1) of the Schedule." In reaching its view, the committee considered all the evidence that was set out in the report, and agreed, by a majority of five to two, with the commissioner's conclusion. During its deliberations, the committee considered the key issues of the definition of a gift or benefit in kind; what is meant by receiving a gift; the financial threshold; and the prejudice test. Having reached a majority view that the member had breached the requirements of the 2006 act, it considered written representations from the member before it decided whether to recommend sanctions to the Parliament. It considered a number of mitigating factors that were highlighted in the member's written representations together with the evidence in the commissioner's report, and agreed by a majority of four to three to recommend sanctions for the breach of the 2006 act. We noted that the member had sought advice from the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee clerks on 8 November, albeit that that was after the deadline for registering some of the donations. We also noted her comments on her previous compliance with respect to registration and that she had, in fact, exceeded those requirements in the past, albeit that we found her previous diligence incongruent with not having taken timely advice and action in respect of the donations in question. The committee also noted the procurator fiscal's comment that there was a degree of uncertainty surrounding the interpretation of the relevant provisions and that the member could not be held responsible for that. In addition, it noted that it and its predecessor committee had not provided advice on the categories of registrable interest. We considered the available sanctions that are set out in sections 15 and 16 of the 2006 act. Only the four committee members who had agreed to recommend the imposition of sanctions discussed sanctions. The committee agreed by division—four for, with three abstentions—to recommend that  Wendy Alexander MSP be excluded from all proceedings of the Parliament for the first Wednesday that is a sitting day following Parliament's agreement to the sanction. On behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, I move, That the Parliament notes the 6th Report, 2008 (Session 3) of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, Complaint against Wendy Alexander MSP , and agrees to impose the sanction recommended in the report that Wendy Alexander MSP be excluded from all proceedings of the Parliament for the first Wednesday that is a sitting day following agreement of this motion.

First, I apologise for coming in a bit late, after Jamie McGrigor started speaking. I congratulate him on introducing the bill and acknowledge the support of the Scottish Government and the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee so far. Like many other members, I have a substantial constituency interest in tartan. Daiglen of Scotland is based in Tillicoultry. It is the last of a long line of textile and tartan-producing concerns across the hillfoots of the Ochils. It is where I got my most recent kilt. AS Campbell is based in Alva, and the oldest manufacturer of tartan is in Bannockburn, part of which is in my constituency. To my mind—although I am not nearly as expert as some previous speakers—the bill is about using the credibility and integrity that would arise from the establishment of a register for the further  exploitation, if I may use that word, of the commercial and cultural potential of tartan. That is entirely right. Although we should consider classification and accept the reason for it, we should not be at all snobbish about tartan. What Rob Gibson had to say was true: many people have tartans for many reasons, and we should not seek to circumscribe those reasons. We obviously wish to protect tartans with an ancient history and a cultural background, but people will see that from the register and will know exactly what kind of tartan they are looking at. We have heard about modernists and wovenists, but not yet about a woven modernist. I am not sure what that would look like. We could also have dye-hard wovenists—is that a woven one that is hard to dye? I am not sure. Anyway, we should not be snobbish about classification, and we should make it as open as possible. Kenneth Macintosh was right to say that Celtic and Rangers have their own tartans. So does Hibernian. It is a very nice green tartan that I am holding up now, if anybody is interested to see it. As Elaine Murray said, all the Canadian provinces have a tartan, which have official status in Canada. The Royal Marines have a tartan, which surprised me more than the fact that the United States Marine Corps have a tartan, too. Our universities have tartans—and even individual university departments are now declaring that they have a tartan. Apparently the Hare Krishna movement has its own tartan. I find that very interesting. On a more serious note, the veterans have the Erskine tartan, which is interesting to note as we are about to go into veterans week. Members have spoken about their own tartans. I have a choice of two. I was surprised to hear Stuart McMillan say that he has a choice of six. One of my choices is the MacMillan tartan; the other is Lamont. The MacMillan was named, I think, after a haircut sported by a 12 th century monk—which counts against using that one. The clan motto, which Stuart McMillan mentioned, contains the word "disco", which put me off a wee bit—although it means "I learn" in Latin. The clan fought at Bannockburn, of course. Lamont, to commend it, is believed to have come from the Norse for "law man". It is associated with great legends of the statesman-like rulers of Cowal and Argyll of Irish and Norse descent. As against that, we have Johann Lamont, John Lamont and Norman Lamont. In any event, I chose the Lamont tartan in the end because it is nice and is more like the Hibs tartan. The bill has a lot to commend it. I do not have the background on it that other members have, but  I wish it every success and will certainly support it when it is brought back to the chamber.

I intended to open my speech with the same quotation that Patrick Harvie used a short time ago—Margaret Thatcher's dictum that anyone over the age of 26 who is on a bus can consider themselves a failure. It is a mark of progress that these days most people would indulge in self-reproach if they found themselves not on a bus, but the lone person in a car driving to work. A few years ago, Scotland's parties recognised the importance of bus travel by coming together to set up the national concessionary travel scheme for older people. Once again, they followed where the innovative and pathfinding SNP council in Clackmannanshire had led. In fact, the national  scheme was a step back for Clackmannanshire. In 1999-2000, when we received a genuinely bad local government settlement, as even the Labour opposition agreed, we introduced a completely free concessionary travel scheme that operated not off-peak but throughout the day—the best scheme in Scotland before or since. Scotland already recognises and values bus travel more than any other part of these islands. Scotland spends 20 per cent more per head than England on the bus service operators grant and almost double what England spends on concessionary travel. That is real money, and it makes the carping from Labour and the Liberal Democrats look a bit sour. We have heard accusations that the Government treats its time as starting from year zero. That is certainly true of the Liberal Democrats and Labour as far as this debate is concerned. It is as if nothing had gone before; as if the refusal of those parties to make the changes that they are now calling for had never happened. By contrast, it was a positive development when the Parliament came together on the concessionary travel scheme. People could point to something good coming from the Parliament and see how politicians could work to improve their lives. In an ideal world, we would give free transport to everybody but, as David Hume first observed, when a society is not in a state of total abundance and does not have unlimited resources, it must prioritise. In government, Labour prioritised not to give the groups concerned free travel. In opposition, Labour members have apparently changed their minds. That is their prerogative, but if they now want the Government instantly to pre-empt its own review to introduce a measure that the previous Administration did not, and which Labour did not propose at the time of the budget, that is at the very least presumptuous.

No, I will not. It is certainly hypocritical of Labour. To be fair, Alison McInnes should consider where the breathtaking hypocrisy in the debate lies. One of the underlying problems is the cost of fuel, which has been mentioned. We spoke about the effect of that on food prices in a Conservative-led debate a few weeks ago and it is an inseparable part of the issue that we are discussing now. Even with the spending by the United Kingdom Government, bus fares are going up throughout the UK, including in Reading, east Yorkshire, York, Bolton, Eastbourne, Sheffield and Oxford.  The SNP at Westminster has proposed that any increase in VAT revenue derived from rising fuel prices should automatically be spent on a corresponding reduction in fuel duty. That fuel regulator proposal is thoughtful and revenue neutral, and it has the support of just about every industry group going. It would have been nice to have heard some views on the matter from Labour members. People are obviously concerned about increasing bus fares. I have had correspondence from people in Kinross about the above-inflation increases on the Kinross to Edinburgh route. Perhaps that is another reason for a direct Perth-Kinross-Edinburgh rail link—but I am sure that I will be told that that is a debate for another time. The Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change reopened the rail link in Clackmannanshire just recently and we have undercut the bus journey to Stirling. Together, rail and bus, with a through-ticketing system promoted by the Scottish ministers—which the motion calls for—can help us to address Scotland's needs. Figures released yesterday from the annual Scottish household survey say that the percentage of people going to work by car increased from 67 to 69 per cent between 2006 and 2007—although I heard on the news last night that there has been a 20 per cent reduction in fuel use for private travel. Better bus transport can help us to reduce the percentage of car commuters, which would contribute to making Scotland wealthier and greener. I would much rather be here debating a range of constructive, and even original, ideas than a motion that is just an anti-Government wish list calling for more money and more central control. I support Stewart Stevenson's amendment to Alex Johnstone's amendment.

Does the member disagree with his Westminster counterpart Edward Leigh, who said that PFI represents "the unacceptable face of capitalism"?

Just as Charlie Gordon, quite reasonably, cited his experience in Glasgow City Council as his reason for supporting Andy Kerr's amendment, I will draw on my experience in Ochil and in Clackmannanshire Council in highlighting my reasons for supporting John Swinney's motion. In Ochil, there are five PPP state secondary schools projects across three local authorities; one is complete and the other four are at various stages of construction. That might, on the face of it, appear to be a good legacy of the Labour-Lib  Dem-Tory PFI scheme— Holyrood magazine this week described PPP as PFI's illegitimate son, although the phrase used was rather fruitier than that. However, when we start to look in some detail at Labour's PFI adventure, it seems more like an oppressive hangover than a golden legacy. I am glad that Michael Matheson is not in the chamber to hear this, but it was the SNP-run Clackmannanshire Council in 2002—not Falkirk Council—that was the first to have a trust model approved by the former Scottish Executive. Indeed, it was approved in a phone call to our chief executive from, of all people, Nicol Stephen. However, when Labour took control of the council in 2003, it immediately changed the trust model back to a PFI model. That is when it all went wrong for Clackmannanshire, the smallest mainland council in Scotland. The bill for its three PPP-built secondary schools will be in excess of a quarter of a billion pounds over the period of the project—and that is for a population of around 48,000. What that means, apart from the fact that the council is now mortgaged to the hilt, is that there is no prospect of any substantial investment in its primary schools, which are decaying and are, to absolutely no one's surprise, subject to a review that is widely expected to result in closure proposals. Incredibly, these three massively expensive new secondary schools have no swimming pools. Despite local objections and petitions by pupils and Alloa swimming club, which is one of the most successful clubs in the UK, the Labour council would not support the incorporation of pools into the entire PPP secondary school estate and into none of the schools being built in Clackmannanshire.

I am sorry; I have only five minutes. The local council said that developers do not like swimming pools because of the space that they take up and the on-going maintenance costs. That bears out my experience of PPP as being developer-driven. Developers do not like to refurbish schools; instead, they say that they prefer to start from scratch. However, that means that the policy becomes environmentally unsustainable, because buildings that are, in many respects, worthy of refurbishment simply get torn down. Moreover, developers do not like refurbishments as they often preclude the sweetheart deals that they manage to strike over land for developments that have nothing to do with the school and are often built at the expense of playing facilities and green space for children.  I have known councils to change the location of proposed schools because the developer wanted it that way. In our scheme, for example, we had to take out the children's whiteboards at the developer's request and cover the cost of demolishing one of the schools because the developer refused to fund it at the previous price. The SFT model outlined by the cabinet secretary will have the virtue of putting those who use—and those who pay for—our new schools back in charge of where they are located and what facilities they have. Why did the local Labour Party exchange the trust model that the SNP had won for the present PFI scheme? The debate on the subject that took place in the council chambers when the decision was taken was fascinating. It is worth recalling that not one Labour councillor was prepared to advance a single argument for the merits of PPP; indeed, most of them said that they did not like or want it. The only argument for accepting it was the cliché that we have had to listen to for a number of years—it is the only game in town. That was the reality as those Labour councillors saw it. The picture that Andy Kerr painted, whereby there was a kind of schools supermarket in which, on arrival at the checkout, a council would be asked whether it would like to pay for its new schools through traditional borrowing, through the use of a trust or by putting them on a PPP gold credit card, is not an accurate representation. The argument that PPP is the only game in town—that there is no alternative—is one of intellectual poverty. It means that the merits of any given proposal are not considered. PPP is a Thatcherite policy with a Thatcherite slogan: "There is no alternative." Everyone knows that, under Labour, PPP was the only game in town when it came to our schools. That is why the Scottish Government is right to consider as many options as possible for getting the best value for taxpayers' pounds. I hope that the SFT will result in the process being far more open and transparent. At the meeting to decide on the preferred bidder in Clackmannanshire—from which the public and the press were excluded—I recall that we were handed one sheet of A4 paper, which was taken from us as we left. It is to the cabinet secretary's credit that he has listened not to the siren voices of the developers and consultants who have ridden on the gravy train of PPP, but to the parents, pupils and taxpayers of Scotland. That is why I will support the motion.

As the cabinet secretary will be aware, I represent a constituency that includes rural Kinross-shire, whose residents can be quite far from hospitals in time of  emergency. Concerns have been expressed to me—as recently as lunchtime today, by pupils of Kinross high school—about rumours and media reports of ambulances that are designed for two people running with just one paramedic on board, which, I assume, makes it hard, if not impossible, to deliver treatment on the move.

Will the cabinet secretary clarify what has been happening with regard to the issue? Will the action that she is proposing to take reassure my constituents?

I congratulate John Park on securing the debate and the motion that he lodged to get it, which I was happy to sign. He has taken exactly the right approach in raising matters of real concern, but I disagree in large part with Jim Tolson. The bridge project was advanced not only by the previous Administration but by many people in Clackmannanshire, different councils and other groups. However, it is worth bearing in mind the fact that we are dealing with a scheme that was advanced by the previous Administration. That is not to say that there are no potential problems, as John Park said. I will concentrate on the areas in my constituency that will be affected: the Gartarry roundabout, which has been mentioned, and places along the A977, such as Crook of Devon, Blairingone and Forest Mill, which will experience a substantial increase in traffic and, along with Kincardine, currently experience a huge effect when the Forth road bridge is closed to high-sided vehicles. It is important that the required refurbishment of the Kincardine bridge is carried out. I will wait to hear what the minister says, but I am not convinced of the feasibility of not having a full closure. The better solution might be traffic calming measures, as has been mentioned. I hope that they will be considered. It is right to raise those issues, but this is a great day for Clackmannanshire, the area surrounding it  and Kincardine, because today, the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine rail line was open for the first time in 40 years. I was pleased to attend that opening earlier with the minister. The bridge will have a huge impact on traffic. Looking further down the line, we could have four bridges, but there will inevitably be disruption in the meantime as one of them is constructed or substantially refurbished. Having spoken to the local councillor for Kincardine—or the chap who was the local councillor; his ward is now larger—again this morning, I appreciate that the town has seen the benefit of the bypass of late, but that it will face a surge of traffic when the bridge closes. Despite that, I am delighted that the new bridge is being built. I am hopeful that the minister will take the right decision and call it the Clackmannanshire bridge. We have been asking for that for some time, but we will have to wait and see how the decision goes. I am sure that it will go the right way if it is down to the efforts of people in Clackmannanshire, who have written in. We will see. I know that this does not address the precise point that John Park raised, but I hope that, in the longer term, the passenger service that now runs from Stirling to Alloa will go right the way through Kincardine and on to Rosyth and Dunfermline. I have not addressed that point to the minister as yet, but I am sure that he will hear about it. If we can create an integrated transport system that takes people and goods from west to east and vice versa right across the north side of the Forth, it will have a huge impact on Kincardine and all the other places that John Park and Jim Tolson mentioned. I am happy to have taken part in the debate. John Park has raised some issues of real concern, and I am hopeful that the minister will deal with them as well as they can be dealt with. I look forward to the opening of the bridge and the easing of the current traffic congestion, which, like John Park, I experience virtually every day on the Kincardine bridge as I come to the Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps are being taken to ensure that, in the next application round for European structural funds, there is a level playing field for smaller local authorities that have fewer administrative resources. (S3O-3280)

I thank the minister for his assistance in arranging at short notice a meeting with his officials on the results of the structural fund bidding process. Does the minister agree that funding such as European structural funds can be extremely useful for areas such as Clackmannanshire, which has, on a smaller scale, some of the worst deprivation statistics in Scotland, and that it is imperative that the Scottish Government ensures that smaller local authorities are not perpetually disadvantaged by virtue of having fewer resources to devote to submitting high-quality bids, often at short notice? Will the minister undertake to ensure that the issue continues to be addressed by officials?

I welcome the debate and congratulate John Scott on securing it. One question can make even the most seasoned politician squirm in their seat. It is the moment at the end of an interview when the journalist, with a glimmer in his or her eye, leans over and cheekily asks, "One last question: how much is a pint of milk?" Every member present is perfectly aware not only that the average price of milk is around 40p a pint in our local supermarkets, but that it has gone up by around 31 per cent. As we all know, a broad range of wider macroeconomic and social consequences is attached to that rise. I would prefer that we were back in the days when whether one knew the price of milk was a frivolous journalistic question rather than the serious question that it is now. Now, especially for people on lower incomes, the question is foremost in people's minds locally and around the world. As we have heard, put simply, the global market is failing and prices are soaring. For example, the average world price of rice has gone up by 217 per cent. That is one thing for those of us who enjoy curry dishes—as at least one or two of the members present do—but it is quite another for the more than 500 million people in India and China who, despite their countries' economic growth, according to the United Nations still live on the equivalent of $1 a day. We have gone over the causes already: the effect of high oil prices on fertility and transportation; droughts and poor harvests that may or may not be related to climate change; the growing middle classes in some parts of the world spending money on larger and richer diets, particularly in China, where there is a growing demand for meat products, which, of course, consumes other basic products; and the poor implementation of biofuel expansion, which draws on land that was previously used for farming. It is a sobering fact—to add to the other facts—that the amount of maize needed to fill one tank of petrol is the same as the average African eats in a year. There are lessons from history that many Governments so far have not learned. The famines of the 1980s and the debt crisis that began then—which, despite the fantastic efforts of the make poverty history movement, still plagues most of the developing world—all stem from a first  great wave of movement in agriculture away from growing food towards growing cash crops such as cotton or coffee. The idea was that those luxuries would raise more money, which would allow the farmers to buy food with room to spare. Of course, the price of coffee went down and the price of grain went up; and the poor stayed poor and hungry. I am glad that the Parliament is discussing the matter. It is as weighty and immediate as it is domestic and global. I am pleased to see that we have been remarkably consensual—in fact, almost unanimous—in the face of it. We must also look beyond the causes and determine what can be done. Anyone who has seen the television pictures of the situation in Haiti—where starvation is now a real prospect for many people who, although poor, until now largely were able to buy the food that they needed to sustain themselves—knows that we all have a responsibility to consider it. Even here in Scotland, we must think about the plight of a pensioner in Alloa who squints at the shelves to find something that she can afford. The situation exists in our local communities, so we must think of solutions, which is not easy. I agree with the Conservatives that we require Government action at all levels, including in Europe, which I am pleased to see mentioned in the Tory motion. Such action must include influencing a system that has been governed and failed by a free market. John Scott presented a compelling picture of what he eloquently described as the coming of a perfect storm, and he asked for ideas. Where necessary, we should allow Government intervention. We should increase aid to developing countries to allow them to improve their infrastructure and production. In my view, we should oppose the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization when they make unreasonable demands for poorer countries to cut their subsidies while saying that the richer ones may continue with their own. We should not allow the problems of growing first-generation biofuels to make us abandon all renewable and alternative fuels. In my view, climate change is likely to cause more shortages. If it does not, the ever-increasing price of oil definitely will, as we heard from Robin Harper. We must support local producers, as I recently did in my constituency, in conjunction with the Alloa & Hillfoots Advertiser , when we highlighted local suppliers to the local population. People are willing to support local retailers, but it helps to make them aware of where the local suppliers are. There are public concerns about the role of supermarkets, and I am delighted that the First Minister recently met representatives of  supermarkets operating in Scotland to discuss the various issues. There are some ideas about what we can do, and I am delighted to support the motion.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government considers it and local authorities received value for money in the running of the 2007 elections. (S3F-693)

Does the First Minister agree that the company DRS, which failed manifestly to provide the service that it was contracted to provide, should be obliged to rebate properly local authorities and the Scottish Government for its failure? Does he agree that, having failed to make timely, fair and effective arrangements for the people of Scotland to elect their councils and Government, the Scotland Office should agree to transfer responsibility for elections to this Parliament to the Scottish Government, preferably as a last act before dissolving itself entirely?

The motion welcomes an independent review by a figure of the highest reputation and legal standing to resolve a set of problems that I hope we all agree exists. I will concentrate solely on the holding of FAIs into the overseas deaths of military service personnel, which I raised with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice a few weeks after my election to the Parliament last May. A number of members have mentioned the difficulties that are encountered by the families of service personnel who were based in Scotland and were killed overseas, but it is worth repeating that we in the Parliament are united in our support of, and our profound sympathy for, soldiers and their families, regardless of the differences that we may have about decisions that their political leaders have taken in sending them into the path of danger. Jeremy Purvis recently arranged a meeting involving veterans and representatives of service organisations, which members from all parties attended. We hope that that meeting will result in the establishment of a cross-party group on veterans' affairs, which may consider the issue that we are debating. The feeling at the meeting seemed to be that that should happen. As we all know, the difficulties that the system poses for families of service personnel were brought into sharp focus by the deaths in  September 2006 of 14 Royal Air Force personnel from Kinloss, but the system has been a problem ever since the current legislation was introduced. We are discussing fatal accident inquiries because of the unfairness of a system that means that accidental deaths abroad of Scotland-domiciled service personnel trigger a whole set of legal proceedings that must take place in the south-east of England. Families that are already devastated by the loss of a loved one must travel hundreds of miles to a part of the world that is often unfamiliar to them if they want to attend an inquest. There is also the rather intimidating process of the inquest itself. Those families should be assured that their loss is being properly investigated and that answers are being found. How can they begin the difficult task of moving on from what has happened, with due sympathy for and consideration of their feelings, if they must travel down to Oxfordshire or Wiltshire to undergo such an ordeal? Delays have been mentioned. Sometimes it can take up to five years to hold an inquest. The old saying that justice delayed is justice denied is relevant. Many families see inquests as part of the justice process—the state is taking account of what has happened and investigating it—and, as the Solicitor General said, legal proceedings can result in some circumstances. Criticism has been made of the accessibility of justice. There is an old saw about law courts, like the Ritz, being open to all. An FAI is open to everybody, but a person from Scotland must travel down to the south-east of England and wait for four or five years for it to happen. I will say something about my own experience when I served with the marines. In 1982, a number of Special Air Service and Special Boat Service soldiers died when the helicopter in which they were travelling to South Georgia ditched in the sea. In my troop, the mortar group of 45 Commando, there were a number of accidental deaths—such deaths are now referred to as deaths by friendly fire. Many of the people who were involved were from other parts of the United Kingdom, but were firmly domiciled at the marine base in Arbroath. What is true for Scottish soldiers is also true for those who have been moved to bases in Scotland, whose entire family live on the base and who have, to all intents and purposes, made their home in Scotland. The same considerations must apply in such circumstances. I do not know why such inquiries have not been addressed until now. It seems fairly obvious to me that they should have been. I am not trying to belittle the legal problems that lie in the way—the issues seem to be much more of a minefield than I understood them to be before I became involved.  However, as far as I am aware, they have not been raised before now. I would hate to think that an element of nit-picking is creeping into the tone of some of the correspondence on the subject. For example, I understand that, since last year, Whitehall officials have changed their position on the mandatory element, which Pauline McNeill mentioned and which has now been clearly enunciated by the Secretary of State for Defence. I hope that better-informed people can shed light on why that is such an issue now. The public, service personnel and their families will understand perfectly well that we are talking about a complex area that involves two different legal systems in two different countries with different jurisdictions, but they will not understand why we cannot now make progress when both Governments appear to want the same end. I hope that, given the tenor of today's debate, there will be unanimity in the Parliament and that, as a result, the Scottish Government will be encouraged to act with haste to try to convince the Westminster Government to act, and that people in different parties in the Parliament will do their part by talking to their counterparts at Westminster to ensure that we can act as soon as possible. Someone who has lost their loved one overseas in a military context will be already distressed without having to wait up to five years to get answers to questions to which answers can often be difficult to find—perhaps of necessity, given that they must be found in a service context, in which secrecy is often important. Consideration should also be given to the fact that the families may be living cheek by jowl with other service families. Often, the circumstances of such deaths can give rise to all sorts of rumour, division and suspicion. That is exactly the kind of atmosphere that one does not want on a military base. I am hopeful that our unanimity today will lead to early progress on the issue. I look forward to hearing what other members have to say.

I seek clarification. Margaret Smith has mentioned Scottish soldiers a couple of times, and her amendment mentions both "personnel, normally domiciled in Scotland" and "Scottish military personnel". Does she mean that the inquests into the deaths of all personnel who were staying in Scotland while they were serving should be held in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in upgrading Alloa sheriff court. (S3O-2777)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his actions in identifying quickly resources to deal with the long-standing problem at Alloa sheriff court. The disorderly and sometimes dangerous situations that are reported to have occurred there  were said by some to have been in danger of bringing the justice system in Alloa into disrepute. I agree that the renovations that are being carried out will properly protect procurator fiscal staff, court staff, witnesses, prisoners and all those who attend court, but will the cabinet secretary ensure that the Scottish Court Service ensures that the interests of all those who are affected by the change will be taken into account and that user groups and other users will be consulted during the works?

Will the member confirm that the cuts in the City of Edinburgh Council's education budget, such as they are this year, are less than the cuts under the previous Administration? Many of the cuts are to managerial jobs, and teachers have been crying out for that for some time.

As a former councillor, I am delighted to take part in the debate on the local government finance order—which we awaited each year with some dread under the previous Administration. When I was a councillor and council leader, I always wanted to say three things, as did council leaders across the political spectrum. First, to the dismay of local government, the share of the cake was reduced over many years; that point has been made today. Along with other Convention of Scottish Local Authorities leaders, I made these points to the then finance minister back in 2002, and our concerns were dismissed as irrelevant.

No. I have just started. Secondly, I wanted to say that we should end or at least reduce ring fencing. It is evident that people throughout local government are happy that ring fencing has been hugely reduced this year. The third thing was that the Labour Government—and previously the Conservative Government—should stop using the council tax as their form of taxation. They taxed people without taking the odium for doing so by reducing the share of the cake that local government received  and forcing huge increases because of the gearing effect.

Certainly.

I do not recognise those figures, and the council leaders at the time—Labour or otherwise—do not recognise them either. The simple fact, which the member refuses to acknowledge, is that Labour reduced local government's share, year on year, in every year for which it was in office. We are here to debate whether to pass extra money to councils to enable them to freeze their council tax. I did not expect Labour or Liberal Democrat members to oppose the freezing of the council tax and they have not disappointed me. Instead, however, we have heard talk of cuts, cuts and more cuts. In politics, there are debating tricks, and everyone has the right to present their case in the best possible light, but there are times when that verges on—or even crosses into—being downright deceitful with the public. What we have heard is deceitful because the funding that councils have received from the Scottish Government is generous, and more than the previous Administration gave them last year. That is a simple statement of fact. For example, in the next three years, funding for Clackmannanshire Council and Stirling Council, in my constituency, will increase by 15.4 per cent and 14.4 per cent respectively. Both are Labour administrations—or at least they were until two weeks ago, when Labour was thrown out of office in Stirling and the SNP took control of the council. The Labour administration in Clackmannanshire has done its party duty and complained at every opportunity about what it calls the cost of the council tax freeze, but we should remember that it goes through bad Audit Scotland reports faster than Wendy Alexander goes through press officers. The administration has presided over financial mismanagement on such a scale that its cash reserves fell to just £6,000 a few months ago. Now, somehow, despite the council tax freeze, it projects the reserves going back up to £3 million. Strangely, though, despite all the extra money that it is getting from the Scottish Government, the  Labour administration in Clackmannanshire proposes spending cuts and efficiency savings that are twice what the SNP opposition proposed. So much for Wendy Alexander and her famous declaration on January 13: "I have no doubt that Labour councillors, indeed Labour councils, have spent their life looking after the homeless, women's aid, all of these poor, weak, vulnerable groups that we came into politics for." In Clackmannanshire, the Labour group is cutting school crossing patrols and classroom assistants. Those cuts could have been easily avoided if it had accepted the SNP's alternative. The simple fact is that the council is seeking to increase its reserves to £3 million at the same time as making cuts. It had alternatives to that. If a Labour council can do no wrong, how come a council—let us say, for example, Stirling Council—has managed to reduce its council tax? How can the council tax freeze possibly be hurting services to those poor, weak, vulnerable groups? Like a grumbling Labour back bencher, it does not follow. Either the forcibly retired Labour administration in Stirling was a bunch of chancers, or the £70 million that is attached to the council tax freeze means that there is no damage to those services, in which case the members of the Labour group in the Scottish Parliament are the ones who are being less than truthful about these things. When I consider those two possibilities, I wonder whether both the Labour administration in Stirling and the Labour Opposition in the Parliament are merely scaremongering, as they have been doing for a number of months now. The word on the ground is that Stirling Council's dear, departed Labour administration knew that the funding settlement was a gift given by a Scottish Government that could not really afford to be generous. According to a Scottish Executive survey three years ago, a third of the population has no meaningful understanding of what a percentage is. I clarify that that was a survey by the Scottish Executive and not a survey of the Scottish Executive. One does not have to be John Swinney to know that, when the Scottish Government's budget increases by 0.5 per cent but its funding to councils increases by 2 per cent, councils are getting an extremely good deal. For that reason, I am happy to support the motion and the council tax freeze.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps the Minister for Communities and Sport is taking to enhance excellence in sport by working collaboratively with the higher education sector. (S3O-2678)

When the minister takes future decisions on such collaborative working, will he take into account the excellent record and facilities of the University of Stirling and, in particular, its co-location with the body that was formerly named the Scottish Institute of Sport, its hugely successful involvement in preparing the swimming training for the most recent Commonwealth games, its contribution to the success of people such as Andrew Murray, Gordon Sherry and Richie Ramsay, and its pathfinder record in offering sports-related degree courses and scholarships over the past two decades?

I am not a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, or a former teacher or an education expert. However, I sat on an education authority for 11 years and, for that reason, I am delighted that we are having this subject debate and that the chamber is being used more as a deliberating chamber than a debating chamber. As a new member of the Parliament, I have found that we tend to have fairly genuine openness and thoughtfulness in subject debates such as this one; perhaps they also reflect what the general public have in mind when they think about what parliamentary debates should be. Regardless of the party to which we belong, we are all proud of our schools and our Scottish education in general, as well as being proud of the schools that we attended. I am particularly grateful to Tynecastle high school, which overlooks Tynecastle park, for turning me into a Hibernian supporter. The distinctive philosophy of our education system and long heritage of valuing learning as a nation is important to us all. Over the past 500 years, that commitment has been second  to none. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for giving us the opportunity to discuss this issue. This debate on the Scottish education system should, as far as possible, be open and based on free thought. Liz Smith's point that teaching needs to be decluttered has been echoed among all the different parties. That is at the heart of the Scottish Government's direction in education. The greater emphasis on supporting vocational training, which many of us have supported for some time, is long overdue. The curriculum for excellence recognises that its four key priorities must be included and embedded in all the strands of teaching, not float in independently as a set of targets that are disembodied from what is being done on the ground. The discussion on resources that we have just had is important. I came from local government, as did Hugh Henry, and I think that councils must have the discretion to take decisions themselves. There has been an increase of more than 16 per cent in Perth and Kinross Council's education budget, but there is a huge cut in North Ayrshire Council's education budget. We might condemn that. Perhaps Hugh Henry would have more credibility if he had condemned North Ayrshire Council and commended Perth and Kinross Council when he was going on about Renfrewshire Council. However, councils must have the discretion to take decisions themselves. That is what those councils have done. North Ayrshire Council must have a rationale—although I cannot think what it would be—for cutting its education budget more than anybody else has. The fact that it has the right to do so is a hallmark of the Scottish Government's approach to local government. I do not think that the call to reimpose ring fencing will be echoed by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities—it will certainly not be echoed by the people there whom I know.

I was trying to say that every council has every right to set its own education budget and that, perhaps, the defining difference between the Scottish Government and the previous Administration is that we recognise that local government has a distinctive part to play and has a right to do so. We might condemn or commend the decisions that councils make, but they have the right to make those decisions. Ken Macintosh commended West  Dunbartonshire Council. I always wonder why we never hear any mention of Clackmannanshire Council, which pioneered exactly the same scheme many years before West Dunbartonshire Council did. However, that was an SNP-controlled council, which might explain why it is never mentioned. During my time on Clackmannanshire Council, we introduced a new learning, leisure and education committee, which included pupils from each of the schools as well as parents, trade unionists and support staff. Again, that innovation did not last long under the Labour Party, which was unfortunate. In talking about cross-cutting in teaching, I am reminded of a conversation that I had with a professor of English, who told me that far more original thought happened in the university cafe than at the individual study desks in the library. Subjects have never lived in separate cubicles, even if it can be convenient to divide them up in that way. Teaching flourishes most when ideas from one area can be drawn into another. Any schoolteacher can tell stories of being happily surprised by pupils who do that spontaneously. Most of the lessons that we remember from our school days are the ones that were the result of an inspirational teacher—in those cases, it was not so much that we learned from the curriculum but that we drew inspiration and support from a teacher in particular. Very good teachers are invaluable in the system. I am glad that the Scottish Government acknowledges that Scotland's education must have a place for Scotland. This country has never been on the sidelines of the world except, perhaps, constitutionally, and it has led in fields from engineering and science to art and literature. However, especially in the teaching of history and culture, we are guilty of placing ourselves on the sidelines. During the recent debate on the teaching of Scottish history, I was astonished at the various ways in which the Opposition parties tried to justify not teaching Scottish history in our schools. No other country in the world would understand that debate.

I was there, and I was on the radio with Ken Macintosh later that night and heard him make the same arguments. I do not understand why people have this absolutely appalling cringe.

I am sorry, but I am in my last minute. A pupil in Ireland covers the world greats, such as Shakespeare—the teaching of whom no one would dispute, anywhere in the world—but, at the  appropriate level, they focus on Yeats, Joyce or George Bernard Shaw. However, in Scotland, there has been an attitude of seeing Scottish—if it is seen at all—as meaning Scots and of not recognising our wider contribution. Robert Louis Stevenson's "Kidnapped" and "The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde" are known by even many young children, but how many know of their Scottish origin? It could even be argued that Scotland gave the world Harry Potter, although, perhaps, one or two people might question the antecedents in that regard. In history, too, it is easy to teach children about the Vikings at Lindisfarne but not Iona, or to teach lines of kings and wars with France, when Scotland's role was distinct and separate. When the Scottish Government made its announcement that history teaching in Scotland was to take the groundbreaking step of including the history of Scotland, the more hysterical critics were quick to reach for the "Braveheart" example. However, I want my children to know not only just how inaccurate "Braveheart" is, but what actually happened. I want them to be taught that, in 1745, Scots fought on both sides at Culloden, along with the English or even the French. I want them to learn that Scots fought under Joan of Arc; that our links with Poland go back for five centuries, not five years; and that, in 1919, troops were deployed in the streets to stop Scotland following Russia into Communism. Above all, I want them to know that they live in a genuine country with 1,200 years of history that is as rich as any other and longer than most. Reversing that kind of trend, along with the other changes in the curriculum for excellence, will need an attitudinal shift. I, for one, have no doubt that our teachers have the ability and our children have the potential.

Given the member's concern about resources, will he condemn North Ayrshire Council, which is making the largest education cut in Scotland, at £118 million, or 3 per cent of the education budget? Will he also commend Perth and Kinross Council, which has the highest increase for education, at £140 million, or 16.8 per cent of its education budget?

I will be the first to congratulate the minister on her announcement of the entrenchment of the St Andrew's day holiday in Scotland, as the previous two speakers failed to do so. How does the minister plan to use Scotland week not just to enhance Scotland's international reputation but to further Scotland's economic and cultural interests?

The motion calls on the Parliament to agree that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's report and the Official Report of today's debate form the Parliament's response to the consultation by the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland on her draft equalities strategy. On 21 November, the commissioner lodged with the Parliament an equalities consultation document entitled "Diversity Delivers" that included a draft equalities strategy. The Equal Opportunities Committee and my committee then took evidence from the commissioner. The Standards, Procedures and Public Appointment Committee's report not only reflects our views on the draft strategy but takes into account those of the Equal Opportunities Committee. Broadly, we give the strategy a warm welcome. The boards of public bodies play a vital role in ensuring that those bodies meet the needs of the communities they serve by delivering services effectively and efficiently, and their work can impact on all aspects of Scottish life. Although the committee recognises and commends the work that is undertaken by board members, it also recognises that, at present, board membership does not fully represent the diversity of Scottish society. The draft strategy seeks to improve the diversity of applications for board membership by raising awareness of the value of public bodies and the role of board members, by ensuring that the public appointments process is encouraging, accessible and easy to use, and by supporting future board members through a range of development and education programmes. The committee agrees that increasing diversity in board membership can only benefit boards' decision making. The strategy highlights evidence that groups that are more diverse in their skills and knowledge have more potential than less diverse groups to consider a greater range of perspectives and to generate more high-quality solutions to problems.  At present, the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland and the Scottish Government are responsible for ensuring that appointments are made fairly and openly. The Scottish Government decides on the form of publicity and the skills that are required for each post and ministers ultimately appoint the successful candidate, while the commissioner regulates the process through her assessors. The committee believes that extending that co-operation to delivery of the equalities strategy is a sensible step. We heard evidence that equalities strategies can fail when there is no clear ownership of any recommendations, but the draft strategy proposes the establishment of an implementation group to ensure that each recommendation is delivered. We agree with that and with the proposal that the implementation group should allocate responsibility for each action that is proposed in the strategy. We welcome the proposal that the implementation group comprise a diverse range of stakeholders including the commissioner, the Scottish Government's diversity champion, a chair of a public body and the Scotland commissioner of the Equality and Human Rights Commission. We agreed that membership could, if appropriate, be extended to include a Scottish minister or Scottish Government representative in order to raise the profile and importance of the strategy, but we agreed with the Equal Opportunities Committee that, given its role in scrutinising the final agreed equalities strategy, it would not be appropriate for a member of that committee to sit on the implementation group. The Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee commends specific actions in the strategy such as the communications campaign and the hub website and recommend that those aspects be more proactively targeted at the groups that are underrepresented on boards. I reiterate the importance of boards and of ensuring that they reflect the diversity of Scottish society. Although we have recommended some changes, the committee believes that this draft strategy represents an important first step in encouraging applications for board membership from across civic Scotland. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 2nd Report, 2008 (Session 3): Draft Public Appointments Equalities Strategy - Diversity Delivers (SP Paper 65), together with the Official Report of the Parliament's debate on the report, should form the Parliament's response to the consultation by the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many local authorities it understands have so far agreed to a freeze or cut in council tax for the coming financial year. (S3O-2468)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that that was a Scottish National Party manifesto commitment and that, as such, another promise has been delivered? Does he agree that, given the dire predictions of doomsayers in the Opposition parties who said that it would never happen, councils deserve credit for the achievement? Does he agree that the aim has been achieved in the most difficult year in the council cycle—the first year—when council tax rates are always increased by the greatest amount? Finally, does he agree that such a major benefit to hard-pressed council tax payers would never have happened if Gordon Brown, Ming Campbell and Tavish Scott had been successful in their squalid machinations in trying to thwart the will of the Scottish people? Those people threw out the Lib-Lab coalition that had contributed hugely to the 60 per cent increase in council tax bills since 1997.

Students today leave university with an average debt of around £11,000. We should be clear about that at the outset. With the stroke of a pen—or at least the push of a button—we can reduce that figure by around 20 per cent, or perhaps even more. Partisan comments have already been made in the debate and there might be more before its end, perhaps including one or two from me. However, all members should be clear that we face a simple choice. Why is that choice important? As the cabinet secretary outlined, the fear of debt puts off potential students and it is precisely those young people who we should be attracting if our universities are to be fair and be seen to be fair. Before I move on, I point out to members that students from the University of Stirling, in my constituency, are in the public gallery today. I commend the students for their action to save their campus post office, which is set for closure by the Westminster Government. Facilities, as well as access, are important. Just a fortnight ago, the Sutton Trust educational charity published a report on the English model, which I understand Labour proposes as a model for Scotland. In theory, there is higher up-front support, with much higher levels of debt afterwards. When I say much higher levels, I am talking about debts of £20,000 or £30,000 as standard—Jeremy Purvis mentioned debts of £45,000. However, it is flawed logic to think that we can increase access to universities by increasing student debt. The Sutton Trust found that two thirds of those who had decided not to apply to university blamed the fear of debt and the crippling financial burden that it imposes. Crucially, the decision was linked with being from a low-income background. Most damning for Labour's world view was the Sutton Trust's finding that "Most students make their choices about studying in Higher Education before they hear about the bursary options." Nearly three quarters did not even know what the word "bursary" meant. Young people at the age of 17, who mostly have little or no experience of financial independence, are presented with five- digit debts as the cost of going to university. Sitting here, we think that those debts are too high but, to young people at the sharp end, they must look astronomical.

As Murdo Fraser said, that is a fair point. The question of university specialisation is also a pressing one. On bursaries, facts are chiels that winna ding—whether or not people should know what bursaries are, the fact is that three quarters of students do not know that, perhaps because they have not had to consider the issue previously. The Sutton Trust, which carried out the study on the English model, has widening access as its main objective. To say the least, its founder is no enemy of the Labour Party. The trust funds the sort of summer schools and access initiatives on which, I assume, Labour would like to spend the graduate endowment money. Despite that, the Sutton Trust evidence makes the Labour Party policy of prioritising the complex and badly perceived bursary system look like mince, to borrow The Sun's view of Labour's position on the budget.

Not just now. We must be clear that the overriding problem is that going to university is seen by too many people as expensive. All the evidence shows that that is the case. Perhaps for the Tories, putting off people from lower income backgrounds does not matter much, but other members would be advised to drop the craven and clucking imitation of the line of their masters at Westminster—who seem to be addicted to ever-higher tuition fees—and take a look at what is on the ground. They should ask the students and the school kids. The right wing alliance that has developed is interesting. The Tories really should think about the company that they keep these days. We are talking about a party that is in bed with foreign media moguls and that believes in identity cards and huge tax breaks for non-domiciled millionaires. A high-profile report last year by researchers from the London School of Economics and Political Science contained the shocking find that  social mobility in the United Kingdom had plummeted. One of the main reasons given for that was the university system. In an ideal system, family background would not matter one way or the other, because young people would go to university on the basis of their ability, not their family income. We cannot create such a system here and now, but we can reduce student debt by about 20 per cent. More important, we can reduce fees by 100 per cent. Some argue that the graduate endowment is not a tuition fee, but it certainly is a fee of some kind that people are charged when they graduate. If something looks like a tuition fee, hits like a tuition fee and not so much smells, but stinks like a tuition fee, it is a tuition fee. Abolishing the graduate endowment will, more than any other single act, send out a signal that ability to learn, not ability to pay will once again be the key to our universities. As I said, the University of Stirling is in my constituency. Students from there and from many other universities are in the public gallery watching proceedings. No doubt, they are taking notes, along with the teaching unions and the universities of Scotland. Even the one or two university principals who complained about being apparently cash starved are part of the consensus in favour of abolishing the graduate endowment. Today, the Parliament can join that consensus and, by passing the bill, can go from opinion to reality. I support the motion.

I first make it clear that I am giving my own views and not speaking as convener of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee or on behalf of the committee. I am interested in why the Labour Party has chosen this debate. What has changed in less than a year since the Lib Dems and Labour Party were in office and apparently subscribed to a code that they now find unfit? Perhaps it is because, in Labour's view, there has been such a mass outbreak of venality among ministers that there is a radical and pressing need for others to be held to a different standard from Labour and the Lib Dems. There is a term for someone who holds others to a standard that they do not want to be held to themselves. I cannot bring to mind the exact nature of it, but when Jackie Baillie mentioned the seven Nolan principles it struck me that one of the principles is integrity. There can be no integrity in someone holding others to a standard that they are not willing to be held to themselves.

No. There are also terms to describe saying one thing and doing another.

I said no. It is not long since we had a very good debate on the Crerar report, in which all parties agreed that we should desist from establishing new quangos or tsars every time there is a crisis of events leading to a public clamour for action. We have not even had a crisis of events or a public clamour for action. In fact, as you know, Presiding Officer, those were the words of Tavish Scott at the Conveners Group less than a week ago. The idea was that we should not always rush to create new bodies every time it suits our own interests.

That does not relate to the point that I was making, which was that Tavish Scott and other Lib Dems have said that there should not be a clamour to create new bodies or tsars. I have made it clear that I am not speaking in my capacity as convener of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. However, I am looking forward to a long and fruitful career in the media as the ex-convener willing to throw around allegations on a regular basis. It may be advancing years and a touch of deafness on my part, but I have heard no clamour from the public. I have had no representations at any of my surgeries, and the public galleries are virtually empty. Even John Knox has gone home because of what he has heard so far. In raising this issue, the Lib Dems and the Labour Party have shown strange priorities. The other element of hypocrisy is in comparing what we have here to Westminster or even Wales. We have heard that it is essential that we have independence and openness. There was no independence in the person appointed by Gordon Brown—he made that appointment and it was not scrutinised by Parliament. The independent person can take action only when they are asked to do so by the Prime Minister, and if they are asked to look at something, it goes further only if the Prime Minister agrees that it should. There is no independence in that procedure, so it is hypocritical to ask for the same system here. Only the Prime Minister decides whether something happens. It is interesting that Gordon Brown omitted from  the Westminster code any mention of or guidance on the question of blind trusts. There is hypocrisy on that as well. As Joe FitzPatrick has said, the Labour Party perhaps feels under particular pressure—arising from cash for honours and other controversies—to be seen to do something. That can be the only explanation for what it has done. Mike Rumbles was factually incorrect earlier. It is inconsistent with the facts to say that the code of conduct for MSPs does not apply to MSPs outwith the chamber. Of course it does and it always has done.

That is exactly what he said—he can check the Official Report . We heard an anti-media rant from George Foulkes. He seems to have no trouble in getting himself into a television studio. His problem is that, when he does so, the SNP cheers and his Labour back-bench colleagues groan. When George Foulkes has been on TV, he has made a virtue of saying that it is wrong for politicians to make spurious and ill-founded allegations against one another, because that demeans us all. That is exactly what he has done this morning, so I invite him to intervene and take the opportunity to apologise for what he said. It would do us all some good if he did that, but I see from his shaking his head that he does not want to. There is an element of hypocrisy in people who are willing to make allegations without foundation or fact going into TV studios and saying that it is wrong when other people do that. We have all seen that of late. The Conservative amendment has something to commend it. I disagree with the idea that the situation is different now because we have a minority Government in the Parliament. Even in my lifetime, we have had minority government in Westminster, so I do not see that as a defining reason for having a different code of conduct. Having said that, I am pleased that the Government is considering the matter and I am sure that it will come forward with proposals around which we can all unite.

We are not laughing with Mike Rumbles, we are laughing at him.

As the First Minister said, one of the results of yesterday's visit by the First Minister and Deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland was the announcement of the feasibility study on reinstating the Campbeltown to Ballycastle ferry. As a student of Scottish history, I am sure that the First Minister knows all too well that sea travel along that route led to the emergence of Dalriada, one of the precursor kingdoms of Scotland, more than 1,000 years ago. In those days our transport links with Ireland helped Scotland to be founded, and the links have continued right the way through. The First Minister has answered questions on the timetable and budget; will he say something else about the benefits of that link should it be re-established?

To ask the Scottish Government what further progress has been made in discussions with representative bodies on extending the opening hours of general practices. (S3O-2273)

I advise the cabinet secretary that, like many members, I have been in discussion with a number of GPs in my constituency—in Dollar, in Tillicoultry, in Alloa and, on Monday, in Clackmannan—who have all said that they are concerned about what they perceive to be the heavy-handed approach that is taken down south. They feel that the Scottish Government is being more constructive, however, and if new money is allocated to cover the additional expenses of extended opening hours they will be happy to accept the deal—at least, that is my impression. Can I have the cabinet secretary's assurance that the £9 million that has been announced in the media as earmarked for that is genuinely new money, rather than money that is being drawn down from existing national health service budgets?

To ask the First Minister what representations the Scottish Government has made to the United Kingdom Government to protect the legal position of Scottish bank-notes. (S3F-496)

Does the First Minister agree that it is extremely ironic that such an appalling measure has been proposed on the ground of  financial stability, given that the failures of the Labour Government and the Bank of England's regulatory regime mean that taxpayers in Scotland are being asked to assume financial responsibility for a share of the £24 billion debts of Northern Rock? Does he think that it is also ironic that the right of Scottish banks to issue notes is threatened by a Scottish Chancellor of the Exchequer and a Scottish Prime Minister? In defending the rights of Scottish banks to issue notes, will the First Minister also defend the rights of people to use Scottish bank-notes without hindrance in the rest of the UK?

I agree with what Patrick Harvie said about time for reflection. As I understand it, time for reflection serves in part to inspire us and to remind us that there is a higher purpose in what we do. Today, the two important guiding principles of morality and generosity were outlined. The proposed budget is generous, within the constraints of the mean-spirited grant from London. That is a sincerely held view; any checking of the evidence on grants that we have received from London during the past nine years bears out that the settlement was a vindictive slap to Scotland for voting for a real Government. The budget is also profoundly moral, because it helps the people who are most in need throughout Scotland. In particular, it helps people who suffer from criminal and antisocial behaviour in our communities. It is easy for those of us who live in areas that are not blighted by antisocial behaviour to forget about such issues, but the cabinet secretary's announcement on police funding will  reassure many communities. It will certainly reassure many communities in my constituency where lives are blighted by antisocial behaviour and criminal activity, including drug dealing. I remember siren voices in the Parliament saying that the council tax freeze that had been promised would never happen. When the BBC surveyed councils recently, I do not think that it found any council that was not going to freeze council tax. We must wait and see what happens. There is an element of morality and social justice to the council tax freeze. The Labour Party's independent review found that people in the lower and middle income deciles pay up to twice as much council tax as a proportion of their income as do people in the higher deciles. The word that we use for a tax that is more punitive for people who are paid less is "unfair". The council tax freeze seeks to address that. There are other important aspects of the budget, for example in relation to pension payments. When I was the vice-convener of a police board for several years, we could not get the Government of the day to listen to the problems that were building up as a result of structural changes to police and fire service pensions. The present Government is making provision for those but, incredibly, it is being pilloried by the party that did nothing when the problems were at their worst. It is important that we deal with those issues, not least because we rely on the fire and police services to deliver many services to people who are most in need. The measures on prescription charges, which Alex Neil mentioned, will have a beneficial effect, particularly on the more deprived communities. Also, a bigger slice of the cake will go to the education sector. Students—a group in society who were not looked after well in the previous Government's settlements—will benefit from that. Several aspects of the budget are generous and moral, in that they seek to improve people's lot. Clackmannanshire Council is Labour run, but it has announced recently that it will do as much as it can—which is quite a lot, it seems—to help deal with the problems of the central heating project. Several councils have made similar announcements. They realise why problems have built up and they will work in partnership with the Government to address them, in addition to the action that the Scottish Cabinet has taken. It is a sign of the times that we have partnership working, even between Labour councils and the new Government. It is important to reflect on the point that Suzanne Dance made about responsibility and self-acceptance during today's time for reflection. I commend that point to the Labour and Liberal Democrat parties, because it would do them good  to try to accept where they are in the current situation. It might improve their performance as Opposition parties. The coalition that those parties had previously is obviously continuing now that they are in opposition, but at least it is no longer at the expense of the people of Scotland. It was interesting that Tavish Scott mentioned the proper stewardship of public funds, which I thought was rich, given that the cost of the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway project in my constituency went from £13 million to £84 million under his watch. The Government, if it takes advice from anybody, should not take advice on the proper stewardship of public funds from somebody who presided over that level of increase in the cost of a public project.

As Tavish Scott should know, the bulk of the funding comes from the Scottish Executive—it holds all the power. It is true that Clackmannanshire Council promoted a private bill in the Parliament, but he who pays the piper calls the tune, and Tavish Scott failed to do that in the years when he was Minister for Transport. It is important to reinforce Joe FitzPatrick's point that there is real public interest in the budget, which has not been the case in the past. Before I came to the Parliament today, I met, by chance, the minister of Alva parish church when I was getting petrol in Alloa—we still have to travel by car from Alloa because the new railway line has been delayed, as Tavish Scott will know. The minister expressed no party preference—I would not suggest that—but, when he saw me, he immediately asked about the prospects for the budget being passed today and what time the matter would be decided, because he intended to follow the process. That is just one example, but I do not remember that level of public interest previously. That interest is partly because there is a chance to influence the budget, as members of other parties have mentioned. When there is a chance to influence the Government of the day and change its proposals, that provokes real public interest and a genuine debate, whereas in the past the budget has been a fait accompli and there has been little point in proposing amendments. There is real morality and generosity behind the budget. The people of Scotland will welcome it and I am happy to support it.

One of the Scottish National Party Government's first actions was to encourage all the organisations that deliver environmental advice, management and controls to work together in order to reduce duplication and  simplify the often complicated landscape of environmental controls. Will the First Minister give us further information and an update on the action that is being taken to provide a more integrated service to farmers and land managers?

Will the First Minister—and, indeed, all members—join me in offering the Parliament's condolences to the young family of John Noble, a firefighter from Alloa fire station in my constituency who was tragically killed while answering a call to a school in Dollar yesterday? We should also give our condolences to the other firefighters who were injured—including one who is critically ill in hospital—and to their families. Is the First Minister aware that Carlsberg-Tetley has announced the proposed closure of its operation in my constituency? It blames high inflation and market pressures. The closure will mean the loss of 58 jobs in a community that is already under some pressure.  I have been in touch with the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism about the involvement of the Government's partnership action for continuing employment—PACE—team; he assured me that that involvement will happen. Will the First Minister reassure families that are threatened by the closure that the Scottish Government stands fully behind them? It is a difficult time for those families, and a statement of support from the Scottish Government would provide them with welcome reassurance.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made in negotiations with the United Kingdom Government over elections to the Scottish Parliament, in light of the parliamentary debate on the Gould report. (S3O-1939)

I thank the minister for his offer of Benylin. I encourage the minister to continue the Government's efforts on behalf of the people of Scotland to deliver the Gould report's central and fundamental recommendation, which is to give back the control of our own elections to our own Parliament in Scotland. Will he also consider whether there should be a thorough review of the electronic counting system, which proved extremely expensive, unresponsive on the night and unwieldy and incapable of independent verification?

Many good speeches have been made in an important debate about a substantial report on a crucial subject: education. Education is a huge determinant of our future. It very much decides the economy and to a large extent the progress of the country itself, so it is a subject worthy of considered discussion. For those reasons, I welcome the OECD's review. I congratulate the OECD, an esteemed international organisation, on its methodology, which, in placing Scottish schooling in international rankings, recognises that although we may not have our independence as a country we at least have it for our education system. I am looking forward to what the new Scottish Government will do with that independence and I am glad to see that evidence from the OECD endorses the Government's educational priorities. The SNP has already recognised the importance of the earliest years, with our proposals for the expansion of pre-school provision by 50 per cent. Not only does pre-school provision improve attainment but, in the words of the OECD report, "Pre-school moderates the gap in achievement which tends to widen during primary school and which, unchecked, undermines compulsory secondary education in comprehensive schools." The report's title refers to "quality and equity". No one could object to those priorities and I hope that no one in the chamber would object to the focus on pupil-teacher ratios in the early years of primary school. An investment in our children at the earliest stages pays off over their whole time in school and, beyond that, over their whole lives. The Lib Dem amendment highlights the importance of the transition between primary school and secondary school. Having spent 11 years on an education authority, I know that that is a stubborn problem, which is at the root of how we can solve the problems in our secondary schools. As a former council leader, I find it rewarding to see that we are now starting properly to recognise the autonomy of local authorities. During my time at Clackmannanshire Council, as has been mentioned by Liz Smith, new ground was broken with the much talked about the synthetic phonics method of teaching reading. Not only did synthetic phonics have an immediate impact but it meant that primary 7 reading was consistently ahead—up  to three years ahead, by some measures—of where it was previously. It reduced the differences between socioeconomic groups and, interestingly—as this is not really touched on in the report—between genders. It has been interesting to hear some of the discussion about the purpose of education and the extent to which socioeconomic inequalities are still being reflected in the education system. Of course, one of the original purposes of education was to reduce and eliminate those socioeconomic inequalities. However, that is not happening sufficiently at present. I hope that the lessons of local authority experiments feed into the curriculum for excellence—not just the lessons of Clackmannanshire but those of West Dunbartonshire, which has taken on the methods as well. Rhona Brankin asked for a national strategy based on the West Dunbartonshire experience, but I would ask her why there was no national strategy based on the Clackmannanshire experience eight years ago. For years, the SNP has made commitments in its manifestos regarding more vocational opportunities. Admittedly, the Labour Party has done so too, but the difference is that we have not been in a position to implement those commitments before now, whereas Labour has. I was also disappointed to see from the report that, in the past eight years, socioeconomic status has become more of a factor in how well young people do in education. The number of young people who left school and ended up not in education, employment or training has gone up as well. The Labour Party often talks the right talk—as they say, a stopped clock is right twice a day—but now we can see just how short on action it has been. Earlier, some of us—including Peter Peacock, I think—listened to a Scottish Trades Union Congress delegate talk about dyslexia in the workplace. In that man's experience, there were two shocking things. The first was the bullying, harassment and hostility that he received when it was discovered that he had dyslexia—his employer was the Department for Work and Pensions. The second shocking thing was that it was not until he was 41 years old that it was discovered that he had dyslexia. There is a lot of evidence in the report about the confidence and professionalism of our teachers. There are also a lot of recommendations in the report—a few are imaginative and quite a few are controversial.

The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and the Minister for Schools and Skills are well seized of the opportunities to improve on the previous Executive's attainments in that area, so I am confident about the issue that Rhona Brankin raises. A few of the recommendations, such as replacing the standard grade or increasing the role of pupil feedback, are interesting. Of course, the 18 recommendations are only opinions, although they are expert ones. We should remember that. I do not think that they all deserve to be put into practice, but they all deserve to be examined and discussed in the chamber, in committees and by parents and professionals. There are also issues that are central to the wider role of education in society, which the OECD missed, as it focused on reading, writing and science. In that regard, I have in mind especially our national heritage. Ian Bell has an eloquent article on that subject in today's Herald. He argues that our literature and history have become "university specialisms, the preserve of dedicated museums and authors, or held in trust by autodidacts." I admit that I had to refer to a dictionary for the definition of that last word. Scotland's history and literature are not mainstream subjects in Scotland's schools, although they should be. I believe that that situation is improving under the current Government. I am sure that the situation will change further, just as it will for the provision of support for the early years of school and innovating and learning from experience—two things that are argued for strongly in the OECD report, which takes a position that is supported by the experience of local authorities. It is a new time for education. We are now in an era in which the performance of Scotland's teachers will finally be matched by the performance of Scotland's Government.

Last May, government in Scotland was hit by two great events. One, of course, was the long-overdue election of a forward-thinking and positive SNP Administration; the other was the badly organised voting and counting fiasco that reduced Scotland's democratic credentials to a punch line for satirists. What a welcome present from the Scotland Office. It did not give flowers or chocolates; it simply made Scotland look like a country that cannot even run an election properly.  However, we do not really run our own elections in Scotland. Running Scottish Parliament elections is only one of a multitude of things that the Westminster Government implicitly seems to think that Scotland cannot handle. I could ridicule that position as absurd, but the Scotland Office's performance last May has done that more effectively than I ever could. I am delighted that we now appear to have an emerging consensus in the Parliament that the situation must change. As someone who worked for some years in the administration of elections, I am personally aware of many colleagues in the Association of Electoral Administrators—I should perhaps declare an interest as a member of that association—who were very concerned in the months and weeks before the election about several key aspects. As public servants, individual elections officers and returning officers will usually spurn public comment such is their determination to maintain their well-won reputation for impartiality. However, I was well aware of the concerns that they were expressing to one another before the election. They believed that the last-minute changes for the May elections were ill thought out and the changes to the design of the ballot papers very wrong. The change to the ballot paper was well understood as a blatant attempt to corral list votes that some parties believed they had previously lost because voters treated the list vote as a second-choice vote rather than a second vote. To lay one myth to rest, I never heard one elections officer say that the title that the SNP used for the list vote was wrong or misleading or even at odds with the spirit of the election. I do not deny that we may have caused a wry smile and a certain amount of regard for how we used the legislation to its maximum potential, but none of the election professionals to whom I spoke had any doubt that we were completely within the rules. We should not equate that with the mistakes of the Scotland Office. Those mistakes cannot be cancelled out by attempting to portray our innovative use of party titles as anything other than legitimate.

Alex Salmond stood as a representative of the Scottish National Party, which had a candidate for First Minister who was Alex Salmond. Andy Kerr quoted the Gould report  as stating that the voters were treated as an afterthought; I assure members that, although I had no part in the decision, I know that when the decision was taken to use that title, the voter was at the very centre of the decision. It is widely known that many mistakes were made in other aspects of the elections. The changes to the postal voting were late in coming, very complex and hard to deal with. The electronic counting system was horrendous, expensive and cumbersome. For the Ochil constituency, it was proposed to hold the election count in Stirling. Much though I would have liked to share Bruce Crawford's triumph on the night in Stirling, it is completely wrong that local election counts for Clackmannanshire Council should take place outwith the council area. However, that was proposed because the accommodation could not take the electronic counting system. The contempt for the democratic process that was shown by the DRS Data Services staff who were involved on the night when things started to go wrong should never be repeated. We should never have got into that position, but most of those problems were widely known. They came as no surprise to many people who were involved in administering the elections when they came to fruition at the election time. That is why the Parliament is right to welcome the Gould report, especially its central provision that we should run our own elections. The Gould report also recommends that we should overhaul the system of returning officers in each constituency. As someone who has acted as a deputy returning officer, I have seen at first hand how much that is needed. Folk should be aware that the actual work for elections is carried out not by the returning officers but by the deputy returning officers and elections officers, who do not get the compensation that returning officers receive. We should end that fiction. We should also accept Gould's crucial recommendation that the Scottish Parliament and local elections should be decoupled. I remember arguing, as leader of Clackmannanshire Council, with Iain Smith and the Local Government Committee that the elections should be decoupled. At that time, no other party supported that position, but it has attracted the support of the Conservatives within the past year or so. I welcome that party's conversion to the cause as much as I welcome Labour's conversion to the idea of the transfer of powers. Decoupled elections are, quite simply, the fairest way to run things. The new relationship between central Government and local government that gives councils far more freedom to spend and work as they see fit means that, now more than ever, we cannot allow local elections to be overshadowed by a national campaign.  If powers over elections are transferred to the Scottish Parliament, at least any mistakes that we make will be our mistakes. The last thing that we need is for the Parliament to be blamed by the public for matters that are, once again, beyond its control. I have confidence in the abilities of the Parliament and, like the voters of Scotland, I definitely have confidence in the abilities of the Scottish Government to deliver that. I have faith that Scotland can run its own elections successfully, just like Quebec, Catalonia and jurisdictions as small as the Isle of Man. That is why the Gould report recommends that the Scottish Parliament would be the logical institution to take responsibility for the two sets of elections. It will surprise no one that I would like the Parliament to take on responsibility for elections to the European Parliament and other institutions, along with all the other powers of a normal independent country. I urge the Parliament to unite to pass the Government motion and to send a clear signal that Scotland is ready and grown up enough to bear this new responsibility.

As the minister is aware, the Parliament agrees many long and complicated motions. However, on December 19, it agreed a simple one, which expressed its belief "that the UK Government should hold a referendum on the EU reform treaty." Has the Scottish Government received any response from the UK Government on that decision by the Parliament, which was clearly in line with the wishes of the Scottish people?

Does the minister agree that, because of the existence of the two categories, and because of what happens in Italy, Germany and other countries, it is clear that there is not a free market? It is for independent states to decide  whether they want to favour their own particular cultural and sporting events.

I thank all members who have stayed to discuss the motion. We may not have a capacity crowd, but we should have a good match. I also thank members who are not here but who supported the motion. In particular, I thank Hugh O'Donnell—without his support, I would not have secured tonight's debate. I know that he takes issue with the part of the motion that calls for the transfer of broadcasting powers to Scotland, so I am grateful that he was able to support it. Before thanking the many people who have written to me since I first raised the issue, I should mention that Stuart McMillan raised the issue some time before I did. He previously lodged a petition with the Public Petitions Committee, which I am sure he will mention when he speaks. I have received letters of thanks from, for example, pensioners in Sutherland who could not afford Sky television and who live in a village where no pub can afford Sky, either. I have been thanked for raising the issue by a person from Dundee whose back problem prevented him from standing for two hours in a crowded pub to watch the recent Scotland v Italy match. I was also  contacted by someone from Glenrothes who, as a licence payer, simply objects to the fact that the BBC seems to be failing to fulfil its role of broadcasting in the public interest. Many other people have been in touch because they are concerned that they should be able to see their national team play their national sport, especially its most important matches. People are disappointed because they cannot do so. Many people feel that the BBC is failing on the issue. Although the BBC is often mentioned, other terrestrial broadcasters could have purchased the rights to the matches, thereby ensuring that one of the criteria for designating events that are to be shown on terrestrial TV—provision of 95 per cent coverage—was met. However, the BBC exists to bring entertainment and political, cultural and sporting events of national importance into the homes of ordinary people the length and breadth of the country. The crucial Scotland matches at the end of the recent European championship qualifiers were two such events. BBC Scotland is limited in what it can do. The core service of the BBC has a budget of about £90.3 million, out of a total United Kingdom-wide spend from the licence fee of more than £3.2 billion. It is hardly surprising that BBC Scotland was outbid by Sky and has been outbid for the remaining available world cup qualifiers by Setanta. To win the rights to televise the Scotland matches, the BBC would have had to break a very undersized bank. However, like many other members of the Scottish viewing public, I could not help but notice that the BBC managed to secure all England's matches on the same commercial basis. That is not anglophobia—I am happy to congratulate the BBC on having won the rights to televise those matches, but I wish that it had funded the BBC in Scotland adequately, so that it could have won the rights to televise Scotland's matches. I might also question the sensitivity of the decision to show England's matches throughout the UK when there was no broadcast of Scotland's games, although in the end I rather enjoyed the England v Croatia match. I believe that there needs to be devolution of broadcasting because BBC Scotland, or the Scottish broadcasting corporation—or whatever name the marketing consultants come up with—would be able to respond to the Scottish viewing audience far better if it were independent. It would still be able to broadcast shows and events from down south, just as the BBC and other channels can broadcast shows and events from around the world. In the meantime, there is another option available in respect of Scotland matches. Before the next round of rights—for the qualifiers for Euro 2012—is released, the Westminster Government  could add those matches to the list of protected sporting events that must be made available to broadcasters that can reach 95 per cent of the population. That describes both the BBC and STV but would exclude Sky, to which fewer than one in three households subscribes, and it would totally block Setanta. The current list covers events such as the Olympics, Wimbledon, the Derby and the Scottish cup final. To be fair, it also includes all European championship and world cup finals matches, although not qualifying matches. It is unfortunate for Scotland, but often the qualifying matches are our finals. Far be it from me to go against the mood of optimism that is sweeping the nation, but as a long-suffering Scotland fan, I cannot help but notice that the current protection has not done us much good for the past 11 years. When Scotland played Italy on 17 November, the match was watched by supporters in some homes and pubs in conditions in which it would probably be illegal to transport cattle, but in Italy the match could be watched in any home in the land. The Italian Government, unlike its Westminster counterpart, had added all of the national football team's fixtures to its protected list and had sensibly recognised the importance and popularity of the game throughout the country. Designating matches in such a way comes at a cost. Recently, and rightly, the Scottish Football Association has pointed to the fact that it receives much-needed income from the rights that it has sold and has tied that income to provision of youth facilities and training in Scotland. However, at present less than a fifth of the SFA's income comes from television and radio, and most of that comes from the Scottish cup. It cannot be right that we should seek to fund youth involvement in our national sport by excluding vast numbers of people from watching our national team playing that sport. If BBC Scotland were run from Scotland and properly funded, the SFA would not have to lose out. I have proposed the listing of European championship and world cup qualifying matches to James Purnell, the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport. His response was not altogether dismissive. He accepted that crucial matches, such as those towards the end of the qualifying rounds, would meet the criteria. He also stated that his predecessor had planned to review the list in 2008-09. Even if the list is changed to include only the final matches of qualifying rounds, that will be a step forward. The Scottish viewing public has a right to see all the international performances of their country at the nation's favourite sport. I hope that the members who follow me will agree with that fundamental principle. This is indisputably an issue that could—I think should—unite the nation.  It is about our national sport and about our national team playing in international events. I encourage other members, and anyone else who becomes aware of the issue, to write to the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport in the terms in which I have written to ensure that he takes the right decision.

Malcolm Chisholm says that Alex Salmond is worth quoting, and I certainly agree. However, Gordon Brown is also worth quoting sometimes, so let me quote him—or at least his manifesto. He said that the treaty is "a good treaty for Britain and for the new Europe. We will put it to the British people in a referendum and campaign whole-heartedly for a 'Yes' vote to keep Britain a leading nation in Europe." The point has been made about the obvious betrayal in going back on that promise, but we should pay attention to the phrase "leading nation in Europe". How can the UK be a leading nation  when the Prime Minister skulks into the room to sign the treaty after everyone else has left? That is political cowardice. It is said that a week is a long time in politics, but two and a half years is obviously even longer. It has been time enough for Labour to change its views. I had hoped that, coming from a party that is adept at accusing others of breaking promises ad nauseum, Malcolm Chisholm would at least have the decency to concede that the Labour Party had broken a promise on the treaty. The Labour Party has a special relationship with referendums. It held one for the Scottish Parliament because, we were told, Tony Blair was not a great fan of devolution and he wanted to lose—at least, so the rumours go. Yet Labour has proposed other referendums that it thought, or at least said, it would win. Members may remember that we were promised a referendum on the euro in Labour's 1997 manifesto, as well as a referendum on proportional representation at Westminster. It also proposed a referendum on the European treaty. Those are referendums that Labour has not held. It feels like the Labour Party is really committed only to referendums that it thinks it will lose—on which basis we look forward to support for a referendum on Scottish independence. The UK Government should hold a referendum on the EU reform treaty. If it does not, it will be not just the Labour Party but democracy itself that loses. The Lib Dems for once had a point when Vincent Cable noted that no one under the age of 50 has had a vote on the EU. Incidentally, we are still waiting for one on the Act of Union 1707. However, it is the same for every other constitutional matter: referendums happen when specific proposals are put forward. The Lisbon treaty is a specific proposal, or a large set of significant proposals, and it—not the wider question of the EU in general, which is the subject of consensus across the political spectrum, aside from one or two fringe parties—should be voted on. Such consensus is fairly rare. In the SNP, we have been campaigning for independence from London for 73 years, but we are happy to support the principles of the European Union, which is not a federation but a confederation.

Our position is evident from what I have said and what I am about to say, so if the member listens, he will understand.  The principles of confederation and subsidiarity—devolving decision making to the level that is closest to the people—are ignored when Governments go back on promises to consult people through a direct vote. Governments should remember that they govern in the name of and as set out by the people. When they change that substantially, their authority is diminished. Those principles are also violated when the European Union takes on too much or centralises unnecessarily. Opposition members will not be surprised or delighted that I cite control over marine policy as an example of that. The Lisbon treaty entrenches Brussels's dominance over Scotland's biological marine resources, just as the UK grants London dominance over one or two other important offshore resources that I could name. I would prefer not to have either of those impositions, but getting rid of one would not be a bad start. Fishing has been—deservedly—a red-line issue for the SNP for many years. It is a vital Scottish interest that is proportionally far more important to Scotland than it is to the UK as a whole. That is another sign of how the interests of Scotland and of the UK diverge. As I have said before, unexpected common viewpoints can be found on fishing. For example, a Labour MP said on 26 April 2004: "I think there is an argument for repatriation of control over fisheries and that the SNP has a valid point." Those are, of course, the words of George Foulkes. Perhaps he will join the rest of his party in changing his mind not only on European control over fisheries but on a referendum. The Labour Government in Westminster is abandoning its promise to give the people a chance to have their say. That is bad for democracy and a disaster for trust in politics. As for the point that Margo MacDonald made—unfortunately, she has left—we must constantly challenge ourselves and the EU to ensure that what the EU does benefits everybody and that there is interest in its policies. We should do that for ourselves and on behalf of the Scottish people. The EU has been partly responsible for the peace that we have had since 1945, for the open markets that we enjoy, for workers' rights—when Her Majesty's Government has not tried to undermine them—and for many other developments, including environmental benefits. However, we must be aware of the dangers of an overweening EU, which can happen. The minister has taken the right approach in guarding against that danger while embracing the benefits. I will point out one or two inconsistencies. The Tories did not want a referendum on the  Maastricht treaty, but they want a vote on the Lisbon treaty. The Lib Dems are inconsistent and illogical, because they want to put a question that nobody else is asking. If Iain Smith thinks that it is impossible to vote against a treaty and remain a member of the EU, perhaps he should tell that to Holland, France, Ireland or Denmark. Labour wanted a referendum on the Maastricht treaty, but it does not want one on the Lisbon treaty, even though it explicitly promised one. Helen Eadie mentioned an auld alliance. It is strange to hear that from a member of a party whose leader, Gordon Brown, has said that the SNP and the Tories are working together to undermine the union in the UK, at the same time as his party has joined with the Tories to save the UK. There is not much logic behind that position. I commend the minister's balanced approach. She is looking after Scotland's interests. I urge members to support the motion.

I realise that it might be unfashionable to do so, but I take significant pride in having been a local government employee for 19 years, a local councillor for 11 of those years and a council leader for four of those years. I know that for some people, including some journalists, such a job history is enough to provoke a splenetic outburst about the presence in the Parliament of third-rate councillors. However, since coming to the Parliament, my respect for the role of local councillors, who do a difficult job, and, in particular, for local government employees—whether they are teachers, police officers who are partly funded through local government, refuse collection workers, social workers or school catering staff—is, if anything, greater. It is worth remembering that such academic studies as have been done unfailingly show that the public have more trust and greater respect for local councillors—sometimes even planning conveners—than for every other tier of public representatives. In my view, the key to the settlement is respect. As a council leader back in 1999, I recall attending meetings with the minister who was responsible for local government, Wendy Alexander, and her deputy Frank McAveety. At those meetings we were assured that there was to be a new  partnership with local government that was based on the notion of parity of esteem. I am prepared to believe that Frank McAveety was sincere in that aim, given his local government experience, but I also believe that the actions of the Administrations that he supported for the next eight years were starkly at odds with the idea of parity of esteem. I also believe that there was an almost unanimous view among council leaders of all parties that that parity of esteem was regularly undermined by Executive ministers. They remorselessly increased the areas of central direction and used both their legal powers and the ring fencing of the funding that they provided to determine councils' activities and choices. They also presided over successive cuts to the share of national resources that went to local government. The settlement that was announced today reverses that trend.

Not just now. Labour councils that I know of are appalled by Labour MSPs' attempts to cling to the control that they once exercised. When I discussed the issue with Angus MacKay back in 2000 and 2001, he said that the share of national resources was irrelevant, but everybody I know in local government believes that it is a key factor and will celebrate the fact that it has increased. In respect of the share of the national pie—I apologise for mentioning pies in the same speech in which I have mentioned Frank McAveety—it is true that the increase is small, but it is important. That is not surprising, given the miserly settlement that we had from Westminster. I wonder what happened to parity of esteem between Westminster and Holyrood. However, where it has been able to go further, the Government has done so, particularly in relation to ring fencing. A huge proportion of funding—an increase from three quarters to 90 per cent—is to be freed from ring fencing and the central diktats of ministers. That is the biggest vote of confidence in local government since devolution.

On the point about best value, most people in local government would agree that best value gave rise to a regime of regulation and consultants' fees. It cost so much that it became discredited.  Many in the chamber will not remember or perhaps even have heard of the partnership agreement that was signed by the Scottish Government and council leaders in the early days of the Parliament. However, everyone in local government and many others will remember the concordat that was signed by John Swinney and council leaders a few weeks ago. It has been called historic, and in the context of the recent history of creeping centralism, which started in earnest in the latter part of the 1970s, it is certainly that. Among Labour members in particular, there is a need for greater realisation of the need for a diffuse democracy in which power is shared between different centres of democratic legitimacy. Some Labour MSPs have expressed legitimate concerns about future expenditure on services for victims of domestic violence and disabled children. Those members are perfectly entitled to have such concerns and to express them, but they have chosen to use them to attack the Scottish Government. That tactic ignores the outcome agreements—I stress the mutuality that is implicit in the word "agreements"—that were signed up to by the Government and council leaders. Their tactic will fail because those members either fail to understand or ignore the fact that such concerns should be focused on the democratically elected councils. They will now have much greater responsibilities—which they should have had long before now—for disbursing resources according to their interpretation of local needs. This is a new era for local government. Increased freedom of action, increased resources and a dramatic decrease in the central direction of local government will enhance local democracy. In achieving the settlement, the Scottish Government has learned the important lesson that relationships that are built on the control of one party by the other are generally destructive, whereas those that are built on choice, freedom of action and genuine parity of esteem tend to be much more productive. I commend the settlement to the Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Government what proposals it has to review and improve services to armed services veterans. (S3O-1497)

The minister will be aware of the  continuing and, indeed, increasing problem of homelessness among ex-service personnel. Recent evidence suggests that between 6 and 8 per cent of all those who are homeless are drawn from the ex-services community. He will also be aware from his work with the housing supply task force that a major problem for organisations, including charitable organisations, that seek to provide housing for ex-service personnel is land supply and the affordability of land. I heard about that first hand from representatives of Whitefoord house, which is directly across the road from the Parliament, this week. Given the Ministry of Defence's substantial landholdings in Scotland and the huge number of disposals that have already taken place, will the minister undertake to write to the Secretary of State for Defence to request that any future land disposals by that department should include provision for charitable organisations seeking to provide accommodation for ex-service personnel, whether that is by the direct transfer of such land at no cost or by legal obligations on successful bidders or developers to provide a proportion of the land sold for those purposes?

I am grateful to Cathy Jamieson for securing the debate and I join her in commending the work of the Coalfields Regeneration Trust, which is headquartered in Alloa, in my constituency. I also welcome the people from Clackmannanshire who are in the public gallery tonight, including Councillor Bob McGill, who is a representative of the local council on the trust. The background and history of Clackmannanshire and Stirling's eastern villages is similar to that of the areas that have been  mentioned already. The situation is familiar to anyone who represents such areas: the coal industry that once brought jobs has gone and we are left with its very poor legacy. For example, Clackmannanshire has higher levels of poor health and limiting long-term illnesses than Scotland as a whole, and Stirling's eastern villages are no better off. In fact, because they are part of an area that is generally seen as prosperous, they are sometimes overlooked. There is also the environmental legacy. The work of the Coalfields Regeneration Trust is helpful in that regard. Obviously, the regeneration of any area is a huge job and one in which many agencies have a role to play. For example, one of the biggest regeneration projects in the Clackmannanshire area is the reopening of the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway, for which Clackmannanshire Council led the campaign. Local authorities make an invaluable commitment by providing funding and support across their range of responsibilities, but programmes such as those that the Coalfields Regeneration Trust supports deliver resources to groups on the ground, which leads regeneration from the ground up. It adds value to projects that would not otherwise get support. Over the past two years alone, groups in my constituency have received more than £520,000 from the trust. It is interesting that that is more than double what groups in the area have received from the big lottery fund. The point is important in the context of Clackmannanshire and the eastern villages of Stirling: the trust is very accessible and helpful to groups that ask for assistance—perhaps more so than some of the larger national grant-giving bodies. I have met many people who are involved with the groups that the Coalfields Regeneration Trust supports. One such group is recyke-a-bike, a social enterprise project that is based in Fallin, which is shortly to be visited by John Swinney, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. The project combines employment with opportunities for training and apprenticeships, which also have environmental benefits. Its promotion and support of cycling has been taken up as an initiative by local primary schools and the University of Stirling. Over recent months, I have donated three bikes to recyke-a-bike, bought a second-hand recycled bike, and had my three children's bikes repaired. I encourage other members to do the same. Just down the road from recyke-a-bike is the Polmaise mining museum, which owes a great deal to the work of Archie Bone, a local figure who was very well known in the eastern villages of Stirling. Sadly, he passed away last week. The museum would never have been established  without Archie, who I think worked the number two pit at Polmaise. The trust also supported the community takeover of the Clackmannan town hall building, by way of money for redecoration, and it helped Alloa rugby club to provide disabled access. Very often, those projects would not get support from statutory or other bodies. The trust's support is even more valuable for that reason. All the schemes that have benefited from the trust's support are an essential part of the regeneration of Clackmannanshire and Stirling's eastern villages. I welcome the contribution that the Coalfields Regeneration Trust makes in my constituency and look forward to the continuation of its work.

Will the member give way?

I would love to claim credit for that, but I did not. If Gavin Brown is asking the minister to ensure that the SNP Government does not use St Andrew's day for a celebration or promotion of independence, will he give a similar commitment if he has his British day not to promote the union?

I commend the motion and the strategy to the Parliament, mostly because the strategy brings to Scotland something that it fundamentally needs—ambition. I believe  that it was ambition and a fresh vision for Scotland that got the Government elected in the first place. Members of the Opposition parties should remember that when they make speeches that comprise nothing but negativity and criticism. The strategy contains ambitions for growth and excellence. From Adam Smith onwards, we have produced economists who have been world leaders—and even a First Minister. The SNP Government had the novel idea of employing some of those economists in the Council of Economic Advisers. It should be our ambition to produce an economy that is a world leader too. It is fashionable to talk about whether people are following through on commitments and manifestos, so let us take a quick look at the partnership agreement that was signed by Labour and its little helpers the Lib Dems. As a new member, I am disappointed to see that every time a Lib Dem front bencher speaks, they look to the Labour benches with pleading eyes for approval. Perhaps it is time that they had some ideas of their own. The first sentence in section 1 of the partnership agreement is: "Growing the economy is our top priority." To be fair, Labour and the Lib Dems grew the economy a bit, but 1.8 per cent a year is less than the UK average, less than the average for industrialised countries and, as the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth said, much less than the growth rate of small independent countries nearby, whose record on economic growth puts Scotland's to shame. Growing the economy was Labour's top priority. The Westminster Government's priority seems to be to give a major boost to the black market by revealing the names and bank account details of 25 million people, but that will not bring it any extra tax revenues. On workers' rights, I say to Iain Gray that I worked for seven years on the Committee of the Regions, and half our time was spent trying to prevent the Blair Government from opting out of directives that sought to give extra protection to Scottish workers.

From recent correspondence that I have seen, I know that they supported it in committee and supported the spirit of the legislation. I do not know whether the member means the working time directive or the legislation on the minimum wage, but as far as I know the SNP has always supported that, which stands in  stark contrast to the conduct of the Labour Party in Europe. Blair tried to undermine workers' rights at every opportunity. The SNP wants our country to rise up the world rankings. To use a football example, we want Scotland to climb from where we were only two years ago, which was 62 nd in the world, sandwiched between Mali and Angola, to something like where we are now, which is 13 th and knocking at the door of countries far larger than us. The strategy is a means to achieve that.

There is no standard growth rate; different countries have different rates. I am sure that the member can do the research for himself. We recognise that small businesses need help to compete and grow, and I am delighted that the Scottish Government is delivering more for Scots small businesses than any other party has offered. I have met the Federation of Small Businesses twice in the last week, since the budget was published. It is true that it would like more to be done, but it is grateful for the support that is being offered by the Government through the small business bonus scheme, which goes far further than the Lib Dems, Labour or even the Tories have gone in the past. The economic strategy also recognises that transport infrastructure—public transport and crucial road networks—is vital. The Government is delivering more, and doing so more efficiently, than any of the other parties proposed. I remember when, in 1999 on Clackmannanshire Council, we identified the fundamental nature of transport infrastructure projects, such as the completion of the A907, the new Kincardine bridge and improved railways—all of which are now happening or have happened. Transport infrastructure is essential to future economic growth. We recognise that education is crucial. The Government is delivering more on class sizes for the youngest pupils and more on fees and debt for students than any other party ever demanded or suggested. It is worth noting that Clackmannanshire Council in my constituency has oversubscribed to so much debt for its secondary school estate that it has not a single penny left to improve its primary school estate. The council has subscribed to almost £750 million of debt for three secondary schools. That is one problem that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has had to deal with.  The other parties criticise the Government for not doing everything now, but the Government has already done more, in a more difficult situation, than those parties wanted to do in the first place. I accept that we could do more and, like many members, I would like us to do more. More important, I would like us to be able to do more. The strategy is far reaching and comprehensive, but it is constrained by the limits of devolution—the limits on tax, business and the macroeconomy. We are told by the other parties that those are big boys' toys and we do not have the ability or responsibility to handle them. Although the strategy has ambitions and targets for 2011, we in the SNP have ambitions for an independent Scotland to go far beyond that. The strategy is a core part of that positive vision. It is part of the process of bringing back Scotland's self-confidence and prosperity. I hope that the Parliament joins me in welcoming it.

I commend the cabinet secretary for his statement and, in the context of the limited powers of this Parliament, for having done so much with such a poor settlement from Westminster. He mentioned the third sector, including the voluntary and community organisations that play a vital role in delivering services and caring for many of Scotland's vulnerable communities. Can he confirm that he has announced that hugely increased resources, including £93 million for investment and development, will go to that sector, and that the many organisations that have been concerned about their future, given the scaremongering predictions of some members of the Parliament that organisations would lose funding, can be assured that the third sector has the whole-hearted and tangible support of the Scottish Government?

It is my belief that one of the key priorities for the Scottish Government—it is probably the key priority for the Government and the Parliament—is to represent effectively the interests of Scotland and its people in the EU. I realise that that is much easier to say than it is to do, but it would be much easier to do if  the Scottish Government sought to do that as an independent member of a confederal Europe. I am talking about a European Union that is based on the authority of sovereign nation states that voluntarily pool their sovereignty in key areas of common purpose. As things stand, I know that too often the Scottish Government has to provide a corrective to the distorting prism of the representations of UK ministers. Even so, it can do that only to the extent that the priorities of the people of Scotland are represented at all by those ministers in the EU. As we know, there was no red line on fisheries for Gordon Brown when he signed up to the new EU reform treaty. I acknowledge and support the Scottish Government making internal and external fisheries negotiations a top priority. In particular, I support the Government in seeking radical reform in the Scottish interest with a view to the competence over conservation of marine resources being returned to coastal states.

There is no change; we are seeking a change—that is the point of what we are saying. The Scottish Government may not be surprised that I support it on the issue, but it will be surprised to find support for the proposition among other members. During a previous debate on the issue in 2004, a then Westminster member of Parliament, who is now a member of this Parliament and who is still at Westminster, was quoted in The Herald newspaper on 26 April 2004 as saying: "I think there is an argument for repatriation of control over fisheries and that the SNP has a valid point". That was quoted in the Official Report of 29 April 2004. The MP was not Alex Salmond, but Lord Foulkes. It is a shame that Lord Foulkes has left the chamber, but perhaps one day he will extend his support for the principle of repatriation of powers to Scotland to the powers that are currently exercised by the Westminster Parliament, in which he sits, at least on a Tuesday. The fisheries issue exemplifies the difference between the representations that can be made by an independent nation state in its own interest and the misrepresentations of a nation's interests when pursued by another state on its behalf. Simply put, if we choose not to exercise power  over ourselves, we allow others to exercise power over us. The problem is that those others may not, and usually do not, exercise that power in our interest, but in theirs. Fishing is a vital Scottish interest but, as far as Westminster is concerned, it rates only as a bargaining chip that is to be used to promote other interests. That is why we should have as our first priority the independence that will allow us properly to represent the interests of the people of Scotland within the EU. On independence, I should highlight what may appear to a disinterested observer to be a puzzling development, whereby Wendy Alexander, the leader of a unionist party in Scotland, accuses the SNP of being in league with the Tories to undermine the union while, at the same time, she is sitting down with her fellow unionists in the Tories to devise a strategy to save the union—Tartan Tories and grubby deals. If that is not confusing enough, I remember that on 4 May, when I had the privilege of appearing with David Whitton on the "Scotland at Ten" programme on the night of the election, he sneeringly suggested that the SNP might look to do a deal with the Tories and laughed off my suggestion that it was much more likely that his party would work with the Tories. I have often wondered since then how he feels about his party's coalition with the Tories on his local council, East Dunbartonshire Council, as well as the rainbow alliance of Tories, Liberal Democrats and Labour in the Parliament. One of the Government's priorities is its vision for a fairer Scotland. That vision must include priorities, which are shared with the EU, for Scotland to be a welcoming place where respect for and celebration of the diversity of cultures and communities in the EU have resonance in a Scotland that welcomes people from throughout the EU who seek to visit, work and live here. In that context, I associate myself with the remarks of another Labour MP, Keith Vaz, who said in a debate this week that Gordon Brown's mantra of British jobs for British workers could be regarded as "employment apartheid", with its implication that foreigners are stealing our jobs. In my constituency, and throughout Scotland, a significant number of EU nationals, mainly from Eastern Europe, have contributed hugely to the local economy and to the enrichment of our culture. I agree that the Westminster Government's unemployment figures are hopelessly fiddled, to the extent that they describe those who claim benefit, rather than those who are not in gainful, meaningful employment, but even those figures are declining. With the claimant count decreasing, how can it be that jobs are being stolen by EU nationals? More crucially, how does Gordon Brown seek to fulfil his promise of British jobs for British workers? The immigration and other EU provisions that his Government has  willingly and rightly signed up to do not allow the exclusion of other EU nationals from employment opportunities in this country. Could it be that that will be Labour's latest broken promise? By contrast, I hope and believe that the Scottish Government will promote the real priorities of the people of Scotland—on EU reform, which has to happen; on competence over fisheries, which must happen for the sake of our fish stocks and fishing industry; and on the raft of justice and home affairs measures, which must acknowledge and accommodate Scotland's distinct legal system. That is the way forward to a fairer Scotland and a fairer EU.

Tavish Scott demanded, after the election, that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee should consider changes to the budget scrutiny process. Can Robert Brown advise us what has changed since then? Is it simply the case that the Lib Dem-Labour opposition coalition has seen the chance of a transient headline, and in taking that chance, has shown contempt for the Parliament's committee system?

And Liberals.

I remind the member that we are debating alternative dispute resolution. It would be useful to hear his thoughts on that.

As the cabinet secretary said in welcoming the report from Professor Crerar, the report is an excellent and informed starting point. That is how I understand the report—as a starting point. Professor Crerar has done some of the heavy lifting, so to speak, in his collation and analysis of the extent and scale of scrutiny and complaints handling in the public sector. However, I want gently to disturb the consensus that is building by saying that I do not think that the report goes far enough in what it proposes. I hope that, in considering Professor Crerar's recommendations, Parliament and ministers will think radically. Although it may not be possible, eventually, to act as radically as we might, we should start by thinking radically about the possible solutions. We should also be prepared not to give in to special pleading from various bodies and organisations. If anybody wants a countervailing view to the points that are made in the report, they should read the submission from Keir Bloomer, the former chief executive of Clackmannanshire Council. I say that with some bias because for years he and I railed against the increasing weight of public scrutiny on local government. He makes some compelling points. In respect of auditing, councils are different from other bodies because they have their own democratic mandate. I think that, increasingly, that is not being recognised by, for example, Audit Scotland, which is progressively going beyond public performance reporting and is involving itself in policy matters and democratic scrutiny matters, which are not within the remit that it was first given. As well as being audited by Audit Scotland, every council must pay for external auditors, who are very expensive, and have its own internal audit section. I will give members an idea of the costs of all that. The smallest council in mainland Scotland, Clackmannanshire Council, in 2002-03 spent £171,000 on auditing by Audit Scotland. By 2005-06, that figure had increased by 35 per cent to £231,000. Audit Scotland is always good at telling councils to be more efficient, but it increases its fee annually, which local authorities have no choice but to pay. On top of that, there are fees for external and internal auditors.  On the sheer weight of scrutiny, Keir Bloomer says: "The regime is widely perceived as punitive and has instilled a fear of taking calculated risks, thus reinforcing the innate conservativism of the public sector." That is true and apparent to most people who work in local authorities. As I said, Audit Scotland has gone beyond public performance reporting. An important point is that scrutiny of public bodies should lie with Parliament, so there is a question about the extent to which public performance reporting bodies are encroaching on Parliament's role. That is something for Parliament to think about. Perhaps it would be best if it was not a lawyer that considered that issue. I hate to suggest it, but it may be best if a political scientist or someone like that were to examine the balance between democratic and public performance scrutiny. I am trying not to use the word "cluttered" about complaints handling, but it is extremely cluttered in the public sector. As Professor Crerar makes clear, it is confusing to the people whom the systems are meant to serve and, as Christine Grahame pointed out, people often feel at the end of the process that it has not served them well. That is partly because when each of the bodies were set up, what they could look at was tightly constrained: for example, the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman—I share the concerns of Tavish Scott and others about it—can only consider maladministration, but the public does not realise that and thinks that the body has a far wider remit, which is why people can become frustrated. The Scottish Public Services Ombudsman started off fairly well with the good intention of drawing in more areas, such as health, but it has lost its way. I have worked with the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman's office for the past 10 years and it is not operating as people envisaged it would. As I said, the public sector is under a huge burden. I have a final quotation from Keir Bloomer. "Public service organisations are overwhelmed by the numerous and disparate exercises they are subject to. There is little evidence of co-ordination or joined-up working between the distinct scrutiny bodies demonstrated by discrete exercises occurring simultaneously or concurrently, including the recent audit of Housing—" in Clackmannanshire Council— "which coincided with the Best Value & Community Planning audit and a visit by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education (HMIE) with the Community Learning audit. A number of these separate exercises also replicate the work of others. For example, reviews of Psychological Services, Child Protection, Children's Services".  Clackmannanshire Council serves about 48,000 people. We are a country of 5 million people—I do not think that a country of our size should have the weight of scrutiny and audit on its public sector that we have. That is why this is the time to be radical. We could make real savings, although that should not be the first priority, which must be rationalisation that is understood and proportionate—another word that comes up time and again in the Crerar report. Although some members have argued against it, we should have a single agency in mind when the issue is being considered and we should only consider as exceptions agencies that can prove that there is a good reason why they should be part of the single agency. The savings in backroom staffing and other costs could be huge, and the agency could be much more understandable to the public that it is meant to serve.

The motion invites the Parliament to note the recent Procedures Committee report, which recommends that the remits of the Procedures Committee and of the Standards and Public Appointments Committee be brought under one new committee. The changes to standing orders that we recommend are set out in annex A of the report. In June, the Presiding Officer wrote to the Procedures Committee advising that the Parliamentary Bureau had recommended that the committee consider bringing together the Procedures Committee and the Standards and Public Appointments Committee. That possibility was also raised at the end of session 2 by the previous convener of the Standards and Public Appointments Committee, who suggested that the formation of one committee for standards and procedures might be appropriate, to assist members in making the most efficient use of their time. In reaching its conclusion, the Procedures Committee considered a number of factors relating to the merging of the committees. First, we noted that, in addition to the references to the Standards and Public Appointments Committee in legislation, there are references to that committee and its clerks in other parliamentary documents such as the "Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament" and determinations by the Parliament on the register of interests. We questioned whether the establishment of a new, merged committee might affect the validity of references in other documents to either committee as previously constituted. We are content that such references would, where appropriate, be read as if they referred to the new committee. Secondly, we noted that the Parliamentary Bureau had already sought clarification of any potential conflict of interest that would result from bringing together the committees' remits. As both committees report to Parliament on, and require Parliament's approval for, any recommendations that they make, we see no conflict of interests for  a member who happens to be a member of both committees. Accordingly, we do not see that as an issue for the new committee. In previous sessions, the Standards and Public Appointments Committee considered a fair amount of legislation. As a result of the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006, the committee carried out a review of the code of conduct, to ensure that it reflected the new requirements for members to register their interests. However, it is unlikely that the same amount of legislation will be forthcoming in this session, so demands on the committee's time will be reduced. The Procedures Committee and the Standards and Public Appointments Committee understood that a new committee could not predict its workload—for example, the number of complaints that might be made under the code of conduct or any urgent procedural issues that needed to be considered—and that meetings to consider such issues would be required when necessary. We concluded that there was no reason why one committee could not manage effectively the areas that are covered by both of the current committees' remits, subject to our ensuring that the new committee examines procedures and standards issues separately at all times. I am pleased to recommend the establishment of the new committee to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament notes the Procedures Committee's 1st Report, 2007 (Session 3), Merging the Procedures Committee and the Standards and Public Appointments Committee (SP Paper 7), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 28 September 2007.

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government intends to take in relation to the United Kingdom's chancellor's reported intention to increase the Scottish block grant by 1 per cent above inflation in this spending round. (S3F-167)

Does the First Minister agree that there is real irony in the situation, given that although oil prices are currently touching around $80 a barrel, Scotland faces the prospect of the worst financial settlement from the United Kingdom Treasury since devolution?

The cabinet secretary said that flooding can decimate lives, and there is no question but that he is right about that. Flooding is a Scotland-wide, UK-wide—as we saw this summer—and global problem, which is made worse by climate change. I will use one or two examples from my constituency to demonstrate that fact. The idea that all was great under the previous Executive and that, under the new Government, all is complacency as Mike Rumbles put it, is—to use Mr Rumbles's own word—preposterous. Complacency would be a party omitting all mention of flooding from its manifesto—as the Labour Party did.

Not just now—the member should wait until I get started.

I want to highlight the situation in Milnathort, which has been mentioned—I must point out that it is in Kinross-shire, not Stirlingshire. The example of Milnathort shows that, as Roseanna Cunningham pointed out, hard engineered flood defences are not always of comfort to local communities. Half a million pounds was spent on new flood defences at Milnathort, yet, within a few months of their completion, major flooding—with all the accompanying trauma that other members have described—took place there. Some people have still not returned to their homes, they have lost all their belongings and they have to live some distance away, with no real prospect of returning to their homes. More important, they have no confidence about going back to their houses—Sarah Boyack referred to that. There is real fear. I live 13 miles away from Milnathort, but every time that there are two successive days of rain I start to wonder what is happening there. That is becoming more acute with the onset of winter. Bridge of Allan, in my constituency, is an example of a place in which one house can be affected by flooding, but the cause of the flooding can be traced back to previous flood defence systems that were put in place. It is hard to get funding to deal with that problem. Another case is the Wallace high school, which is currently under construction in Bridge of Allan and is said by local people to be Scotland's first underwater school. It has been built on a flood plain, and it is behind schedule and well over budget because of the cost of pumping out the water during its construction. In the middle of my constituency, we had—as Mike Rumbles mentioned—the River Devon natural flood management scheme, which was funded not by the previous Executive but by HSBC working in partnership with Clackmannanshire Council and WWF Scotland. As the cabinet secretary has said, it is not a simple case of new soft, natural flood defences being far better than the old engineered system. We must have the right solution for the right place. It is important that we review the Flood Prevention (Scotland) Act 1961—I am very pleased that that is included in the Government's programme. It is essential that we streamline the processes and the funding regime, as the cabinet secretary outlined. Regarding Sarah Boyack's point about councils and funding, it is also essential that we do not impose new burdens that we do not then fund. I worked on a council for a long time, so I know that local government is fed up of that happening in the past, and it should not happen in the future. However, that is not the same point as the red herring about a council tax freeze, which is a completely different issue. I agree that if we oblige  councils to do more on flood management, we should fund the costs. I welcome the urgency with which the Government has sought to address the matter, by including it in the legislative programme and through the recent flood management summit, which I could not attend because of constituency obligations. I am grateful to Roseanna Cunningham and her Rural Affairs and Environment Committee for accepting an inquiry on flooding as one of its first items of business and I hope to give evidence to that inquiry. The urgency that her committee and the Government have shown on the issue stands in stark contrast to the complacency that existed under the previous Executive, of which Mike Rumbles's amendment, which I will oppose, is redolent.

I congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing the debate. I am happy to support the motion and do not disagree with anything that I have heard from members so far. It is gratifying that so many members from different parties have come together to work in a common interest. I hope that that will add weight to the representations that we make today. I commend my constituents and their fellow protesters—those who are here today and others—for their commitment during the process, which has been extraordinary in some cases. One or two of my constituents have, given the absence of a written record, sat through hours of the inquiry in order to provide reports to others on what was happening. The motion states that 17,000 people have objected to the development; we understand  that the figure is now 27,000. Many have objected because they believe that in certain areas the line will be an eyesore. I share the concerns that Murdo Fraser and others have expressed about the process. An increasing number of cases have come to me that place in question the role of the inquiry reporters. This week there was an interesting article in The Courier about the issue, which would bear further scrutiny. My constituency is not the only scenic stretch of the route—far from it—but Ochil is scenic and historic. The Wallace monument, which is no less than a symbol of Scotland's nationhood, looks out on to a landscape that will, if the proposal succeeds, be bisected by concrete and steel. Those of us who are familiar with Scottish history will recognise the significance of the battle of Sheriffmuir, where the struggle between the Jacobites and Government troops came far closer to ending the newborn Act of Union than the more celebrated uprising 30 years later. I worry that, 300 years on, we may as a country take a decision that would run huge electricity pylons right through the middle of that battlefield. Historical and aesthetic reasons are important, not just because of the past but because Stirlingshire currently depends a great deal on the Wallace monument as a tourism resource. The atmosphere and the aesthetic bring more than 100,000 visitors a year to the Wallace monument. Scottish Natural Heritage called the Ochil hills, which the Wallace monument looks out on, "a landscape experience that is unique in Scotland" and "one of the most visually sensitive areas in Scotland". My predecessor as MSP for Ochil, George Reid, said that he was stunned by the proposals and that no other country in the world would think of despoiling an area of such national importance. I have worked in Stirling for the past 15 years and, for most of that time, I have driven to Stirling on the A907 through Tullibody. On that road, drivers can see the vista opening up before them, with the Wallace monument sometimes shrouded in cloud. That fantastic view will be despoiled, if the proposal succeeds, with huge pylons right in front of that view. The pylons are massive—up to 65m high, which is 220ft, in old money. It is worth thinking about the fact that no building in Edinburgh is as tall as that, not even Appleton tower or Martello Court. We do not have time to go into the health issues, but I hope that they will be taken into account by the inquiry, if it should relax its procedures. In that regard, I refer members to the recent Westminster report that talks about  recommended areas either side of pylons that might generate emissions. The eastern villages of Stirling are often forgotten about in this context but have regularly been seen as a dumping ground for pylons and various other public utilities, to the detriment of their people. I hope that their interests will also be taken into account. History has shown us that when decisions on what is beautiful and what is ugly are made by the state, the result is as often as not cultural vandalism or concrete monstrosities. I do not think that any of us want that to happen in relation to the areas that we are discussing. Some 27,000 people are now offering their opinions. I hope that the inquiry is flexible enough to take note of them.

I start by offering my apologies: I will have to leave the debate early as some constituents will be making representations on the debate immediately after decision time. I congratulate the minister on the proactive and pragmatic approach that she and the Government are taking to ensure that Scotland's interests are properly represented and promoted during negotiations on the treaty. As a former member of the European Committee of the Regions, and as Scotland's sole representative on the COR as an alternate member to the last constitutional IGC, I am well aware of the extent to which the period immediately prior to a decision of the European Council is often the most productive for effecting changes and influencing the final treaty. The minister is absolutely right not to jeopardise Scotland's interests by prematurely anticipating the contents of the draft treaty.

No, but I will try to address the point that Robert Brown made. We do not have a motion today simply because we do not know what the treaty will say. What kind of motion would we have? It is entirely right to leave the options open in the meantime.  I also want to address a point that Malcolm Chisholm made. While I was reading today's papers, I remembered that, in the seven years during which I worked in Brussels, the only people in the whole of the European Union who strolled the corridors of power trying to convince everyone else that Scotland would be some kind of pariah standing apart from the European Union were the fevered Labour members. Nobody else I spoke to, from any group or from any country, held that view. It is interesting to consider what would happen if Commissioner Borg's statements were carried to their logical conclusion. For example, if Belgium broke up—as is currently being talked about by all the mainstream parties—his office would be outside the European Union in Brussels. It is a strange logic, but some people find it attractive. It is sad but true that the Scottish Parliament has no direct role yet in negotiating or ratifying the treaty, but Scotland has vital interests in key issues such as fisheries policy, the Scottish justice and legal system, energy policy and representation in the European Parliament that cannot be properly promoted without the clear voice of Scotland's Government being heard. To maximise that voice, I hope that, wherever possible—I realise that doing so will sometimes not be possible—parties will take a team Scotland approach that seeks to galvanise the views of our MEPs of whichever party, members of the Scottish Parliament's European and External Relations Committee of whichever party, and Scotland's representatives on the European Committee of the Regions from whichever nominating institution and of whichever party, and that all parties will seek to give mutual support and reinforce areas of agreement that are in Scotland's interests. That was the key role that the European members information and liaison exchange—EMILE—network, which was set up by the former First Minister, Mr McConnell, some years ago, should have had. It never carried out that role, but most people in the parties outwith the then Scottish Executive believed that that would have been its most productive role. I say to those who are sceptical that we can find areas of agreement on which we can work together, that all the parties that are represented in the chamber—I think—opposed reducing the number of MEPs from Scotland from seven to six, and that there is broad agreement in areas that relate to Scotland's distinct legal system. I make that point because, in my experience in Europe, countries such as the Republic of Ireland have for many years achieved fantastic deals from Brussels as a result of all the parties adopting a united approach. All the parties in that country work together as team Ireland and achieve a great deal by doing so. Obviously, they have  fundamental differences but, by and large, they work together when it comes to important national interests. It is right that the EU treaty should streamline the EU and that it should start to return power to national Parliaments—indeed, I hope that one day it will return power to the Scottish Parliament. That such changes should be considered in a union of 27 members is right. It is inevitable that compromises will be made—that is simply part of the game—but we should take a team Scotland approach in the areas in which we can agree, so that, like countries such as Ireland, we work together and achieve real progress in Scotland's interest.

As the cabinet secretary mentioned, the Labour Party claimed—and, incredibly, still claims—that there were never hidden waiting lists, yet we know that more than 35,000 patients were on availability status codes and had effectively lost their waiting time guarantee. The injustice was compounded by the fact that many of those people were kept in the dark and were not informed that they had lost their waiting time guarantee. Will the cabinet secretary further clarify the extent to which patients will be kept informed about what is happening to them as they go through the process?

In his opening speech Iain Gray said that he was grateful that the document acknowledged the good things that the previous Administration had done, but the calls that have been made during the debate for a step change and for an urgent look at current provision suggest that there was some kind of failure in the past. More specifically, the fact is that 30 per cent of people in Glasgow are not economically active. Does the member accept that the endless and synthetic carping would be taken more seriously if members of the previous Executive acknowledged some of their failures?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to support and promote the work of the Scottish Society for Autism. (S3O-398)

Will the minister ensure that public bodies—in particular, local authorities—are made fully aware of the excellence of New Struan school at the headquarters of the Scottish Society for Autism in Alloa in my constituency, and of the cutting-edge nature of that facility and the learning experience that is offered to children there? Will she accept my standing invitation to come and visit the society and New Struan school at any time?

Can the cabinet secretary confirm that growth will be essential to the Scottish Government's ambitions for creating a wealthier Scotland? Can he give us further information on how he intends to ensure that the spending review will help Scotland's businesses to grow, particularly small business? Can he indicate the extent to which that will have a beneficial impact on town centres, such as Alloa town centre, which were so disparaged by the former First Minister during the election campaign? Further, can the minister say something about the  current plethora of performance reporting? Does he intend to do something about that to relieve the burden on local authorities from inspectorates, audits and performance reporting?

I want to reinforce a point that was made earlier. Icons are extremely important to someone who has travelled to New York with the Wallace sword and looked after it for 10 days and 10 sleepless nights. The minister mentioned Canada and California. Is there a  possible link with Alexander Graham Bell, who is another Scottish icon? I think that there are two Alexander Graham Bell visitor centres in Canada and one in the United States. Is Alexander Graham Bell a possible theme to consider for next year's tartan week?

On ignoring evidence, does Malcolm Chisholm remember that, when he was a member of the first Scottish Executive, it approved the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line at a cost of £13 million? It has been announced today that the project will cost between £80 million and £85 million. The previous transport ministers—Tavish Scott and Sarah Boyack—would not take interventions from me earlier in the debate, so will Malcolm Chisholm apologise on behalf of the previous Executive to the constituents who moved into my area but will be unable to use the link until next July?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it is having with the United Kingdom Government on proposals to permit investigations into the deaths of Scottish servicemen killed abroad to take place in Scotland. (S3O-349)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his response and for the co-operative action he is taking with the Westminster Government on this matter. Does he agree that it is possible and necessary for the Scottish Government to take that co-operative work further in the interests of service personnel who are from or based in Scotland, and their families, including those who served in the Falklands war, many of whom are still suffering and are able to access ever fewer and less appropriate facilities for their welfare?

Does that principle extend to the super-rich venture capitalists who were featured on "Newsnight" last night, who pay an absolute minimum of tax under a Labour regime in London?

My experience of local taxation, rather like that of Charlie Gordon, has been formed by my working in local government for nearly 20 years, by my being a councillor for 11 years and, before that, by my studies of local government finance. Whether I was a student of local government finance, a local government employee or a councillor—and, like Charlie Gordon, a council leader who had to propose council tax increases—it was always clear to me that a property-based tax such as the council tax is inefficient and unfair. Council tax is now defended by new Labour—although perhaps not much by Charlie Gordon. Labour clings to the council tax with a tenacity that  it did not have even in relation to clause IV, which surprises me. If any member thinks that the reform that was proposed by the Labour Party during the election campaign was logical or coherent, they should use a spare night to watch the YouTube recording of Jack McConnell being interviewed by Bernard Ponsonby and try to find a rational and logical coherence to what Jack McConnell said. The Tories, too, defend the council tax, but in speaking to a motion that is against local income tax they have acknowledged the failures and limits of the entirely discredited council tax. The fact that during the election campaign they described their proposed reforms to the council tax as radical shows how poor the tax is. The fundamental limitation of council tax as opposed to local income tax is that it is not a buoyant tax. Do the two parties that still support the council tax also support a revaluation? They must do so, because that is the corollary of their position. Labour and the Tories should be up front and admit that we cannot have the council tax without a revaluation, which is long overdue, for political reasons. Charlie Gordon knows as well as I do that local taxes have been used for far too long by the Conservatives and Labour to push through tax increases that the parties did not want to push through the income tax system. Local government and local government tax payers have paid for national policies that have been implemented by local government without being properly funded. The real problem is that after the poll tax, which was a disgrace, there was no proper scrutiny of the council tax. People were so eager to get rid of the poll tax that they embraced the council tax too quickly. The defining feature of a local income tax system is that it is fairer. People pay according to their ability to pay, as Bill Wilson said. The old nostrum, "from each according to their ability to pay" is useful in this context. A local income tax would also be cheaper to collect. It costs £65 million to collect the council tax, but it would cost around £25 million to collect a local income tax, according to the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy.

The CIPFA figures do not go into that detail, but the system that we propose would be even cheaper to administer. About half of pensioners fail to take up council tax benefit, which exacerbates the unfairness of the current system. Local income tax collection  rates are about 96 per cent on average, compared with around 93 per cent for the council tax. Local government leaders are fed up to the back teeth with the prevarication in the Parliament, which reached its highest level of absurdity when the former First Minister rubbished a study that he had commissioned before it was even published. Local government finance is creaking at the seams, and people who are on limited incomes are struggling to pay their council tax, sometimes having to choose between paying the council tax and paying a heating bill. Many pensioners have an old-fashioned attitude and would far rather pay the bill that they have been sent than incur new expenditure, even when such expenditure might save their lives. It is regrettable that at a time when change to local government taxation is desperately needed, the Tory motion does not advocate change. The Tories criticise the Government for not coming forward with proposals but have failed to include proposals of their own in the motion. I support the amendment in Tavish Scott's name.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Ross Finnie for taking the intervention, with some encouragement. On the point about the funding being adequate, will the member explain why the previous Executive allowed Labour authorities—such as Clackmannanshire Council—to charge illegally for the preparation of meals over a number of years before dealing with the matter? Surely local authorities would not have had to charge had the funding been right in the first place. The previous Executive did nothing.

The Irish do not have Trident.

I am delighted to make my first speech in a debate that I hope will result in the abolition of tolls on the Forth and Tay road bridges. Their abolition will be warmly welcomed in my Ochil constituency. I want to begin by thanking my immediate predecessor as member of the Scottish Parliament for Ochil, George Reid. Many tributes have been paid to George in recent weeks, which may have included the anecdote that he has often told against himself. He recalls that when he was walking down Alloa's High Street recently, he was stopped by two laddies, who said, "Hey, pal. You're that George Reid guy, aren't you? We get you at school." Flattered by the recognition, George said with a smirk, "Oh, really? In modern studies?" The obvious reply to his question was, "Naw—in history." I hope that it is not too bold a claim to make on George's behalf that his place in Scottish political history, as a member of the United Kingdom Parliament or an MSP over 33 years for much of the area that I represent, and in getting to grips with the saga of the Parliament building's costs, is assured. On behalf of my constituents and many people in Parliament, I thank him and give my best wishes for the future to him and Daphne. I also acknowledge the work of my predecessor's predecessor. Perhaps unusually, the Ochil constituency has had different MSPs in  each of the three sessions. It is also unusual that the first, Dr Richard Simpson, re-entered Parliament as a list MSP at the most recent election. I acknowledge his efforts on behalf of my constituents between 1999 and 2003. One of the most compelling reasons why the tolls on the Forth road bridge should be abolished is that, when they were proposed, it was specifically said that they would be put in place to pay off the capital costs of constructing the bridge. That was a long time ago; indeed, my father was working on the construction of the roads that lead to the bridge when I was born. I understand that the capital costs of the bridge were paid off in 1994. Then, as the Scottish National Party's transport spokesperson, I called for the tolls to be abolished, because the purpose for which they had been introduced had been served. Instead, it was decided to keep them on. I presume that that decision was taken because the tolls were a nice revenue stream for the Government of the day. In the process, another promise to the electorate was shelved. The Forth road bridge tolls became a stealth tax long before Gordon Brown had heard that phrase. One reason why people are fed up with the political process is that politicians' promises are often not kept. Last week, Des McNulty mentioned the contract between electors and the elected. In this case, the contract—the promise by the then Government to have a temporary toll—was betrayed by those who were elected. To give an idea of how far we seem to have strayed from the notion of a democratic contract, we have only to consider the new idea that a party that gained the largest number of votes in an election can be accused of acting arbitrarily simply because it wishes to implement its specific manifesto commitments. I am no admirer of tolls. Indeed, I was convicted for refusing to pay the Skye bridge toll back in the mid-1990s. The Skye bridge toll campaign was another successful campaign to get rid of unjust tolls. It would be nice if the Lord Advocate considered quashing my conviction and those of others who opposed that disgraceful toll, but I suppose that she could just as easily come after me for the £50 fine that I have not paid in 12 years. The tolls on the Skye bridge were wrong, and they have been abolished. The continuation of tolls on the Forth road bridge—I am concentrating on that bridge rather than on the Tay bridge, because it is much more important to people in my constituency—is also wrong. Those tolls should be abolished. Tricia Marwick has received e-mails from people who object to abolition of the tolls. Such people ask where the money will come from to pay for the maintenance of the Forth and Tay  road bridges. That money should come from general taxation, which is where the Government that introduced the tolls said it would come from once the tolls ended. When it is asked why people in the north of Scotland and the Borders should pay for the upkeep of a bridge that they never use, we should say that they should do so for the same reason why those who use the Forth and Tay bridges pay for the upkeep of roads in the north of Scotland and the Borders. We all benefit from a comprehensive national road system whether or not we personally use every road in the country. I will also welcome abolition because it should finally lay to rest the fear of people in my constituency that the new upper Forth crossing—there is a new crossing coming quite soon that I hope we will come to love as "the Clackmannanshire bridge"—will be tolled. Of course, any gratitude among my constituents for not tolling the new bridge will be tempered by the appalling news that the First Minister gave us earlier that it is now estimated that the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway will cost £83 million and, I presume, will not be completed until next year. That figure and the delay that has been caused by poor management of the contract should have those in the previous Executive who were responsible hanging their heads in shame. The abolition of the Forth and Tay road bridge tolls will be good news for my constituents and Scotland. It will provide a level playing field, remedy a long-standing injustice and will, I hope, represent a small step in the rebuilding of public faith in Government by respecting the idea of the democratic contract as a vital, but too often neglected, tenet of Scottish democracy. My party said that it would abolish the tolls and it is now doing so. It said that it would seek consensus around the proposal and it has done so, as can be seen from the cross-party support for the proposal. I will be delighted to support the motion to abolish the tolls.

This is the first time I have spoken in the chamber, and I have perhaps not yet picked up the nuances of the language that is used here. Des McNulty says that the Labour Party is clear about what it stands for, yet he has again criticised the policy to remove the bridge tolls. I do not know where the Labour Party stands in relation to the tolls. I read in today's Evening News that the Labour group on the City of Edinburgh Council is against the removal of the tolls, yet we heard today from Wendy Alexander that Labour is now in favour of the removal of the tolls. Perhaps Des McNulty can clarify the matter.