We should be grateful for that contribution from Graeme Pearson, in which he shared his experience from his former role in the then Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency. I am pleased to contribute to the debate to help to raise awareness of the dangers of new psychoactive substances, which appear to be increasingly available not just in Scotland but throughout the world. According to a report in The Guardian last September, the UK has become an international hub for websites selling those substances, with our postal workers operating as unwitting drug mules and delivering to thousands of customers who can buy the stuff easily online. I tried a Google search last night and the first website that appeared in my hit list was a site offering to sell and deliver to me. I got no further than that, thankfully, because my system blocks the site from being accessed, but that is not the case for every online user. The Guardian report showed that approximately 670,000 young folk in the UK aged between 15 and 24 claimed to have taken those substances and the numbers will continue to rise unless something is done about the issue. As several members have said, here in Scotland, 47 deaths were recorded in 2012 in which one or more psychoactive substances were implicated in the cause of death. As the minister said in her opening speech, there is a huge danger to our young people. The term “legal highs” somehow implies that those substances are safe, tested and regulated, but—as Alex Johnstone mentioned—nothing could be further from the truth. They are anything but safe. Only the manufacturers know what is in the packets, and those substances are certainly not regulated or safely controlled in any way. Someone who takes such substances is taking a risk with their life and we must help to alert our young people to the dangers that they face when they are tempted into buying and taking what are potentially killer substances. Of course, although we probably all agree that action is needed, it is not entirely clear what the most effective action would be. The science works far quicker than the law, and invariably we are playing catch-up. The manufacturers vary the substances slightly to evade whatever legal restrictions can be put in place, and by the time we may get a ban in place, another variant will be on the market. The only legal weapons that we have are the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 and the more recent temporary class drug order from 2011, which are both reserved to the UK, as is the regulation of internet services. I know that the Scottish Government is fully behind all the collaborative efforts to tackle the issue. However, unless jurisdictions around the world can outsmart the producers and peddlers of these substances, I am sure that we will continue to lag behind, which will ultimately put more of our young people at risk. Methods of tackling the issue vary from country to country. I understand that Ireland has now banned the so-called head shops, which sell the potentially legal substances in question in the high street, and that it has made it a criminal offence to advertise, sell or supply them if they are not specifically controlled under existing legislation. That might be one way of dealing with the science and regaining some control over the rate of production of the drugs. In America, the substances are automatically banned if they are “substantially similar” to the chemical structure of substances that are already illegal, meaning that close chemical variants are also illegal. Portugal maintains a list of the substances that pose a public health risk and prohibits their advertising and distribution, which is punishable by fines and closure of premises. The minister will be aware of the WEDINOS—Welsh emerging drugs and identification of novel substances—project and website that provides a mechanism for people in Wales to bring in substances that they may have purchased and have them fully tested and analysed. Anyone can check on the website and see what the products contain. The site also offers harm-reduction advice that can be shared in an attempt to give people at least some information that might help them. There is a variety of attempts at tackling the issue around the world. I understand that the Home Office is reviewing what can be done here and intends to make some announcements in the spring, which I am sure the Scottish Government will be keen to contribute to. The minister outlined some of the work going on in Scotland to complement other efforts. Last year, the minister organised an event with partners from the police, health service, community and youth organisations to see what could be done here to tackle the problem of new psychoactive substances. It is probably no surprise that those colleagues identified the need to tackle the supply of such substances. I am aware that we are looking at measures involving the police and trading standards officers seizing and testing substances on sale. Whether we can proceed as in Ireland and ban the shops that sell the stuff will depend on the Home Office review findings, but I am certain that the Scottish Government will contribute to the process and support whatever measures are proposed. Colleagues also asked for more help to try to reduce demand and to offer training for our alcohol and drug partnerships. I am glad to see that that is under way. Two key areas that we need to do some hard thinking about are how to cut off the online route that offers sellers an easy and legitimate outlet to their market and how best to tackle the classification issue, perhaps as in Ireland, so that only named and controlled substances may legally be supplied. I believe that if we can get a firm grip on those two areas, we can make real progress in not only cutting off the supply of the substances to our young people, but overcoming the problem of keeping pace with the speed at which science can be applied in order to thwart the law. I am happy to support the Government’s motion and I look forward to the rest of the debate.

6. To ask the Scottish Government how it is working with service providers and local authorities to improve mobile phone coverage across the country. (S4O-02872)

The cabinet secretary is aware that mobile phone coverage in many communities in Scotland is still poor, despite the coverage obligations that have been placed on the mobile network operators. With 4G services beginning to roll out, can the cabinet secretary give me any assurance that those communities that cannot get 3G services will be covered by 4G services? If that does not happen, those communities face continued exclusion from access to digital services.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what support it is providing to East Ayrshire Council to enhance learning and teaching. (S4O-02828)

I thank the minister for that answer and his recent visit to Kilmarnock’s Grange academy campus, where he saw at first hand the great work that is being done on science, Scottish studies and languages, particularly Gaelic and Mandarin. Does the minister agree that the planned development of a single, three to 18-year-old campus for James Hamilton academy and Kilmarnock academy, which will incorporate primary schools and early learning provision, represents a substantial commitment by the Scottish Government to the quality of educational provision in the north of Kilmarnock?

Most of us who speak in this debate probably know or know of someone in their community—perhaps even in their family—who has committed suicide. The loss of a loved one is devastating enough for any family to cope with, but to discover that the loss came about as a result of suicide must pile on more anguish to those who remain. Families who suffer that sometimes blame themselves and wonder whether they could have been more vigilant. Could they have spotted any warning signs and done anything to prevent it? With the natural grief over the loss of a family member comes the additional stress of asking whether a loved one’s suicide was preventable. Cases that I have been aware of over the years often had something in common, which was the total surprise of the family: there seemed to be no indication or warning signs of what was to happen. Therefore, any strategy to reduce the number of suicides in Scotland must offer some guidance to help families spot the potential dangers, and I recognise that the new strategy does that in several ways. Although we often rely on our dedicated professionals in the health and mental health services to assist us with this problem, families can play a vital role in noticing a family member’s changing patterns of behaviour. I will talk about that in more detail later. If we look at some of the statistics, as the minister did in his opening speech, we see that there were 762 probable suicides in Scotland in 2012—about two every day, which is quite a sobering thought. In the 2012 statistical report covering suicide information, three quarters of suicides were males and about half were aged between 25 and 54. People who lived in the most deprived communities in Scotland were three times more likely to commit suicide than those in the most affluent parts of our country. Interestingly, two thirds of those who committed suicide were in employment and over half had had mental health prescriptions dispensed to them in the 12 months prior to their death. In comparison with the rest of the United Kingdom countries, Scotland’s male suicide rates are significantly higher—73 per cent higher—and female rates are almost double. Both have remained above the western European mean since the early 1990s. Despite the gloomy figures, there is encouragement as the trends are markedly downwards; as the minister said, the overall figure has fallen by about 18 per cent in the past 10 years. Indeed, the figures are at their lowest level since those days in the early 1990s. Much of the good work started in 2002 with the choose life programme, which was recognised as a leader in the field. The steady decline in suicide rates from that time is a testament to the success of the public awareness approach that was adopted. The introduction in 2008 of suicide prevention awareness training for NHS front-line staff has built on that success. The strategy that we are talking about is a natural progression of the approaches that have been working over time. We do not need to look too far to identify some of the probable causes of suicide, with mental illness, alcohol and drug abuse, poverty, family break-ups and financial problems all playing some part. As the minister said in December 2013, we have made progress, but we need to keep reaching out to those who are at risk and focus our attention on where the evidence takes us. Suicide is preventable and we can reduce the number of tragedies that families face each year. I was interested to listen to this morning’s Radio Scotland programme on depression as part of its mental health season, in which several callers expressed the need for people to be able to talk to someone at any point in a day when depression strikes. What are the possible warning signs? I have mentioned families who said that they did not notice any changing patterns of behaviour with their loved ones. I am aware of a local case in which a person simply left home one day, with no apparent signs of what was to come, and did not return. Neil Findlay mentioned some of the causes of suicide. Perhaps some of the symptoms were those that were kindly posted on one of the NHS choices websites, which provides very useful help to families. They included feelings of hopelessness; episodes of sudden rage and anger; reckless acts with no apparent concern for the consequences; feeling trapped; starting to abuse or more frequently use drugs or alcohol; noticeable weight changes due to changes in appetite; people becoming increasingly withdrawn from friends, family and society; an inability to sleep, or sleeping all the time; and—this one might occur to families—someone suddenly beginning to put their affairs in order by sorting out possessions or making a will. It is sad, but families might recognise those symptoms only after the event because in our busy day-to-day lives we may not think anything of such potential warnings. That is not to say that those are all causes to set the alarm bells ringing, but the advice from the NHS is to engage a person and encourage them to talk about how they are feeling and to share any concerns with a GP or a person’s care team, particularly if they are being treated for a mental health condition. I expect that other members will develop the key elements in the strategy, but the particular emphasis on more direct engagement with families and carers, more work to tackle stigma and discrimination and deploying technology to provide people with more helpful information will, I hope, improve matters even further in the coming years. The Scottish Government’s strategy for preventing suicide develops and builds on the very successful choose life programme that has seen a significant drop in the awful statistics. The public have been closely involved in developing the strategy further and I am sure that more gains will be made. Helping families and health workers to spot potential warning signs and providing the support mechanisms for those who are at risk will go some way towards reducing further the number of suicides, which, as the minister said, are entirely preventable.

5. To ask the Scottish Government how it encourages the emergency services to use social media as a means of communicating with the public. (S4O-02741)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the huge potential to keep the public informed and up to date with news and events, particularly on major incidents, often much more quickly than the traditional media can achieve. The recent events at the Clutha bar showed how Police Scotland, for example, can get information out to people relatively quickly and accurately. During the floods in Australia in 2010, the Queensland Police Service Facebook page jumped from 17,000 to 100,000 hits in just 24 hours, which shows the power that social media can achieve. Will he do everything that he can to promote further the use of social media in our public bodies in Scotland as a means of communicating directly and accurately with the people?

15. To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it provides to people with myasthenia gravis. (S4O-02701)

The minister will be aware that myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune neuromuscular disease that leads to fluctuating muscle weakness and fatigue, and yet awareness of it among general practitioners appears to be limited, as does the availability of specialist training in the nursing profession. Will the minister consider what could be done to assist in that regard, and whether more specialist training can be offered to nurses, not only to develop their own skills but to provide much-needed support for sufferers?

6. To ask the Scottish Government whether it has estimated an independent Scotland’s share of the United Kingdom national debt. (S4O-02682)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that, when Labour left office in 2010, the debt in the UK was £750 billion. It is now predicted to be £1.6 trillion by 2016. Can she assure me that, in the negotiations that will follow a yes vote next year, she will drive a hard bargain with the UK in recognition of the fact that Scotland’s contribution to the UK’s finances is greater than our population level suggests?

I join colleagues in thanking Dick Lyle for bringing the motion on President Kennedy to the debating chamber and for providing the Scottish Parliament with an opportunity to remember one of the most influential and charismatic political leaders the world has ever known. Those of us who were around at the time remember where we were at the moment of the assassination. Even though I was five, I still recall the moment vividly; when the newsflash came on the TV, I was in the house with my mother, sitting at the fireplace. I knew something awful had happened but I was not sure exactly what it was. I recall being incredibly saddened by my mother’s reaction to the news and knew that what had happened was important. Fifty years on almost to the day, I am privileged to be able to stand here in our Parliament and give something back to honour the memory of a man who changed the world. The cold war between the west and the Soviet Union was probably at its coldest during Mr Kennedy’s presidency, and the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1961 would probably have finished the careers of lesser Presidents than JFK. Yet he prevailed, won the support of the American public and successfully faced down Khrushchev during the Cuban nuclear missile crisis of 1962, succeeding in persuading the Soviets to dismantle their nuclear capability there in return for a reciprocal agreement from the Americans in Italy and Turkey and a promise not to invade Cuba. Diplomacy certainly averted disaster for the world. At that time, America was a racially divided country and the civil rights movement was struggling to gain momentum. President Kennedy must have watched in horror at the events in May 1963 in Birmingham, Alabama when state-sponsored brutality put down a civil rights event led by Martin Luther King, who was to be assassinated himself only five years after the President. Perhaps JFK could have done more earlier to rid America of apartheid but his executive orders prohibiting racial discrimination laid the groundwork for the Civil Rights Act of 1964. In many ways, the Kennedy Administration was years ahead of its time. As my colleague Dick Lyle has pointed out, in 1961 JFK established the Peace Corps, as a result of which US volunteers worked in third world countries to build roads and hospitals and educate their citizens. He promoted his new frontier programme, promising federal funding for education, medical care for the elderly, economic aid to rural regions and Government intervention to halt the recession of the time. He also declared to an unsuspecting world that America would put a man on the moon before the end of the decade, which of course happened in 1969. Averting a nuclear world war three while planning to expand the scientific achievements of mankind beyond our dreams were pretty impressive achievements in his all-too-short term in office. Presiding Officer, you would expect us to find some story connecting Jack Kennedy to Scotland. As Jamie Hepburn made clear in his speech, in 1939, as a 22-year-old, President Kennedy made his first public speech in what I know as the Baird hall of residence in Sauchiehall Street in Glasgow, after the Germans had torpedoed the Athenia passenger ship, killing 28 Americans. Glasgow’s reaction to that incident and the way in which its people looked after and cared for all who survived it, particularly the American citizens, must have left a hugely positive impression on the young Mr Kennedy and might well have influenced him in his later years as President. We would like to hope that it did. I feel privileged to be standing here talking about President John F Kennedy and the important legacy that he left us, after such a short term of office. He touched the hearts and minds not only of the American people but of people throughout the world, including in Scotland. I might have been only five when he was taken from us but he certainly made an impression on my life. He said “A man may die, nations may rise and fall, but an idea lives on.” The ideas and vision of John F Kennedy certainly live on and I think that the world is a better place because of him.

Does the minister agree that Longannet power station continues to be of significant importance to Scotland’s energy needs? Does he share concerns about the impact here of transmission charges?

Before I contribute to this fascinating debate, I cannot help but think that on this occasion, as on past occasions in the chamber, we would surely by now have been treated to some mirth and devilment from our former colleague David McLetchie, who was also mentioned by my colleague Colin Keir. I am certain that David would have enjoyed the proposition that tribunals were a place where justice could be determined without the necessity for lawyers to make an appearance. Similarly, I think that we would have listened in reverential silence to the wit and wisdom of our own Brian Adam, an experienced voice in the Parliament, guiding us through a process such as this with a steady hand and some gentle reasoning. They were two great members of the Scottish Parliament, who are sadly missed. While reviewing the papers for the debate, I thought that a good place to start might be to ask a fairly simple but fundamental question: what exactly is a tribunal? I know about tribunals from past experience, of course, but I naively expected that a bill on tribunals making its way through the Parliament might define what tribunals were, or would be. Were we about to legislate on something that we were not going to define? Nothing is ever quite that simple, of course. The evidence at committee about the distinct nature of tribunals appeared to suggest that attempts to define what they were could lead to a loss of uniqueness. Thankfully, however, the committee did not buy that argument and has asked the Scottish Government to set out a definition on the face of the bill. In its response, the Scottish Government appears to be happy to define the principles for tribunals along the lines of those included in the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. There might have been some misunderstanding about the bill’s proposals and the purpose of introducing the bill. As I understand it, creating a unified tribunal structure offers us the best of both worlds. It will be a system in which the public can expect consistent processes and procedures, with consistency and quality of expertise being available, while at the same time it will ensure that the specialisms of some tribunals, such as the mental health tribunal and the additional support needs tribunal, remain in place. Yes, of course, there must be a careful balance, but the committee seems to be confident that that can be achieved. From what I have read, the current tribunal system is mainly ad hoc with little common ground in leadership, appointments, procedures, reviews and appeals, and the bill aims to address those concerns. By doing so, it should ultimately deliver a better system for the public. I will pick out a few important elements from the bill that merit further mention. On the independence of tribunals, it should be welcomed that the bill proposes a statutory obligation to ensure that tribunal hearings are heard by people who have no links to the body that they might be challenging. That seems an obvious requirement, but it has not always been guaranteed. For example, there have been occasions on which appeals on educational placing requests have been heard by people who were appointed by the education authority. The guarantee in the bill will surely provide greater comfort to appellants. The provision relating to appeals and reviews generated differing views on the committee. For me, the provision was less than clear, and still needs a bit of work. I note that first-tier and upper tribunals may review their own decisions and that appeals may be lodged from one level to the next one up and on to the Court of Session. However, Jonathan Mitchell QC warned against making the grounds for appeal overly restrictive because a person who wins a first-tier appeal might have it overturned by the upper tier and find themselves unable to challenge that decision at the Court of Session because of restrictions that have been imposed. I hope that we end up with an appeal and review process that does not diminish the appellant’s right to challenge perceived injustice simply because of the imposition of strict rules. From what I can see, the committee took the reasonable step of asking that this aspect of the bill be kept under review. The submission from the Lands Tribunal for Scotland made the case that it should be excluded from the provisions of the bill because it has been operating quite successfully as a court for many years. However, I note the minister’s comments that that would probably defeat the overall aims of the bill and create an anomaly at the outset. The Lands Tribunal, which is highly regarded, would sit comfortably within any new system that had improved systems and processes at its core. The Scottish Government’s response reflects that, and the Government intends to transfer the Lands Tribunal to the upper tier. Because of the expert nature of its considerations, the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland made a strong case to be retained within its own chamber. My understanding from the Scottish Government’s response is that that will, indeed, be the case. On children’s hearings, there was some concern from the children’s reporter and Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People about a possible transfer to the tribunals, particularly since the system has only recently been reformed. However, it has to be said that the SCCYP and children’s reporter were not opposed in principle. The bill appears to contain sufficient safeguards that require the Scottish ministers to undertake the necessary consultation in advance of laying any further regulations before Parliament. Scotland’s tribunal system offers our people access to justice in an informal setting while safeguarding the rights of ordinary people who feel that they have suffered an injustice. It is right for the Scottish Government to modernise the system, make it simpler, more consistent, and easier to access. It is also right for us to carefully establish the ground rules for reviews and appeals, but always with the rights of the public in mind so that justice is served first and always. The new system will need time to settle in and, in due course, it will clearly be in a position to absorb those tribunals that are currently reserved by the UK. With that, Presiding Officer, I am happy to support the Government’s motion.

4. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met East Ayrshire Council and what matters were discussed. (S4O-02525)

The minister will be aware that there has been significant investment in Kilmarnock’s public buildings and environment in recent years. Despite that investment, much more needs to be done to help Kilmarnock to make progress after the loss of 700 jobs at Johnnie Walker. Will the minister agree to meet me to discuss how best the Scottish Government can assist East Ayrshire in developing its economic strategy?

In more than 20 years as an elected member trying to help local people with a variety of issues, I think that I can say that this issue has proved to be the most challenging, frustrating and heartbreaking of all. When Janice and Alan Glasswell first came to see me at my surgery in Darvel, I had no idea of the battles that they faced. Janice faced a battle with cancer, but the family faced another battle—one with the system, to try to get treatment that they hoped would help. It was a battle to get basic information, to get explanations, to meet the people at the centre of the case and ultimately to understand the reasons why the system rejected her application for the drug Cetuximab. Even after Janice sadly died, and despite my best efforts, I could not understand why a person who, opinion suggested, might benefit from the drug was still refused it. None of us could understand the criteria that applied in the IPTR process. Nobody explained it, and the appeal did nothing to alter the outcome. There was clear clinical opinion in favour of giving Janice the treatment but that was not enough. I still do not know why, and I suspect that to this day Alan Glasswell does not know either. Many of the issues that made matters worse were not even clinical issues. They were about communication, getting simple explanations, being allowed to meet people and feeling that the system was trying to help rather than hinder. The family became medical research experts, looking for comparable cases to help their argument—and they found them. However, they should not have had to do any of that—so much of the family’s remaining precious time together was taken up with that activity. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for personally meeting Mr and Mrs Glasswell during her illness. I am grateful that he listened to their story and took the action that I and many people hope will go a long way towards making sure that families do not have to face such circumstances again at a time when they are at their weakest and when they need most help. The IPTR process is to go and will be replaced by a new system that will be clinically driven, will consider those medicines not yet approved by the SMC and will put the patients at the heart of the process, involving them in matters that affect their health. The decision on whether to grant a medicine will now be taken by clinicians who agree that benefit can derive from it, rather than people having to prove exceptionality, as happens at present. The Glasswell family found that perhaps the most torturous part of the experience was knowing that one clinician thought that the drug could help—only for them to be demoralised by refusal on the basis of something called “exceptionality”. One crucial element of any new system is this thing called “timeliness”—the need to conduct reviews and to come to decisions as quickly as possible. As I understand it, the SMC’s review, which is to be completed by Christmas, will look at cost-effectiveness and at what kind of cost thresholds, or QALYs, should be in place. Such a value-based pricing policy appears to have been dropped by the UK, to which overall powers in this area were reserved. As the Health and Sport Committee recommends, whatever we do with the QALYs, we must ensure that we do not simply apply the same criteria and end up with the same outcome, which disregards clinical benefit. The committee’s report and the witness evidence covered that issue, and I am pleased that the Scottish Government is to introduce a range of measures to make all the necessary improvements. Members have mentioned that the extension of the £20 million rare conditions medicines fund to 2016 will help many people who are suffering from cancer and other diseases for which medicines have not yet been approved. The cabinet secretary has acted positively to address those difficult situations. It is important that any new system that we introduce is transparent and allows people to be held to account for the decisions that are made. An apparent lack of accountability was one of the main difficulties reported to me. Therefore, I hope that the additional £1 million that is being made available to assist with transparency will in some way involve HIS in its wider audit role, as well as helping to keep patients in the loop. As we know, healthcare does not come cheap. It costs nearly £12 billion, which means that about a third of the entire Scottish Government budget is aimed at supporting our national health service. It is a service that we are proud of and one that we are determined to maintain and improve. Ultimately, although a new system for providing access to new medicines will lead to yeses, sadly, it will still lead to some noes. The crucial element that has been missing until now is confidence—families such as the Glasswells had lost confidence in the previous system and they had to fight on another front, which they should not have had to do. We now have the chance to restore that confidence. I think that we owe a debt of gratitude to the cabinet secretary, Alex Neil, not only for listening with sympathy and understanding to the plight of many families, but for acting when he was asked to do so. I think that he deserves our full support to make the new process one that we can all be proud of.

Can the Deputy First Minister offer, even at this early stage, an indication that we will begin to develop not only Prestwick’s potential in a Scottish context for our tourism industry, but its international future?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to improve rail services to Edinburgh from areas to the west and south-west of Glasgow. (S4O-02462)

The minister will be aware of the large population that lives west and south of Glasgow. People in my constituency are hampered in taking up the economic opportunities to travel to work in Scotland’s capital because they have to change trains and stations and must walk between Glasgow central and Queen Street stations. That means that it can take around two hours to travel a distance of only 60 miles. Can the minister give me any hope that a through service might become available for customers from the south-west of Scotland at any point in the future?

I came to this subject not knowing a great deal about rehabilitation. After reading some of the briefing material, I can see why the cabinet secretary has brought the matter to the attention of the Parliament. The 1974 act began as a private member’s bill and was variously amended and updated to become the grand hotchpotch that it probably is now. The cabinet secretary said that he is open to suggestions as to what to do with it. That is either an act of bravery or, more likely, a plea for help—possibly a bit of both. The examples in the Government’s briefing persuade me that something needs to be done. Even if we achieved nothing but a simplification of the system, that would be a worthwhile step forward. However, the hope is that we can modernise the 1974 act, look at how other jurisdictions have dealt with rehabilitation and make our system current and appropriate for the times in which we live. I note, from the changes that were made in the 2008 revision to the act for England and Wales, that further changes are in progress although they are not yet commenced, as Alison McInnes mentioned. The proposed changes will extend the scope of the act to include those who are serving sentences of over 30 months and up to four years. That means that individuals who would never have been rehabilitated under the terms of the old act will now be rehabilitated as a result of the reform. Perhaps the cabinet secretary can give us an indication of his thinking in that regard for Scotland. Since 1984, the average length of sentence in Scotland has gone up markedly. As a consequence, many more individuals who are serving sentences over 30 months have no chance of rehabilitation under the current system. In 1984, there were 400 or so sentences of greater than 30 months, but by 2011 the number of sentences of that duration had increased to more than 1,000. We could take the view that that is the price to be paid by individuals for their criminality, but it is hard to justify a system that reduces the number of people who might expect rehabilitation when overall crime levels are at their lowest for 39 years. To offer some hope, the threshold for rehabilitation could perhaps have been linked in some way to the sentence lengths being imposed as we moved through those years. What is happening in other jurisdictions? There is quite a variation in how rehabilitation is delivered. In Belgium, a very simple approach appears to be taken whereby a person can apply for rehabilitation at any time after completion of the sentence and, if granted, the records are removed completely from the registry. In Australia, where there is no obligation to destroy criminal records, they may not be disclosed after the convictions are spent—which is usually 10 years for adults and five years for juveniles—although, similar to the Scottish system, convictions involving a prison sentence of more than 30 months will remain unspent. In Estonia, which is one of the countries to examine the matter most recently, rehabilitation lengths of one, two, three, five and 10 years are applied depending on the sentence. However, in general, a three-year sentence threshold seems to apply to distinguish between rehabilitation periods of either five years or 10 years, which is quite a contrast to what happens in Scotland. Finally, in America, criminal records generally remain on record without termination, with some possible exceptions if the offender was a minor at the time of the offence. Those examples illustrate how complex the process can be, but it seems that in all cases, except that of America, individuals can seek some form of rehabilitation—or even expungement of their records—that would not be possible in Scotland under the present arrangements. In section 3 of the Scottish Government’s discussion paper, a number of examples are given of a record that involves a less serious offence remaining on a person’s register in cases in which a subsequent offence is committed. Currently, such a person will never become rehabilitated in terms of both offences. We can take the view that that is too bad and that it is just reward for continued offending, but it was probably not the intention of the original act to compound in perpetuity a record of those less serious offences. The purpose of all this is to reduce reoffending and to strike the correct balance between the protection of the public and the offering of a route back to a normal life to those offenders who have demonstrated that they pose no further risk to society. Although it is entirely correct that serious offenders must remain on the radar to protect the public, can we say the same of a young person in their 20s who is convicted of a minor offence of breach of the peace, who may have that record hanging over them for years to come? There is enough research on tackling reoffending to support the rehabilitation route as opposed to the supervision and sanctions route as a means of reducing reoffending in society. A study by Tong and Farrington in 2007 showed a 14 per cent reduction in recidivism in Canada, the US and the UK among offenders who were involved in programmes that focused on rehabilitation, whereas only modest improvements—if any—were achieved as a result of a sanctions-based approach. I know that we are not discussing rehabilitation policy directly, but keeping on record and providing disclosure of a person’s blemished record in perpetuity when that record involves less serious offences perhaps does not make a useful contribution to the overall task that we face in reducing reoffending. I support the move by the Scottish Government to re-examine the system of determining the appropriate length of time after which convictions may be regarded as spent. The issue appears to be dealt with differently in other jurisdictions, and the Government’s re-examination will make a very useful contribution to the achievement of our ultimate goal of tackling reoffending and offering individuals a positive route back into society.

Is it the cabinet secretary’s intention to include victims and their families as part of that wider engagement with stakeholders? I imagine that they might have a slightly different view of some of the proposals that we have heard in the debate.

Including Labour.

It is a disgrace that the Liberal Democrat leader has left the chamber. We were kind enough to listen to his point of view in the debate, but it appears that he does not want to listen to ours. I thank our minister, Fergus Ewing, for his considerable efforts over a number of months to save as many jobs as possible in the industry, and I welcome his announcement today that he will consult on establishing more effective regulation of it. I also thank my friend and colleague Adam Ingram, whose contribution led the open debate. As many members will know, Adam was at the heart of all the discussions that took place as events affecting his constituents unfolded over the summer, despite his own illness and the tragic passing of his wife Gerry. The Parliament should recognise that commitment, which goes well beyond what should reasonably be expected of anyone. [Applause.] Members: Hear, hear. I also acknowledge the role that my colleague Aileen Campbell played in the task force in her capacity as the local member for Clydesdale. When we last debated the issues facing the opencast industry back in January, in Adam Ingram’s members’ business debate, the warning at that time concerned the ORR’s proposal to introduce the additional freight levy. If anything was going to finish off the industry, it would have been that. Thankfully, as some members have mentioned, the ORR stepped back from that and listened to the pleas of many members of the Parliament and of our colleagues in councils throughout Scotland. It is worth remembering the importance of the industry to Ayrshire, which had approximately 700—or 60 per cent—of the industry’s jobs before the crisis occurred. Those were good, well-paid jobs. The number of jobs lost is similar to the number lost at Johnnie Walker in Kilmarnock when Diageo left in 2009. Ayrshire has had to take quite a blow and we really cannot afford the prospect of two major industries closing down. The opencast output from Ayrshire last year was more than half the overall tonnage in Scotland, and a quarter of the entire UK tonnage, which emphasises the industry’s importance not only to Ayrshire, but to Scotland and the rest of the UK. It is surely not a serious option to halt all new production, as proposed by the Greens and Liberals, who seem to say anything these days just to get noticed. I am grateful to East Ayrshire Council for providing some helpful information in advance of today’s debate, and I welcome to the chamber Councillor Roberts and Councillor Primrose, who are visiting us from East Ayrshire today. I can report that a substantial document and set of recommendations will be presented to the council on Thursday. The steps to recovery outlined in that document from East Ayrshire will greatly assist other councils and the Scottish Government in planning the essential restoration work that must be completed. That will be of huge service in the long run. Chief among the figures that are presented in the report is the current estimated total cost of restoration, which could—as several members have mentioned—be as high as £161 million. We know that the restoration figure is notional, and is based on costs that were outlined in the original planning consents, but it shows the extent of the problem that has been building for many years. The council has agreed, as Adam Ingram pointed out, to carry out an independent review, which will be led by Jim Mackinnon. The scope of the review will be to examine all the circumstances that have led us to the current position. It may not be comfortable reading for officers and members—past and present—of the council, but it will be an essential piece of work nevertheless. With regard to statutory bodies, a clearer—and perhaps a strengthened—role must be carried out in future by organisations such as SEPA, SNH, the Forestry Commission and others. Hindsight is a wonderful thing—with which we are all blessed, of course—but, looking back at the history of opencast applications and subsequent monitoring, one could ask whether enough was asked of or done by our agencies to help us to protect the public interest and the environment. Perhaps there can be strengthened roles and responsibilities for those bodies in the future, and I invite the minister to give that some thought in his conclusion. Ayrshire almost lost another industry over the summer: a historic and important industry that continues to make a vital contribution to our local and national economy. With some deft footwork and no little skill, our minister, together with colleagues in both Parliaments and in the councils, averted that disaster. We have made very good progress, but we have by no means reached a happy ending as yet. We are indebted to East Ayrshire Council for the work that is being undertaken there, and I am sure that all Scotland will reap the benefit in years to come.

7. To ask the Scottish Government when it will next meet the European Commission and what matters will be discussed. (S4O-02278)

The cabinet secretary will no doubt be aware of the multi-annual financial framework budget proposals that could see a huge cut to funding for broadband infrastructure across Europe. Could she indicate whether and how that might impact on the digital participation strategy in Scotland?

I am grateful for the opportunity to contribute, and I hope that I can offer a perspective on the issues to complement the obvious hard work that has been carried out by all our colleagues who serve on the Justice Committee and on the Health and Sport Committee. Getting the proposals right is inevitably going to involve a careful balance between the rights of the accused and the rights of victims and witnesses. The conclusion of the Justice Committee report says as much and anticipates further improvements at stage 2, but the general principles of the bill are supported and that is very welcome. If the bill is approved, victims and witnesses will be entitled to more information about their case, standards of service will be consistent and clear, restitution orders will be made against those convicted of assaulting police officers, and a victim surcharge will be introduced to require offenders to contribute to the cost of supporting victims. I note the proposal to allow children more freedom to give evidence in court if they wish to do so. The committee raised a concern about that becoming a requirement, but the cabinet secretary clarified in his response that that will not be the case and that he is happy to discuss the matter with the relevant justice partners. I know that there is also continuing debate about the extension of special measures to vulnerable witnesses and about the entitlement to contest the use of those measures in court. I have listened carefully to colleagues who, having considered those matters in greater depth, will go on to consider the issues further at stage 2. From my own experience of the justice system, both as a victim and as an elected member supporting victims, I think that the proposals in the bill will improve the situation for victims in Scotland. In my view, the proposals offer a little tilt in favour of victims that has been overdue for some time. When the Public Audit Committee looked at the criminal justice system recently, it was clear from one of the charts illustrating the process that the focus is almost exclusively on the alleged offender’s journey through the system. Of course, there are clear and obvious reasons for that, not least of which is that the requirement to obtain justice for offences committed inevitably means that the spotlight falls on the accused and on how they are to be taken on that journey. However, it was not at all clear to me what the victim’s journey looks like or should look like. Often, victims feel like onlookers staring in through a window while the process takes place and sometimes does not include them at all. That was the feeling of two families in my constituency—one whose daughter was murdered and the other whose daughter died in a tragic accident. Both families were clearly victims who needed support. They needed to be at the centre of the processes that followed, but they were not. That led them to feel alienated from a system that they desperately hoped would provide closure for them. They expected to be in the loop at all times and to feel that they, too, were key parts of the process rather than left feeling like innocent bystanders who were being carried along in the slipstream. To address that issue, the bill must regard victims and witnesses as integral to the justice system. I know from the committee report that there has been a call for standards of service to be set out in regulations. If the Government is not minded to effect that proposal through the bill, I hope that it will give consideration at least to setting out guidance advising what the victim’s journey is supposed to look like. From the initial incident and evidence gathering through to the trial or fatal accident inquiry—and beyond to any further investigations—victims and their families must be equally served by good communication, by access to information and by clear indications of timescales, of the extent to which they can participate and of any further options that are open to them that they may wish to progress. That level of support should be automatic rather than offered only on request. If it was, many victims and their families would begin to feel that the justice system is about them, too. My attention was also drawn to the proposal to allow victims to make representations to the Parole Board when a prisoner becomes eligible for release. As the cabinet secretary is aware, one of the families to which I have referred is concerned to ensure that a full and detailed risk assessment is carried out on any prisoner who is eligible for release and that public safety is paramount in making that decision. I very much hope that the views of victims can be taken into account in that process. Perhaps that can be extended to the families who are affected by the crime, too. I am encouraged by the proposals in the bill and by the direction of travel that we are taking in Scotland to support victims and witnesses. Setting new standards of service, providing better access to information and better communication and, we hope, putting victims at the centre of the justice system will together be a further step in delivering a fairer justice system, as will the requirement that offenders make reparation to their victims. I think that all those proposals will be supported by the people of Scotland. As we proceed to stage 2, I remind committee members of the comments by the Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists that people with speech, language and communication difficulties are more likely to be the victims of crime. I ask colleagues to bear that in mind as we firm up the bill at stage 2. I congratulate the committee on its efforts so far. I support the motion that is before us today.

2. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans to meet the increasing demand for software engineers suggested by recent surveys by ScotlandIS and e-skills UK. (S4O-02216)

In his answer, the cabinet secretary clearly stated the substantial numbers of people employed in the IT industry in Scotland. We know that up to 65 per cent of companies surveyed in Scotland are reporting increasing demand for graduates in the industry, with a forecast 45,000 new entrants needed over the next five years. Will the cabinet secretary consider what additional measures might be taken, for example in schools, to raise the profile of a career in software engineering? Average salaries in the industry are around £35,000, with contractors commanding about three times that amount. Will he agree to meet me and ScotlandIS to see how we can widen that discussion with our universities and colleges?

The increase in funding for student support in the Scottish Government’s budget provides significant increases for Scotland’s poorest students, setting a new minimum income of £7,250 a year for those who are most in need and overall putting an additional £140 million a year into students’ pockets. That was NUS Scotland’s verdict after it had lobbied the Scottish Government to do just that. It is the best student support package across all the nations in the current UK and puts nearly £1,000 extra into the pockets of our poorest students. There are no front-door tuition fees in Scotland and no back-door endowment charges, and overall debt levels are the lowest in the UK. It seems that Labour is now constantly at odds with the NUS in Scotland, and it appears to be heading towards a confrontation with Scotland’s students and the wider Scottish community on the principle of free education. That is where we are heading if Labour ever wins again—tuition fees will be back. I cannot imagine any students and their families now or in the future being thrilled at that prospect. Maybe Labour members miss their endowment charges, or back-door tuition fees as they really were—in fact, Labour members voted to keep them—but the rest of us do not miss them and they will not be back as long as the SNP remains in power. We should not be surprised at this coming back to haunt us in the Parliament once again. The attack on student support is a fig leaf behind which to hide what is really happening in the Labour Party in London. Mr Balls holds his hands up and admits defeat, sides up with the Tory cuts agenda, refuses to repeal the bedroom tax and starts attacking winter fuel payments for pensioners. That is the real source of where Labour in Scotland is now coming from. Scottish Labour members are hooked on a leash by their London bosses, no matter the cost to Scotland. The planned journey back to power for Labour in the UK means the consequent abandonment of the principles of collective social solidarity that Labour was once proud to defend, and Scottish students and their families will pay the price if Labour is ever elected again. It does not need to be like that, and it will not be like that in Scotland under the SNP Government. The commitment to free education is not cheap. It costs us money to deliver it, but that is the point. It costs the Scottish Government and not the families of students in Scotland, because we believe that education is a right for every citizen who can learn and not a privilege for those who can pay their way through the front door of our universities. I believe that the communities of Scotland are with us on that.

As always, Margo MacDonald makes a valid point. Looking to the future, we should encourage a wider and more accessible education for all young people in Scotland. On top of our commitment to having no tuition fees in Scotland, we have put up £10 million to get 2,000 students from our poorer backgrounds into university, 700 of whom have come from our widening access programme, which Labour also opposed. When I spoke on this subject in February, I told the chamber of my good fortune to have gone to university pretty much for free in the 1970s when an enlightened Labour Government also thought that that was the right thing to do.

There was still a cost to my family: the cost of having a son who was not contributing to the wellbeing of the family for another four years.

I pay tribute to the work of my colleague Adam Ingram MSP, who, despite his current illness, has attended the important work of the task force on behalf of his constituents in Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley. I ask the minister to spell out for the Parliament the possible impact of the ORR’s proposal to recommend the new freight-specific charge of £4.04 per kgtm.

Scotland has a continuing reputation in the world for scientific innovation and creativity and for punching far above its weight and numbers in the world. We have the highest rankings of citations of our scientific papers anywhere in the world relative to our gross domestic product, and we excel in the agricultural sciences, pharmacology, toxicology, space sciences and plant and animal sciences. Moreover, our scientific collaborations with the United States, Germany, China, France and India are increasing. Indeed, the president of the Institute of Physics, Sir Peter Knight, has said that physics-based businesses drive the economy of Scotland, that we lead the UK in that respect and that “Now is the time to build on this advantage.” In a minute or so, I will illustrate how two distinctly different countries—Estonia and China—are successfully growing their own economies through science and innovation and how that might be something of which we in Scotland should be aware. Even with our rich history of achievement in science, it is regarded as being slightly unusual for people with a science background to serve as members in this Parliament. I think that I might be one of the few members with a science honours degree—in my case, it is in computer science—and I recall the Royal Society of Edinburgh reminding us some time ago that much more scientific knowledge exists outside than exists inside government. We should be mindful of that in the years ahead. How has Scotland come to be so highly regarded by the world’s science communities? Clearly, our long history of scientific achievement and the excellence of our universities have played a huge part in maintaining our reputation for science. That reputation draws gifted people to work and study here and we all reap the benefits. However, in this modern era there is much more going on that will, I hope, give Scotland our science heroes of the future. Members around the chamber have cited examples of that, including the vital role that the science centres play in reaching out and providing engagement. There are also about 19 science festivals throughout Scotland, and there are moves within schools to give kids more practical science experience and to provide professional development for our primary teachers in STEM subjects. The minister mentioned careerwise Scotland initiatives and so on. Europe plays its part, too, in providing some £30 million a year of valuable research funding for our institutions. All those initiatives play their part in nurturing new Scottish talent and encouraging people to take up science as a career. Scotland will need such initiatives to continue if we are to maintain any kind of leading position. What is happening in other parts of the world? A recent article on developments in Estonia showed that even the smallest independent countries have invested heavily in encouraging new generations of software engineers—a subject that is close to my heart. Estonia is a country of only 1.3 million people and was part of the Soviet Union as recently as 20 or so years ago. It has, however, embarked on a programme to train and develop new generations of software engineers. We have all heard of Skype, the interactive video, voice and text environment that we are told is for “doing things together, whenever you’re apart.” It keeps many of us in touch with each other around the world. Skype was invented by Estonian software engineers and sold to Microsoft only two years ago for $8 billion. It is estimated that, at peak times, there are some 40 million people online at the same time using Skype. E-stonia, as it is becoming known, is very much at the centre of innovation in software design and looks like maintaining that position for some time to come. That is an incredible achievement of which Estonia can be very proud. Let us move on from one of the smallest countries to the biggest country in the world. Thirty years on from Deng Xiaoping’s economic reforms, China has developed from being a relatively poor agricultural country to being the second-biggest economy in the world. Its aim was to make the transition from being agricultural to industrial, and then on to being an innovative society with science and technology as the centrepiece in achieving that. China still has some way to go, but the signs are good—or ominous, depending on your point of view. At the start, very few of the major commercial technological breakthroughs came from China and only five of the Chinese universities were ranked in the top 500 in the world, but its investment in research and development has increased tenfold in only 10 years and now stands at over $135 billion a year. Chinese students are now outstripping their American counterparts and, by 2015, China will be the number 1 publisher and quoted source of scientific papers in all fields of science—a certain inevitability that China has planned well to achieve. From Estonia and China, let us return to Kilmarnock. In my constituency, we have recently set up Kilmarnock Engineering and Science Society, which I have mentioned in the chamber before. It has been meeting in Kilmarnock for over a year, and its aims are to promote science and engineering and to attract school pupils, in particular, and the public to its lectures. We have been graced by some wonderful contributions from the likes of Professor Colin McInnes, Dr Peter Hughes, Professor Martin Hendry and Dr Victoria Martin—a Kilmarnock woman who is doing some particularly important work on the Higgs boson experience. How do we, in Scotland, with our long history of innovation, invention and excellence in science, maintain our reputation and continue to compete in the world of science? We will not do so because of our wonderful reputation, nor will we do so without considerable effort. We must enthuse our youngsters with the possibilities of what science can do and the opportunities that it provides. That is why the Scottish Government’s science engagement programmes are crucial. We must back up the enthusiasm with the investment that makes it all possible and the expertise that makes it all happen. Money is not everything, but it helps. Creativity, ingenuity and inquiring minds are the real keys to success. Scottish scientists have always had those traits, and I am convinced that our current generation of scientists will continue to lead the way.

Scotland has a continuing reputation in the world for scientific innovation and creativity and for punching far above its weight and numbers in the world. We have the highest rankings of citations of our scientific papers anywhere in the world relative to our gross domestic product, and we excel in the agricultural sciences, pharmacology, toxicology, space sciences and plant and animal sciences. Moreover, our scientific collaborations with the United States, Germany, China, France and India are increasing. Indeed, the president of the Institute of Physics, Sir Peter Knight, has said that physics-based businesses drive the economy of Scotland, that we lead the UK in that respect and that “Now is the time to build on this advantage.” In a minute or so, I will illustrate how two distinctly different countries—Estonia and China—are successfully growing their own economies through science and innovation and how that might be something of which we in Scotland should be aware. Even with our rich history of achievement in science, it is regarded as being slightly unusual for people with a science background to serve as members in this Parliament. I think that I might be one of the few members with a science honours degree—in my case, it is in computer science—and I recall the Royal Society of Edinburgh reminding us some time ago that much more scientific knowledge exists outside than exists inside government. We should be mindful of that in the years ahead. How has Scotland come to be so highly regarded by the world’s science communities? Clearly, our long history of scientific achievement and the excellence of our universities have played a huge part in maintaining our reputation for science. That reputation draws gifted people to work and study here and we all reap the benefits. However, in this modern era there is much more going on that will, I hope, give Scotland our science heroes of the future. Members around the chamber have cited examples of that, including the vital role that the science centres play in reaching out and providing engagement. There are also about 19 science festivals throughout Scotland, and there are moves within schools to give kids more practical science experience and to provide professional development for our primary teachers in STEM subjects. The minister mentioned careerwise Scotland initiatives and so on. Europe plays its part, too, in providing some £30 million a year of valuable research funding for our institutions. All those initiatives play their part in nurturing new Scottish talent and encouraging people to take up science as a career. Scotland will need such initiatives to continue if we are to maintain any kind of leading position. What is happening in other parts of the world? A recent article on developments in Estonia showed that even the smallest independent countries have invested heavily in encouraging new generations of software engineers—a subject that is close to my heart. Estonia is a country of only 1.3 million people and was part of the Soviet Union as recently as 20 or so years ago. It has, however, embarked on a programme to train and develop new generations of software engineers. We have all heard of Skype, the interactive video, voice and text environment that we are told is for “doing things together, whenever you’re apart.” It keeps many of us in touch with each other around the world. Skype was invented by Estonian software engineers and sold to Microsoft only two years ago for $8 billion. It is estimated that, at peak times, there are some 40 million people online at the same time using Skype. E-stonia, as it is becoming known, is very much at the centre of innovation in software design and looks like maintaining that position for some time to come. That is an incredible achievement of which Estonia can be very proud. Let us move on from one of the smallest countries to the biggest country in the world. Thirty years on from Deng Xiaoping’s economic reforms, China has developed from being a relatively poor agricultural country to being the second-biggest economy in the world. Its aim was to make the transition from being agricultural to industrial, and then on to being an innovative society with science and technology as the centrepiece in achieving that. China still has some way to go, but the signs are good—or ominous, depending on your point of view. At the start, very few of the major commercial technological breakthroughs came from China and only five of the Chinese universities were ranked in the top 500 in the world, but its investment in research and development has increased tenfold in only 10 years and now stands at over $135 billion a year. Chinese students are now outstripping their American counterparts and, by 2015, China will be the number 1 publisher and quoted source of scientific papers in all fields of science—a certain inevitability that China has planned well to achieve. From Estonia and China, let us return to Kilmarnock. In my constituency, we have recently set up Kilmarnock Engineering and Science Society, which I have mentioned in the chamber before. It has been meeting in Kilmarnock for over a year, and its aims are to promote science and engineering and to attract school pupils, in particular, and the public to its lectures. We have been graced by some wonderful contributions from the likes of Professor Colin McInnes, Dr Peter Hughes, Professor Martin Hendry and Dr Victoria Martin—a Kilmarnock woman who is doing some particularly important work on the Higgs boson experience. How do we, in Scotland, with our long history of innovation, invention and excellence in science, maintain our reputation and continue to compete in the world of science? We will not do so because of our wonderful reputation, nor will we do so without considerable effort. We must enthuse our youngsters with the possibilities of what science can do and the opportunities that it provides. That is why the Scottish Government’s science engagement programmes are crucial. We must back up the enthusiasm with the investment that makes it all possible and the expertise that makes it all happen. Money is not everything, but it helps. Creativity, ingenuity and inquiring minds are the real keys to success. Scottish scientists have always had those traits, and I am convinced that our current generation of scientists will continue to lead the way.

13. To ask the Scottish Government what recent progress there has been with the review of the individual patient treatment request process. (S4O-02087)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the struggle that my constituent Janice Glasswell and her family endured recently and of the fact that, sadly, Mrs Glasswell passed away last month. At no time did the family feel as though they were an integral part of the IPTR process—they felt excluded from it. I ask the cabinet secretary to ensure that that changes; that all information is made available to patients and to their families; and that full and concise explanations are given in writing by clinicians when determining all future applications for access to specialist cancer drugs.

It has been highlighted already that the total economic and social cost of reoffending in Scotland is about £3 billion a year. According to the Audit Scotland report on reducing reoffending that was published in November last year, we spend over £400 million every year on criminal justice-related services, with some £99 million of that going to the community justice authorities every year for the past five or six years. Some of the key challenges that we face in Scotland are that we have one of the highest prison population rates in Europe and that approximately 30 per cent of offenders are reconvicted after a year. There are, however, a number of positives and the trends are favourable: recorded crime is at a 37-year low, having fallen by 26 per cent since 2006; offences by young people have fallen; and the reoffending rates are at their lowest level for 10 years. The stakes are pretty high. The cost to society of offending is massive and the public investment in tackling it is substantial. That level of investment must return higher dividends to us, and the time is right for the Scottish Government to move the agenda forward. I am a member of the Public Audit Committee, which has looked at the reoffending issue a few times. We did so in September 2011 and again last November. In the 2011 report “An overview of Scotland’s criminal justice system”, the Auditor General said that, “Although CJAs were established in 2007, there are no agreed measures to assess their performance or impact”, and he noted that funding arrangements were particularly complex in relation to the targeting of spend. As a result, CJAs tended to develop localised performance indicators, which made it difficult to establish a consistent picture on progress towards delivering on the national objective of reducing reoffending. In last year’s follow-up report, “Reducing reoffending in Scotland”, Audit Scotland noted that none of the statutory partners who attend CJA board meetings is accountable to the CJA, which ultimately limits the effectiveness of the current model of delivery. Of course, that is not the fault of the CJAs themselves. Audit Scotland made several recommendations, such as targeting spend at measures that are known to be effective, promoting collective responsibility among key players, co-ordinating work with the third sector and introducing clear lines of accountability, underpinned by effective monitoring of performance. The recommendations are the natural next steps to take, seven or so years after CJAs were established, if we are to see the progress that I know we all want to see. I hope that the consultation on redesigning the community justice system will lead to our embracing the recommendations. Indeed, I am confident that all stakeholders will see the merit in moving in such a direction. Over the past few years, my contact with the south-west Scotland CJA has been positive. We have an extremely dedicated and able convener in Councillor Peter McNamara, who is very committed to the task. I have been particularly impressed by the work that has been carried out under his stewardship. When I was elected in 2007, one of my first visits was to Bowhouse prison in my constituency, to see for myself the work that is going on to come up with a strategy to reduce reoffending. I met prison officers, council officials, voluntary sector staff, the local community justice authority team and an ex-prisoner, who talked openly about his experience of prison and his journey away from offending. If one message stood out for me that day, it was this: one of the most important factors in reducing the risk of reoffending is the maintenance, as much as possible, of the links between the prisoner and their family. Prisoners who maintain close relationships with partners and children are less likely to develop associations with fellow criminals, which might lead them to reoffend. Audit Scotland gave several examples of what works. More holistic, person-centred approaches, which involve throughcare and support services, all have encouraging results in the context of reducing reoffending. Such interventions do not come cheap, but we know that they work. They will help us to achieve our goal and reduce the massive cost to the public purse that I mentioned. I commend the work that is carried out by my local CJA and its partners. Despite the deficiencies that Audit Scotland and the Parliament’s Public Audit Committee highlighted, the commitment that is given by everyone involved, even in the absence of clear governance arrangements, still gives me confidence that dedicated and capable people are at the heart of the criminal justice system in Scotland. I make a plea to the cabinet secretary and the minister not to forget victims and families in the community justice system. It is not all about offenders; victims’ needs and expectations are just as important. Given the funding that we channel into offenders services, I hope that victims of crime will also feel that they are part of the new community justice process. I have no doubt that whatever model the cabinet secretary adopts, he will have teams of excellent people, who will all be determined to work towards reducing reoffending in Scotland and who will be backed up by clear expectations and strong governance arrangements, to assist them in their task. That will be crucial.

11. To ask the Scottish Government what support it provides for community business initiatives in Kilmarnock and Irvine Valley. (S4O-02025)

The support that has been indicated is very welcome in my constituency. Could the minister say how other business start-ups might attract additional support, financial or otherwise, beyond our very helpful business rates relief scheme, particularly during their crucial first year of operation?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what support will be given to families and communities affected by the liquidation of Scottish Coal.(S4T-00324)

I thank the minister for that detailed response. A task force is exactly the measure that is needed and I certainly look forward to contributing to its work on behalf of constituents who are affected by the news. I am sure that fellow members—I see Aileen Campbell and other members in the chamber—who represent affected constituencies and regions will support the Scottish Government’s efforts to preserve jobs and businesses in the important Scottish coal sector. Can the minister give further details of the PACE efforts that might provide support to directly affected people in the short term?

I am very thankful to the minister for that full and detailed response. The PACE efforts are crucial at this early stage, particularly in the short term, and I welcome the minister’s commitment to engage in that process.

I start by taking us back to Jimmy Reid’s 1972 inauguration speech as rector of the University of Glasgow, which was described by the New York Times as the greatest speech since the Gettysburg address. Jimmy’s speech was entitled “Alienation”. It described a society whose prevailing sense of values caused people to become alienated from humanity. He said that to be partially dehumanised made people insensitive and ruthless in their handling of their fellow citizens, becoming self-centred and grasping individuals. He talked about a rat race, with people scurrying around and trampling on others in the pursuit of personal success. He pleaded with the students of the time to reject that approach as it led to the loss of dignity and human spirit. He said that it was a tragedy that the great mass of people go through their lives without a glimmer of what they might have contributed to their fellow human beings. However, through education, the flowering of individual talents was the precondition for everyone’s development. Today, we are seeing a new version of alienation when we see people who need the help of their fellow man being demonised by some sections in our society. Essentially, that is a big part of what the debate is about—the kind of society that we want and a choice of futures. There is nothing in the Opposition amendments that we can rally round and offer up as an exciting alternative package to the Scottish people. Labour’s amendment is a threat to abolish universal services, thinly disguised as a concern about sustainability; through their amendment, the Tories want a 10 or even 20-year budget forecast; and the Liberal amendment simply welcomes the Tory UK Government’s budget, which it signed up to. The amendments are all depressing, given their lack of vision for Scotland. Should we go along with the divisive means testing and the “something-for-nothing brigade”—in the words of Johann Lamont, not the SNP—or do we face that down and deliver a better future for our people? The four pillars behind our public service reforms—prevention, performance, people and partnerships—are key drivers in delivering the outcomes that the Scottish people want. They help us to intervene early, to prevent problems from occurring and, ultimately, to offer better value. They have enabled us to focus on performance improvement in our police and fire services and to establish close partnerships among councils in respect of the integration of health and social care. The Scottish Government is delivering a better future for the people of Scotland. We do not charge our university students for their tuition fees; we do not charge the sick for their prescriptions; we do not charge our elderly citizens in relation to their personal care needs; we do not charge people for eye tests; and we do not charge senior citizens for their bus travel. Those five universal services are not the mark of a profligate Government that is reckless with public finances. Even with those commitments, the figures show that in each of the past five years public spending in Scotland as a percentage share of our economy has been less than in the UK—by some £4 billion. The share in Scotland is even lower than it is in the majority of our European Union partners. Those services, which are affordable and are fully paid for, are the mark of a Government that recognises, as the Reid Foundation does, that the principle of universality is one of the Parliament’s greatest achievements. Each year, more than 100,000 students in Scotland benefit from our decision not to charge tuition fees. Student debt levels are by far the lowest in the UK. We abolished Labour’s endowment fees, and students from the poorest backgrounds get a minimum income of more than £7,000. That is not something for nothing; it is investment, to enable individual talents to flourish, for everyone’s benefit.

Of course it has not done. I think that Jimmy Reid would be hard pushed to determine who the Tories are in this Parliament these days.

We know that in Scotland 600,000 adults who earned less than £16,000 per year used not to be entitled to free prescriptions. Studies in 2008 in 15 high-income countries that had prescription charges showed that the approach led patients to forgo essential medicines, which had an impact on their health and led to higher care costs. Free prescriptions are not something for nothing. Jimmy Reid urged students at the University of Glasgow to reject attitudes that might set one group against another. He urged them to reaffirm their faith in humanity and unashamedly acknowledge that, as Burns put it, “man is good by nature”. He stated his belief that his generation was taking mankind along a path towards a goal that is worth fighting for. Just over 40 years later, the vision for Scotland that the Scottish Government has set out embraces the goals that Jimmy Reid expressed so wonderfully in his speech. I, too, think that those goals are worth fighting for, and I look forward to continuing the process in an independent Scotland.

Scotland is already a strong country financially. With independence, we can grow our economy further to make even greater progress. Scotland is the European Union’s energy capital, with more than 60 per cent of all Europe’s oil production. Our oil will be worth £48 billion over the next six years. We have a quarter of Europe’s potential offshore wind and tidal energy. Our food and drinks exports continue to grow and are valued at more than £5 billion a year. Our universities are among the best in the world. Inward investment is strong, and the GERS figures show that we have a fiscal position that is stronger than that of the rest of the UK, whose deficit is 6 per cent of GDP, whereas Scotland’s is 2.3 per cent. We contribute 9.9 per cent of tax revenues to the UK and receive back 9.3 per cent in spending. Having full economic powers at our disposal would not only allow us to focus on growing our economy but give us the ability to get to grips with poverty and improve the welfare of our citizens. For too long, in an oil-rich Scotland, we have endured child poverty that has blighted the hopes and dreams of thousands of our young people. In some communities in Scotland, child poverty is as high as 43 per cent. Good progress has recently been made in driving that down, but we could do more with independence. Who among us can say with hand on heart that the UK has spent Scotland’s vast oil reserves wisely over the past 40 years? Where is the UK’s equivalent of Norway’s oil fund, which is now estimated to be worth £450 billion? I can tell members where the UK’s money went. It was squandered by successive Labour and Tory Governments on things such as Polaris and, now, Trident—nuclear weapons of mass destruction all stationed in Scotland and safely far away from England’s population centres. Billions of pounds have been wasted. We have seen blunder after blunder by the UK in almost every sector. For example, in NHS information technology procurement, we wasted £12.7 billion. Members may remember the fiasco of the Child Support Agency, in which £1 billion was written off. Seven billion pounds has been wasted in defence procurement mistakes and £5 billion was wasted on the abandoned identity card scheme. Let us also remember the £750 million wasted on the hapless millennium dome, which Tony Blair forced on a less-than-enthusiastic London public. Billions of pounds have been wasted. In the present day, the much-bragged-about AAA credit rating has gone. Growth forecasts are now cut in half, and UK debt as a share of the country’s GDP is forecast to rocket to more than 85 per cent by 2016. Who pays the price for that? Scotland’s children, our poorest families and pensioners do. George Osborne will go down in history as the man whose economic growth forecasts started at the lowest levels ever and then gradually worked their way downwards. With a record like that, is it really in Scotland’s best interests to stick with the UK?

I am really sad to hear that from the Liberals. I do not know whether Mr Rennie was around at the time but, as I understand it, the UK Government procured and commissioned the Parliament building, too. I would like to turn my attention away from the UK’s failures and to look at how many small nations in the world are meeting economic challenges much more effectively than their bigger counterparts are. Of the 34 advanced economies as defined by the International Monetary Fund, 23 have populations of less than 20 million. Eleven of those smaller countries are in the top 15 advanced economies based on per capita income and four of them are in the top five based on the World Economic Forum’s global ranking of competitiveness. Scotland GDP per head is about 118 per cent of the UK’s, and we rank about eighth out of those 34 countries. The UK languishes in around 16th place. What is going on and why are smaller countries faring better? According to David Skilling, who is a senior adviser to the New Zealand Government, there are three main reasons why smaller countries have outperformed larger economies over the past few decades. First, they have a greater capacity to adapt to a world that, through globalisation, is rapidly changing. Secondly, they tend to have higher levels of “social capital and trust”, well-functioning political institutions and a well-developed sense of external matters. Thirdly, they also tend to have good reputations for the quality of their policies. All those contribute to their enhanced performance. Mr Skilling concludes that, when it comes to continuing to succeed in what he describes as the current unforgiving environment, smaller countries have a distinct edge, provided that they continue to innovate and shape their policy development to the new economic environments that present themselves. To that end, smaller countries are more likely to play a leading role for many years to come and can offer unique guidance to other, larger advanced countries. The message is clear for our small country of just over 5 million people. Next year, on 18 September, we will stand at the crossroads and decide which of two possible futures is best for us: one with a lumbering, incompetent and failing UK, whose priorities—which are not shared by the Scots—are to spend billions on weapons instead of weans and to attack the poor and reward the rich—

The alternative is a future that will see Scotland emerge, at long last, to pursue a destiny that our own people share.

As members have already pointed out, making Scotland the best place in the world for children to grow up is a tall order but, as the Deputy First Minister said last week, it can be one of the “prizes of independence”. A good many initiatives that are already under way and about which members have offered some detail are taking us towards that goal; in my speech, I will re-emphasise some of them and share with the chamber a glimpse of what life can be like for some of our children who live in my Kilmarnock and Irvine Valley constituency. To start with, I think that we should contrast our efforts in Scotland with what the UK Government is about to do with its welfare reform agenda. Here, we are shifting much of our focus towards the early years, early interventions and preventative spending and so far the results are encouraging. The £270 million investment in the early years and early intervention will help communities that need help and, through our partnership with the health boards, the councils and the voluntary sector, we are beginning to put together teams of people who not only have the right skills but who actually care about getting it right for every child and will work tirelessly to achieve that. In just over 10 years, child poverty levels in Scotland have dropped substantially from 28 per cent to about 17 per cent; although that is still too high, it is heading in the right direction. However, child poverty levels are much higher in my constituency and the Scottish Government’s measures will help—they have to. There has also been a significant improvement in the number of mothers giving up alcohol during their pregnancies, and satisfaction rates with health visitors are very high at more than 80 per cent. We should contrast such measures with the UK Government’s imminent welfare reforms which, as colleagues have already pointed out, could condemn another 50,000 children in Scotland to poverty over the next few years. Those reforms must be one of the most disgraceful attacks on the poorest in society since the poll tax; there is not even a counterbalancing policy that targets the £2.5 billion savings that will be made on tackling anything else. It is a blatant attack on the poor to bail out a failing and financially downgraded Government and will hang around the necks of the Tories for years to come.

I hear what the member has said, but how on earth does the bedroom tax solve that and lift people out of poverty? It puts more people into poverty. The proposed children and young people bill will provide 600 hours of free early learning and childcare support to three and four-year-olds and looked-after two-year-olds. That is a big increase on what was already in place and will mean that, on average, these youngsters will get about two to three hours of quality support every day of their young lives. Researchers tell us that, during the first three years, a youngster’s brain growth is 75 per cent complete and by the age of three 50 per cent of our language is already in place. That is why it is so important to intervene positively in those early years, and for parents to read and talk to their children as often as possible. The 600 hours are a wonderful opportunity for parents and youngsters, but we must also do what we can to ensure that parents take up their entitlement and use it. Offering a service is one thing, but helping parents and making it easier for them to take up the service can also be a challenge. Through the various initiatives we must look for ways to support vulnerable families and build capacity in whoever the main carers are. I want to share a few thoughts on poverty in my constituency. From time to time over the years, I am sure that we have all noticed that some kids at school rarely, if ever, go on school trips with the rest of the children. Even on short trips to the museums in Glasgow, the safari park at Stirling or Edinburgh zoo, it is the same kids who are always missing and never have that experience. Going to another country on a trip with the school is no more than a dream for some of Scotland’s children, because their parents cannot afford even a modest contribution towards a day trip and certainly cannot afford to pay for a trip to another country. I know some children who are now 15 years old and who have still to set foot out of the town that they live in. That cannot be right in this day and age. Those youngsters stay silent about the issue, and so do their parents, but we all know the reason why. If we are tackling poverty and Scotland is to become the best place to grow up, I hope that we can do something about that issue. It can last from the first day a child goes to school right through to sixth year. No youngster should be excluded in that way. Our schools do what they can, but even in these very tight economic times I ask the ministerial team whether there is anything that can be done to offer a glimmer of hope to those families. Lastly, members can surely see that we can do much more for our children if we are not hampered by a Government in London whose only mantra is to cut budgets and make savings from its citizens. If there was only one reason to back independence, then this is surely it. The United Nations Children’s Fund said that the mark of a nation’s standing is how it treats its children. Let us strive to be that nation and lift all Scotland’s children out of poverty.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to review Scottish Water’s procurement processes. (S4O-01813)

As the cabinet secretary may be aware, smaller companies are sometimes at a disadvantage in engaging with the procurement process, which often favours larger companies due to economies of scale. First, can she clarify whether the public utilities will be included within the public procurement reform bill? Secondly, what advice can the Scottish Government offer to those small companies that do not make it on to Scottish Water’s various frameworks on how they can continue to develop their businesses?

I went to the University of Strathclyde in the 1970s and graduated with honours in computer science in 1980. I left there with not a penny in debt, other than the debt of gratitude to my parents for the financial sacrifice that they made in encouraging me to go to university. I got a job right away and worked continuously for 27 years in software-related employment until 2007, when I became a member of the Parliament. Of course, none of that would have happened if my family would have had to pay tuition fees or graduate endowments or if I would have been saddled with student loans. I would never have made it to university at all, because being saddled with a mountain of debt before even starting off in life would have made me think twice. One of the best days that I can recall in this Parliament—there have been many good days under the SNP in this Parliament—was 28 February 2008, when the Parliament abolished Labour’s graduate endowment fee or back-door tuition fee of more than £2,000. At that point, the ability to learn and not the ability to pay was once again established as a basic principle of Scots education. Scottish Labour was determined to hang on to its endowment charge and so opposed its abolition, hook, line and sinker, with the honourable exception of our Deputy Presiding Officer, Elaine Smith, who has left the chair for the moment. That measure immediately benefited 50,000 students in Scotland, who would not be burdened with a back-door tuition fee, adding to their debts when they left university. Because of that move by the Scottish Government, student debt levels in Scotland are the lowest in the UK. As my colleague Stewart Maxwell mentioned, the average is about £6,000 compared with £17,000 in England. On top of that, from this year, students from the poorest backgrounds will benefit from a minimum income guarantee of more than £7,000, which is the best in the UK. Labour opposed all those measures, but Scotland’s students are much better off as a result of what the SNP has done in government. The graduate endowment was a disaster. Of the £26 million that had been added to existing student loans at the time the fee was abolished, only £57,000 had been paid back to the taxpayer. Students in Scotland rightly supported the SNP Government’s position on that and still do. The mid-1970s, when I went to university, was probably the last time that a Labour Government kept its word about free education and tuition fees. As we all know, Tony Blair hijacked the Labour Party and Labour values by promising no tuition fees in 1997 and then introducing them a year later. David Blunkett followed up and promised no top-up fees in 2001 but, by 2004, the fees had shot up to £3,000 and Margaret Hodge lectured students that there was “no such thing as a free lunch.”

As usual, what we get from Labour members is a giant smokescreen to hide the fact that they all signed up to avoid paying tuition fees and are now in favour of them. They want to present a complete smokescreen to the people of Scotland. Not to be outdone, Labour in Scotland introduced tuition fees by the back door in 2001 with its £2,000 graduate endowment fee, which was thankfully abolished by the SNP in 2008. History is repeating itself. Labour candidates at the previous election lined up to get their pictures taken promising no tuition fees but now Labour members are turning their backs on Scotland’s students. Labour’s “something for nothing” cuts commission has chilling echoes of the party’s own past, when it said one thing and did another. If ever an episode will haunt a party that has totally lost its way, that must surely be it. The Labour amendment reads like a recipe for hashmagandy, a well-known Australian recipe for a stew made from anything that is lying around. Everything is in there, from funding models in England to budget review panels. That old favourite Labour ingredient, the independent commission, has made a comeback from 2008, when the Labour Party voted against abolishing the endowment fee. It is all there apart from one thing: tuition fees will be back if Labour ever wins again. Who knows, maybe the Labour Party will even want to bring the poll tax back. I will say a few words on investment in higher education and the arrangements for widening access. The allocation of more than £1 billion to our universities in 2012-13 is a real-terms increase of nearly 6 per cent on the previous year, with a further increase of nearly 4 per cent to come. That means that, in Scotland, we will be increasing teaching funding by almost 15 per cent over our spending review period, in contrast with a 40 per cent reduction in England over the same period. In December, we announced 2,000 extra university places for students from poorer backgrounds. Next year, an additional £10 million will be allocated to that, which will mean an additional 700 places under the widening access scheme, 1,000 for students moving from college to university and 300 via the skills for growth scheme. That is a fantastic commitment from the Scottish Government at a time when budgets are really tight. The message from the SNP is simple: there will be no tuition fees for Scotland’s young students when they go to university. Tuition fees are wrong and there will not be any in Scotland—not by the front door, the back door or any door. Our youngsters should get the chance to go to university in the way that many of us did because they have the ability to learn, not because their parents can buy them an education. I am delighted to support the Government motion.

I speak as someone who has been a proud member of the Kilmarnock credit union for a number of years now. Although those looking in from outside might be not exactly enthralled by today’s debate, it is very important to highlight the problems of the many thousands of Scots who are caught up in the spiral of debt. Debt can end careers, destroy families and ruin one’s health. We should not underestimate the importance of trying to help people to take responsibility for managing what some may regard as an inevitable consequence of the times that we live in. There can be no doubt that some companies are lying in wait to strike when people are at their most vulnerable and need immediate access to cash. As the minister said in his opening remarks, in 2009 more than 1 million people in the UK took out a combined total of about 4 million payday loans to the tune of more than £1 billion. It is estimated from those figures that, in that year in Scotland, some 100,000 Scots borrowed more than £100 million through such schemes. People turn to payday loan schemes because they appear more attractive than traditional borrowing routes, such as the banks. Sometimes, that may well be the case, but the business model for payday loans assumes that a percentage of people who take out a loan will go on to extend the loan, roll it over and thus compound their debt problems many times over. That is the point at which people need help from the Government—the UK Government in this case—to provide the necessary regulation to stop the exploitation of debt from becoming a booming industry that delivers further misery to already vulnerable people. Although some progress has been made by the current UK Government, such as by introducing new codes of practice for the industry and transferring regulation from the OFT to the new financial conduct authority, the UK Government seems unwilling to take some of the steps that other countries have taken to impose caps on charges and costs. That opportunity was also missed by the previous Labour Administration at UK level. As the minister informed us, countries such as France and Finland have introduced measures that either cap charges or apply interest-rate ceilings. I understand that payday loan schemes are outlawed altogether in some states in America. Under the Scottish Government’s existing powers, we can act in matters relating to the enforcement of debt. Through the debt arrangement scheme that was implemented in 2004, as Mr Macintosh explained, and updated again by this Government in 2011, we can provide some degree of protection for consumers, so that they can be helped to manage their debts better without the fear that their debts will run out of control and result in debt spiralling, court action and worse. Some of the changes that were introduced in 2011 included widening the money advice gateway to give us—notwithstanding Kezia Dugdale’s comments—more approved organisations managing the schemes; allowing applications from couples with joint liabilities; and the possibility of debt payment holidays of up to six months. Those changes have all helped a great deal, which appears to be borne out by the number of debt payment plans that are in place. Under the scheme, there were more than 3,300 plans in place in 2011-12 compared with about 1,400 or so immediately prior to the reviews. This year’s proposals to improve the debt arrangement scheme via the Scottish Government’s bankruptcy reform bill should bring even more comfort to people who will no doubt continue to access loan schemes. The intention, as other members have stated, is to freeze interest and charges from the date of application to the creditors, rather than from the date of approval of the payment plans. That will further help hard-pressed consumers who are struggling to repay debts. Those measures offer considerable hope to many thousands of Scots who face debt problems. However, we all know that, to address consumer debt and punitive interest charges, we need the UK Government to take effective action similar to that taken by others to bring an end to the misery caused by spiralling debt. I have no doubt that, in the event of a yes vote, our ministers will act to introduce such powers to our independent Parliament that will convene in 2016. In the meantime, I am delighted to support the Scottish Government’s motion.

I suppose that, when the motion was written, it seemed like a good idea at the time. Tens of thousands of students—maybe 21,000—stuck on a waiting list must have sounded like perfect fuel for another dig at the Scottish Government. Alas, it is yet another scare story from Labour and, when subjected to the scrutiny of audit, it falls apart at the seams. The findings of the audit so far are that nearly 75 per cent of those on the so-called waiting lists are not actually waiting for a place at college at all. In one college, the so-called waiting list reduced by 95 per cent when it was examined a little bit more closely. Those are quite incredible findings, given the sensational headlines that we all saw. A combination of duplicate applications, enrolments elsewhere and students no longer needing places has exposed the motion for what it really is: a cheap shot at the cabinet secretary. Kilmarnock College confirms that some students who were not successful in their course of choice were referred to other courses. As we are all well aware, no one is guaranteed their first choice. Also, some people who applied to Kilmarnock College did not attend for interview. Not even the briefing from the NUS mentions Labour’s waiting lists theory. There is not a single word about it in the five-page briefing. Instead of mentioning waiting lists, it concentrates on highlighting the budget cuts that have been imposed on Scotland as a result of Labour’s incompetence when it was last in office in the UK and recognising the SNP’s efforts to protect student numbers in further education. The truth is that Scotland’s SNP Government is getting on with the job of transforming further education. By 2014-15, the SNP will have invested £5 billion in our colleges since it came to office. That is 39 per cent more in cash terms than the equivalent period when Labour was in power. Since 2007, the SNP has also increased student support from £67 million to £84 million—an increase of 25 per cent. In this year’s budget, another £17 million was added. Despite being opposed by Labour, it was described as fantastic news by the NUS. Figures published this week show that more than 34,000 school and college students in Scotland continue to benefit from the education maintenance allowance. The average EMA payment to Scottish students is now £729 per year. More students from our communities most in need benefit from that payment, which was abolished in England. On the college estate, despite huge cuts to Scotland’s capital budget, the SNP is spending £200 million on a new City of Glasgow College. That is the biggest single investment made in any college in Scotland. We are also spending £50 million each on new colleges at Inverness and in Kilmarnock—my constituency. The latter will provide a massive boost to the town. If the Labour Party was serious about more funding on top of that for colleges, it could have presented an alternative budget, but it did not. It could also have suggested allocating some of the additional £331 million of capital that was announced last week to the colleges but it did not do that either. The Scottish Government did. It allocated another £19 million out of that for capital investment for colleges. When we start from the base budget of £511 million, which is acknowledged even in the NUS briefing, and add the additional capital investments and non-profit-distributing allocations, the total funding for colleges in Scotland amounts to more than £632 million. That is well up even on last year’s figure of £574 million. Scotland’s students and the Scottish public can be proud of the investment in our colleges, our students and our reforms of the sector, which will meet the needs of our students and our economy in the 21st century. I am happy to support the cabinet secretary’s amendment.

Will Labour be proposing an alternative budget then?

I am delighted to speak in the debate. Like many members, I served on my local council for the best part of 20 years. I wish that I had £1 for every comment that I heard along the lines of, “Who on earth thought that was a good idea?” Our dearly beloved planners have for many years borne the brunt of public indignation and been blamed for the variety of carbuncle awards that have been heaped on our unsuspecting and defenceless towns. The drive for modernism in the 1960s saw many of our historic town centres demolished, only to be replaced by units and shopping malls that are characterless and indistinguishable from one another. Many people said, “If that’s progress, let’s stay where we are,” but nobody listened. Of course, it was unfair to blame everything entirely on the planners or, perhaps, on the planning system. Scotland was ready for that type of modernism, with new designs and materials, and for a break from the stuffy historic past when people got droont every time they went shopping on a Saturday.

I absolutely acknowledge that. There is a lesson to be learned about design. We all seemed to want American-style shopping malls, indoor spaces and lots of glass, metal and plastic everywhere, so out went the old grey granite and stone high streets. Did local people get what they wanted? To a degree, they probably did, but the price was high, and we are still paying it today. I recall as a councillor in the 1990s trying to save the original stone railway station house in Kilmarnock, which I believe was the oldest in Scotland at the time. The thinking was that the building served no useful purpose and was better replaced by an imitation red sandstone wall. That replacement was duly carried out, and a photograph to remind us of our heritage had to do. I hope that we have come a long way from those heady days. I have followed the current developments and announcements by the Scottish Government with great interest—not only as a current MSP and former councillor, but as someone who values the character that is still left in our towns and wants it to be enhanced, and not further diminished by the planning system, planners or even the toon cooncillors. That is a tall order, but it is a worthy aim that we should pursue. I am therefore pleased with the commitments to strengthening the role of local people—particularly young people, as several members have mentioned—in the planning process. The charrette approach of having interactive design workshops that allow local people to shape their communities must surely be a welcome approach to local planning, which for many people can be too technical and remote to engage the ordinary person on a meaningful basis. Mark McDonald mentioned that earlier. I was pleased to hear colleagues who have much more knowledge than I do of the charrettes that have been carried out in Dumfries, Fife, Aberdeen and elsewhere confirm that—as I expected—a consequential benefit of the approach might be fewer objections to development proposals when they reach the planning application stage. One of the greatest complaints that I received as a local councillor was that local people rarely felt engaged with the planning process and took the view that, by the time they heard about the local plan or planning applications, everything was a done deal. The culture change to direct and early engagement of stakeholders and communities, and the minister’s commitment to involve more young people in planning, are crucial and will really help us to get things right. The fees proposal seems to have struck the correct balance between providing enough funding to help bridge the gap that Audit Scotland identified in fees and expenditure and managing the burden that is placed on applicants. An additional £4 million to £5 million coming to our planning authorities should go some way towards helping our councils to fulfil the greater demands that are placed on them these days. The agreement with COSLA to monitor performance improvements should also help us to identify and assess authorities that need help. That is a useful tool to aid performance improvement. Other members mentioned the proposals to simplify and streamline the process—the minister touched on those in his opening speech—without losing the quality of output or the involvement of local communities. That, too, is welcome. Some of the concerns that were expressed by consultees chime with my experience as a local member. I am pleased to note that the minister has acknowledged many of them and will, I hope, set out more details in NPF 3 in March, and in the planning policy review that he announced a moment ago. One concern is that the time that is taken to process applications is not consistent—which is perhaps a good way of putting it. Many applicants are frustrated by the lack of a clear timetable for objectors to submit views and for the council to determine applications. Progress on that will be very welcome. A key concern that remains is about how we can enable local members to participate in the planning application process at an early stage. The current advice in some authorities—perhaps all authorities—is that they should not participate in order that they can retain their objectivity when an application comes to committee. However, our local members carry the can if and when things go wrong, and their communities expect them to be involved. I would welcome a mechanism that would permit them to participate in the planning application stages. Perhaps the way to achieve that would be along the lines of the charrettes that we discussed earlier. The proposals that the minister has set out are welcome and appear to have broad support across Scotland. Planning belongs to us all, and we have a duty to our communities and future communities to get it right. Meaningful engagement with local people to shape those future communities is the right approach. Although there have been some spectacular failures in the past, today’s proposals, which have community involvement at their heart, will give us a better chance of getting it right in the future.

I congratulate my colleague Adam Ingram on bringing the matter to the attention of Parliament by securing this evening’s members’ business debate. In a country that is as resource-rich as ours, with booming industries in oil and gas alongside the exciting new developments in renewable energy, it can be all too easy to dismiss the coal industry’s relevance to modern-day Scotland. Once the powerhouse of Scotland’s economy, with 150,000 workers producing 40 million tonnes of coal every year by the 1900s, the coal industry may no longer exist on the scale that it once did, but its contribution to local and national economies remains as important as ever. Nowhere is that more evident than in East Ayrshire. Like Scotland as a whole, East Ayrshire has a long history of coal mining and production. That history has had its fair share of highlights and tragedies, but it has shaped the community for hundreds of years and continues to do so. I am indebted, for obvious reasons, to my granddad Daniel Coffey for surviving a mining accident in 1927 at the Windyedge pit, near Gatehead in my constituency, which killed two of his companions. The mining industry still touches many families in Ayrshire today. The coal industry’s decline in recent years has been reflected in parts of the community, but that is exactly why what remains of the industry is so important to East Ayrshire. Some 704 people are directly involved in coal-work operations in the area. That represents 58 per cent of the total for Scotland and an increase of 11.8 per cent since 2008. Those workers ensure that East Ayrshire produces more than half of Scotland’s entire coal output, with a little under 3 million tonnes being produced in the area each year. Indeed, the coal industry provides 5.6 per cent of the area’s gross value added output, which is far more than for any other local authority area in Scotland. It could be convincingly argued, therefore, that East Ayrshire represents the heart of Scotland’s coal industry, and that that heart is still beating strongly. In cash terms, those 3 million tonnes of coal account for £46 million gross valued added output, which means that East Ayrshire again leads the way by contributing more than half of Scotland’s entire coal industry GVA. For that reason, I must join my colleague Adam Ingram in welcoming the consideration of two Scottish projects to take forward the next phase of the UK Government’s carbon capture and storage programme. As producers and beneficiaries of fossil fuels, we hold a responsibility to contribute to limiting the negative effects that their use may have on our environment and the environments of others. We are already making a great contribution to helping the victims of climate change in other parts of the world through our climate justice fund, but it remains as important as ever that we seek ways to prevent such damage in the first place rather than to cure it afterwards. Carbon-capture technology will undoubtedly help us to achieve that. However, I share my colleague’s concern at the proposals substantially to increase from 2016 the cost of transporting coal by rail. The Office of Rail Regulation, which plans to introduce the charges, anticipates an increase in cost to freight operators of between 3 and 5 per cent. Although we must recognise the good intention behind the increase—namely, to ease the burden on the taxpayer—we must nonetheless consider the long-term impact that the plans might have on the coal industry as a whole. Rail freight should not become a cash cow, because freight hauliers could move much of it back on to the road network, which I am sure we would not wish for.

14. To ask the Scottish Government how it monitors and reviews the cost to the national health service of prescriptions issued by general practitioner surgeries. (S4O-01631)

According to ISD Scotland, generic prescribing accounts for 83 per cent of drugs that are prescribed, which represents a welcome 6 per cent improvement in the past 10 years. Can the cabinet secretary assure me that the costs of branded drugs, which tend to be much more expensive, will be kept under close scrutiny to ensure that value for money is taken into account?

The Commonwealth games in 2014 will be a fantastic showcase for Glasgow—and for Scotland. We will have 17 sports, with 6,500 athletes from 71 countries coming to Glasgow to take part in what have become known throughout the world as the friendly games.

I beg your pardon; I will do my very best. Who can forget the wild scenes of jubilation at the ceremony in Sri Lanka in 2007 when Glasgow was announced as the winner, and the even wilder scenes back in Scotland as young people gathered in a number of venues across Glasgow city to celebrate the news? Scotland and Hampden are rightly famous for the Hampden roar, but on the day when Glasgow was announced as the 2014 venue the screams could be heard even as far away as Edinburgh. I can just remember the incredible 5,000m final at Scotland’s first Commonwealth games in Edinburgh in 1970, when Ian Stewart pipped Ian McCafferty to win gold for Scotland in a pulsating race that saw the legendary Kenyan athlete Kip Keino coming third. With Lachie Stewart having already won the 10,000m, it was a fantastic achievement for Scottish athletics to have three world-class runners competing at the highest level and winning medals for Scotland on an international stage in front of their home crowd. It is pleasing to see such a high number of contracts for the games being awarded to Scottish-based companies. Over the next six months, the Glasgow organising committee expects £50 million-worth of business opportunities to be generated. The four strategic partners—the Scottish Government, Glasgow City Council, Glasgow 2014, and Commonwealth Games Scotland—are reporting that everything is on track and that the substantial investment by the partners and sponsors to deliver a successful games will also see many benefits for Glasgow and Scotland for years to come. It is welcome that an additional £1 million has been added to the elite athletes programme budget, making a total of £9 million to support the various performance development initiatives. I hope that that will mean more success for our athletes—no pressure there, then. In a regular update to the Public Audit Committee earlier this month, we heard news of progress on the Hampden running track part of the project and we heard about important revisions to security procurement arrangements in line with the London experiences this summer, as detailed by the minister earlier. Planning for the games seems to be well in hand, and our best wishes go to all the partners that their hard work will pay off as we approach the summer of 2014. I will say a little about the plans for the long-term benefit from the games. The sports facilities and infrastructure will be a clear and obvious benefit to Glasgow and Scotland; they are already allowing us to pitch for and secure more high-profile events, which is particularly welcome. Possibly of greater importance is the impact that the games will have on young people right across our country and the thousands of volunteers directly coming to help at the games. The £10 million legacy facilities fund that the First Minster announced in March will provide some great opportunities for people to engage with sports in their local communities. The volunteers who come to the games have a crucial role to play since they will be the first point of contact for many visitors. The experience they gain will be extremely valuable to them in developing their own skills, and many of them will have the opportunity to gain direct employment opportunities in sport through the £5 million legacy young person’s fund. I am also looking forward to hearing more details about the youth legacy ambassador programme, which will give young people a chance to work in their communities, to find out how best we can capitalise on the games. Only 30 minutes down the road from Glasgow, in Kilmarnock, East Ayrshire Council recently opened an international-standard running track and sports facility. The facilities are being well used, with more than 17,000 users so far. There are a variety of athletics programmes, and Scottish Athletics and Scottish Disability Sport have asked to use the facility as a national camp for their disability squad of about 30 athletes. We very much hope that the first-class facilities will attract some of the games teams to our area as they prepare for the games.

We have the voice of the Scottish Parliament and its members, and of course we have the loud, clear and capable voice of Margo MacDonald. One of our best-known local athletes is weightlifter Peter Kirkbride, from Chick Hamilton’s club in Shortlees in Kilmarnock. Peter was a silver medallist in Delhi in 2010 and we hope that one more big lift from him will bring a gold medal back to Kilmarnock, so that we can spray our post boxes with some of that nice gold paint that has been left over from London.

I am just coming to the end of my speech. I am convinced that the games will be a stunning success and that our visitors will never forget the warmth of the people of Glasgow. Let us look forward to an incredible Hampden roar at all the venues, for all the athletes and visitors, and to an even bigger roar when our athletes step onto the podium to claim their gold medals for Scotland. After all, they will be doing that again in Brazil in 2016.

I am grateful for the opportunity to contribute to the debate. When I tell anyone who asks me that I am an honours graduate in computer science, I usually get a strange look, as if to say, “What on earth are you doing here in the Scottish Parliament?” Regrettably, I am still getting that look from some colleagues in the chamber today. The look of surprise on people’s faces tells me something about attitudes to science and where people think that it rightly belongs. We should all strive to change those attitudes by inviting the public to engage with science and, as policymakers, by putting science centre stage in what we do. That wonderful professor of science Carl Sagan once said: “We live in a society exquisitely dependent on science and technology, in which hardly anyone knows anything about science and technology.” My own journey in science began as a youngster with my fascination with the moon landings in 1969; I was fortunate to be able to highlight those events in a recent members’ business debate in tribute to Neil Armstrong. Within a few years, I was lucky enough to be studying computer science at the University of Strathclyde. Way back then, hardly anyone I knew knew anything about computers and the impact that they were to have on our changing world, but I wanted to be a part of it anyway to see where it took me. I think that Professor Sagan was right about science being a bit of an unknown to most people in our society. I am grateful to the Royal Society of Edinburgh for its briefing paper to members, which tells us: “much more scientific knowledge exists outside than within government.” We probably all knew that, but good progress is being made in Scotland and in the European Union in that regard. The science for Scotland strategy that was launched in 2008 underpins much of the work that is currently going on in Scotland to place science more at the heart of what we do. It is aimed at individuals and at encouraging greater awareness of and participation in science, supporting scientific research, fostering more partnerships between business and academia and reaching out to develop Scotland’s role as a key player in science internationally. Members have highlighted Scotland’s respected role in research citations around the world, and the increasing number of international collaborations that are taking place with countries such as Germany, France, China and the USA. Looking to Europe, I find it extremely encouraging to note, as members have mentioned, that Professor Anne Glover was appointed as the European Commission’s first-ever chief scientific adviser, following her similar role for the Scottish Government. The horizon 2020 programme, of which members may well be aware, is attempting to simplify and nurture research and innovation capabilities and to be a real driver for jobs and growth in Europe. It will be a huge test of the European Union’s ability to apply scientific knowledge directly and positively to effect the kind of societal change that most of us want to see. I was fortunate to meet Professor Glover a few years ago at one of the many science festivals that take place at Our Dynamic Earth, and I look forward to seeing her develop an influential role as one of Scotland’s top scientists at the heart of European policy making. I will move to a local focus. I have had the privilege of seeing the emergence of a new engineering and science society in Kilmarnock, which Professor Danny Gorman established just last year. The idea came from a conference that was held at Kilmarnock College, which resulted in discussions on science engagement—or the lack of it at the time—and the desire to promote a greater interest in science among our pupils. I am delighted to say that the society is going from strength to strength. It has already had five major lectures from scientists such as Professor Colin McInnes, who spoke on advanced space concepts; Dr Dan Kirkwood, who spoke on new materials that are emerging; Suzanne Flynn, who talked about her experience in aerospace engineering; and Professor Martin Hendry, who gave us a fantastic lecture on gravitational waves. In the new year, we are to hear from Dr Victoria Martin of the University of Edinburgh, who is, coincidentally, also from Kilmarnock. She will tell us about her work in searching for the Higgs boson particle and its implications for understanding the origins of the universe. The point is that all the presenters and members of the society meet to promote science—and engineering in our case—to further public interest in science and to influence public policy. One of our champions of the society is a local teacher, Colin Barbour, who is principal teacher of physics at St Joseph’s Academy in Kilmarnock and recently won the Institute of Physics teacher of the year award 2012. The comment from Professor Sir Peter Knight about physics driving the Scottish economy and Scotland leading the UK in that regard is both appropriate and encouraging. Scotland has a long and impressive history of scientific contributions that have made the world a much better place in which to live. The new challenges that we face in world population, climate change, energy, food production and economic prosperity are all areas in which we can find Scottish scientists making an important contribution. In my view, we are placing science more at the heart of what we do and perhaps, if he had lived for a few more years, Professor Sagan would change his view and see that science and scientists are everywhere, even at the heart of government.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to develop co-operative businesses. (S4O-01560)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that this is international year of co-operatives and that Scotland currently has more than 500 co-op businesses, which employ more than 28,000 people and have a combined turnover of more than £4 billion. Does he have any plans to extend the good work that the Scottish Government is already doing to promote co-operative businesses within our local communities and to encourage even greater participation in the successful co-operative model?

Will the cabinet secretary outline how the local government settlement will implement reform of public services and the proposals of the Christie commission?

I am still reeling a bit after the offering from Annabel Goldie. In contrast with the positive examples that we have heard about to celebrate Scotland and St Andrew’s day, all that Miss Goldie seemed to offer was to trumpet the abolition of slavery—that was the best example that she could come up with. I remind her that, even in the emerging United States of America, slavery was abolished in the majority of states by 1804, but the British empire hung on to the profits from it for another 29 years, before it was abolished in 1833.

I thank the member for that clarification, but if that is the best example that she can come up with, she is struggling to present her case. The stories about St Andrew the apostle are many and varied. He was the first apostle and follower of Christ. As many members have said, we share him with many nations such as Greece, Russia and Ukraine. His relics are found in Scotland, Greece, Italy and Poland and are a crucial part of the Christian tradition of celebrating his feast day on 30 November. Some years ago, I had the pleasure of standing beneath the magnificent statue of St Andrew in the Vatican, which was unveiled in 1640 and above which is a relic from the cross on which he was martyred by the Romans. That led me to appreciate the close association that Scotland has with him. It is interesting that the flag of the island of Tenerife looks similar to our Scottish saltire. One story is that it was adopted in recognition of the bravery of Scottish sailors at the battle of Santa Cruz in 1797. They were led by Admiral Nelson, but the battle ended in defeat for Nelson and he lost part of his arm as a consequence. That has nothing at all to do with St Andrew, but it has a possible link with Scotland. So every time that members see a picture of Admiral Nelson with his right arm inside his coat, they can proudly share the knowledge of how and when that happened and its connection with Scotland. It is curious that, in many modern-day manifestations, the cross of St Andrew is depicted as dark blue when, in fact, it is azure blue—as close to the colour of the sky as we can get—and defined as such by the Parliament some years ago, including by colleagues who still serve here, as I understand. I suspect that the adoption of dark blue had more to do with the limited early methods of producing dyes for colouring garments. Dark blue was easier to produce and provided a stark contrast with colours that opponents in other places adopted. Andrew’s place as patron saint was established early in Scotland’s history and provides modern Scotland with not only an association with an apostle of Jesus, but a beautiful and, I hope, plausible explanation of how our flag came to be what it is. In modern Scotland, we choose to commemorate St Andrew’s day in a rich variety of ways, including music, theatre and literary events throughout Scotland. Our schools bring his story to life, celebrate our connection with him and promote Scotland and the best that we have to offer. Scotland’s first national book week, which was mentioned in the cabinet secretary’s motion and in her speech, features strongly in my constituency, with events taking place in Kilmarnock that involve contributions from local Ayrshire writers and others. Something of a cultural renaissance is taking place in Kilmarnock and the town has been shortlisted for the creative places award. We have had some magnificent events at the Burns monument centre, the Dick institute and the beautifully restored Palace theatre and grand hall buildings. Some incredible work is also going on at the Centrestage music theatre in the town. Visitor numbers are climbing, and a range of events involving music, the arts and literature has seen the town begin to reclaim its creative heritage. As members know, Robert Burns’s first book—the Kilmarnock edition—was printed in the town. We also have the only school in Scotland to have two Nobel prize winners as former pupils—Sir Alexander Fleming and John Boyd Orr. We also have some contemporary writers—such as Willie McIlvanney or, more recently, Zoe Strachan and our fellow Ayrshire man Rab Wilson—who are making quite a contribution to the literary landscape. We should also not forget our local contemporary rock ‘n’ roll stars Biffy Clyro, who talk up the town whenever they get the chance. East Ayrshire Council’s cultural development leader, Phillipa Aitken, says—rightly, in my view—that Kilmarnock has been a creative town for generations. Recent investment by the council and other organisations has certainly brought an exciting new era to that part of Ayrshire. St Andrew’s day marks the start of Scotland’s winter festival and, as the cabinet secretary remarked, gives us a fantastic opportunity to celebrate Scotland’s people and history. I took the opportunity to look back and discover my own family history, using the impressive genealogy search facilities at the Burns monument centre. I discovered that my ancestors arrived in Kilmarnock from County Tipperary in Ireland in 1850, which was a turbulent time for Scotland and Ireland. Significant past events can explain the present to us and give us a glimpse of our possible future. St Andrew the apostle knew nothing of Scotland and our nation was not yet born at his time. However, as each St Andrew’s day arrives, we can reach out to him, retell his story and retell the story of Scotland. In so doing, we can offer an enthusiastic world audience a closer look at the richness of what modern Scotland has to offer.

7. To ask the Scottish Government when the Scottish Catholic archives will be made available to genealogy centres in Kilmarnock and Glasgow in addition to the Edinburgh centre. (S4O-01502)

The cabinet secretary will of course be aware of the importance of providing access to Catholic archives and history as close as possible to the west of Scotland centres where many Catholic people live. Will she agree to consult further with the Catholic church on whether it will review the arrangements to ensure that there is equal access for people who live in the west of Scotland as well as for those in Edinburgh?

2. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports students with dyslexia, particularly in written examinations. (S4O-01480)

The minister will be aware that dyslexia can be a particularly debilitating condition that often affects people’s verbal as well as written communication skills. Can he assure me that students who take written and indeed verbal exams in any language, including English, are not penalised due to their disability? Are exam markers made aware of a candidate’s dyslexia?

4. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether it will review the performance of information technology systems in constituency offices. (S4O-01495)

I thank my colleague for his detailed answer, and I thank our IT team for their sterling efforts over the past years to try to resolve the performance issues. However, I do not think that the problems are related to broadband speeds or processing capability in the new computer systems that we give members from time to time. Rather, I think that the problems lie in the levels of security layering in the communications between constituency offices and Holyrood. I would be happy to work with my colleague and others to try to identify solutions and improve the position for all members.

My thanks and congratulations go to our Deputy Presiding Officer, John Scott, for bringing the British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly’s work to the Parliament’s attention. The British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly was not exactly on my radar until I was asked to join it last year. The body has a diversity of political interests, and at first it seemed to me that it might be an assembly of the middle ground that offered recommendations to please everyone and achieved very little. However, nothing could be further from the truth. The members who attend the assembly are certainly not slow in representing their views, but they have shown determination to understand and find common ground with their colleagues, no matter their politics. That is quite an achievement if we consider the origins of the assembly, which was established in 1990 to help to further the peace process. Even after only my first three plenary sessions, my view is that the assembly is doing some fantastic work, and the members and support staff who make it all possible are to be congratulated. Under the excellent leadership of Joe McHugh TD and Laurence Robertson MP, as co-chairs, business agendas are put together that certainly offer members the opportunity to engage directly on issues of importance. In Glasgow last month, there was a very welcome opportunity to look at the Scottish economy and Irish-Scottish relations. As well as keynote contributions from the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Theresa Villiers, and our Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism, Fergus Ewing—John Scott mentioned them—there were contributions from Ailish Forde and Jane Richardson from Diageo. It would be fair to say that there was considerable interest in what the speakers had to say and, as far as I recall, all the sessions ran over time due to the number of members who wished to raise points of interest. It is clear that there is keen interest in what is happening in Scotland, not just among our Irish colleagues, but among our counterparts in the UK Parliament, the Channel Islands, the Isle of Man, Jersey and Guernsey. Mrs Villiers stated her support for Northern Ireland being given control of corporation tax, but she was equally adamant that any further devolutionary changes in Scotland would be put on ice until the independence referendum. That certainly caused some discussion in the assembly that morning. Mr Ewing took a number of questions from various delegates, including one from our Deputy Presiding Officer. It would be fair to say that Mr Ewing spoke with great enthusiasm about Scotland, the huge potential for renewable energy, our shared interests with Ireland and our prospects for the future. It is interesting that we also heard from Sir William McKay on the age-old West Lothian question. If I have to be perfectly honest, I think that that flew over the heads of the majority of the delegates who attended. BIPA is an excellent forum. It brings together people with polar-opposite political views but allows them to come together in common purpose when the opportunity comes their way. So far, my experiences of BIPA have been first class: first, in Brighton, where we were guests of our UK Parliament hosts; and then on a memorable visit to Dublin, where the assembly was addressed by Taoiseach Enda Kenny and was later hosted by President Michael D Higgins. But where other than in Glasgow’s famous Curlers in Byres Road would it be possible to slip in unnoticed with members from the UK House of Lords, senators from Seanad Èireann, TDs from the Dáil and Sinn Féin and Ulster Unionist members from the Northern Ireland Assembly not only to spend time together but, crucially, to develop a closer understanding and to maintain friendships that are now well established? Glasgow indeed offered our colleagues a very warm welcome and left a great impression. I very much look forward to further engagement with colleagues in the assembly. Once again, I offer my thanks to our staff in the Scottish Parliament, who work so hard to make these occasions such a success. Go raibh an t-ádh libh, agus feicfidh mé sibh i nDún na nGall—best wishes, and see you in Donegal.

The excellent briefings provided for the debate by our research team and Barnardo’s contain a number of statistics on which we can draw; members have shared many of them during the debate already. The numbers that took me by surprise were that there are 16,000 children who are being looked after by Scotland’s local authorities, and that there are possibly up to another 15,000 being cared for by relatives under informal arrangements. We should just imagine how those children would fill two decent-sized football stadiums. That is a stark reminder of the importance of the work that the Scottish Government is doing with local authorities, other partner organisations and families who support their children. The rule yourself in campaign that is being promoted this week by BAAF is as enlightening as it is moving in the way in which it highlights the cases of the youngsters who are featured. The wishes on a star chart shows the wishes of some of those youngsters, who yearn for what most children might regard as the ordinary things in life, such as having a pet, going swimming or just having fun. In the absence of a family, parents or brothers and sisters, those ordinary things become dreams for so many youngsters. I commend the organisation for the work that it is doing and welcome the events throughout Scotland that Barnardo’s, in particular, has planned in order to offer potential parents an insight into the adoption process. As the minister said when she launched the national parenting strategy last month, she is not starting from scratch. She is pulling together universal services in health, education and social work, combining those with the third sector and bringing everything together under one shared agenda to demonstrate a real commitment to Scotland’s children and families. The suggestion in the proposed children and young people bill to award rights and responsibilities to our kinship carers recognises the work that they do and gives them a much more stable working environment. For too long they have been unsung heroes, taken for granted by a system that, although it is grateful for their intervention on behalf of thousands of youngsters, does little to recompense them for their efforts. Most local authorities now pay kinship carer allowances, but it was a fight to get the UK Government to agree not to claw back some of those allowances to balance out other benefits. The minister and her predecessors can therefore be proud of their achievements to date, including the widely supported plans in the national parenting strategy. During the summer, I had the pleasure of meeting Who Cares? Scotland’s Kilmarnock-based team under the excellent guidance of Jimmy McWilliam and his staff. As members will know, Who Cares? Scotland provides advocacy support to many youngsters in care settings. Not all are destined for adoption, of course, but the discussion that I had that day with Jimmy about the work that his team does opened my eyes to the needs of our looked-after children. One of the most striking messages was that looked-after children sometimes have little social contact with their friends. Therefore, on top of the obvious challenges that they face in retaining family relationships, they can find themselves presented with yet more difficulties in simply trying to keep friendships going. Who Cares? Scotland asked more than 100 youngsters what was important to them for the children and young people bill. Clare Adamson has already shared a quotation from the report, but I would like to repeat the last sentence, which stood out for me. The young person said: “I never got to say goodbye to my friends either which I didn’t like.” In the report, the common message from young people was that we must involve them in the process, tell them what is happening and give them time to prepare themselves. If our purpose is really to put children at the centre of all that we do, those sentiments must be listened to and acted on. I am sure that the minister will have noted the comments that were made in the report with great interest. In the report “Care and Permanence Planning for Looked After Children in Scotland” by the Scottish Children’s Reporter Administration there is a helpful section that looks at timescales and some causes of delay. The sample that is offered in the report shows us the four stages to achieving permanence, from initial contact to permanence being decided, the lodging of applications and petitions, and orders being granted. For more than half the children in the sample, it took between one year and two years to progress from the point at which permanence had been decided to presenting the petition in court. Many reasons were offered to help us to understand the delays in other parts of the process. As expected, they ranged from attempts at rehabilitation in families, delays in identifying suitable adoptive parents and difficulties if other siblings were involved. However, it is not clear to me why there can be delays of up to two years between the point at which permanence has been decided and the submission of the application to the court for determination. I think that Nanette Milne has already mentioned a suggestion by Barnardo’s that a framework should be established with clear guidelines on what the timescales should be so that we would all know what to expect. From the tone of the discussion on this important subject and the breadth and depth of the work that the Scottish Government has already carried out, I am in no doubt that the minister and her team have a clear understanding of the issues surrounding looked-after children and their journey to permanence and adoption. It seems that we are developing a whole-system approach, as requested by East Ayrshire Council, which is my council, and I am sure that others support that approach. The additional call for a proactive Scotland-wide approach to finding adopters and long-term carers, which perhaps links the issue to employability and alternative pathways, is interesting. I hope that the minister will consider that as she takes forward her agenda.

2. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to encourage more undergraduates to study computer science and software engineering. (S4O-01417)

The minister will be aware of the new opportunities that are opening up for software developers with the arrival of 4G mobile services, and of Scotland’s already strong position in the creative industries, which is exemplified by the fantastic achievements of Gordon Cameron and his work with Pixar on the movie “Brave”, and the masters course on gaming that is offered by the University of Abertay. Does the minister see an opportunity to further promote software engineering to Scotland’s young undergraduates and thereby to capitalise on the exciting future for the industry in Scotland?

With great pleasure, I offer a few words in memory of Commander Neil Alden Armstrong, who died in August this year. As everyone surely knows, Commander Armstrong was the first man to set foot on the moon on 20 July 1969. From that moment, he became a hero to not only the American people, but the people of the world. His carefully prepared line: “That’s one small step for man; one giant leap for mankind”, which he said as he stepped from the ladder of the lunar module on to the moon’s powdery surface, is surely one of the most significant and enduring quotations in human history. It announced that we, as a species, had made the first journey from earth to another world. Neil Armstrong was born in Ohio in America in 1930. He was the oldest of three children and was of Scottish and German ancestry. I have no doubt that other members will reflect on his family connections with Langholm. I have watched a clip of the 1972 ceremony, and it is possible to see the sense of pride that Neil Armstrong had in his Scottish roots when he accepted an invitation, only three years after the landing, to become a freeman of the muckle toon. He could fly planes before he could drive a car. At 15, he got his first flight certificate. He served his country from 1949 to 1952 and, as a pilot during the Korean war, survived by ejecting from his fighter plane. He had to repeat that feat some years later when testing a prototype of the lunar module, which was nicknamed the flying bedstead. Apparently, he ejected from it with less than a second to spare, walked back to his office and got on with his work while the prototype vehicle exploded in flames. A masters graduate of aeronautical engineering, he became an astronaut in 1962, first commanding the two-man Gemini craft before the more famous three-man Apollo programme was initiated. Then, of course, the most famous journey in the history of man was being planned. In 1961, President John F Kennedy stated the aim that America would land a man on the moon—and get him back safely—by the end of the decade. So it proved. The Apollo missions began and gradually got closer to the moon without landing there until, in 1969, Apollo 11, with Commander Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins, took off from Cape Kennedy in the magnificent Saturn V rocket on 16 July. Their mission was indeed, in the words of the famous science fiction series “Star Trek”, to go where no man had gone before, land on the moon and get back safely, but it was science fact—it was actually happening. I recall being totally gripped as an 11-year-old by that adventure and the five-day journey to get to the moon. For a young boy or girl who was interested in science in those days, it was the dream of a lifetime to be able to witness a spacecraft leaving earth and landing on what we then called another planet. I remember having a huge wall poster that showed all the planned stages of the journey. The mission was, of course, a stunning success. While Michael Collins orbited the moon in the command module Columbia, Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin made the descent to the lunar surface. In typical fashion, Commander Armstrong had to take manual control of the lunar module—or the eagle, as they called it—and he put the vehicle on the surface with about 45 seconds of fuel remaining, which was an experience that he was well used to. Roughly 100 hours after the launch, Commander Neil Armstrong descended the ladder, uttered his immortal words and made history. It is a lovely thought that the moon’s first-foot should be a wonderful man with a strong Scottish connection. Buzz Aldrin joined him 20 minutes later and, together, they spent only about two and a half hours on the surface, collecting samples, taking pictures and filming, before blasting off to rejoin their colleague for the journey home. To say that they received a hero’s welcome would be an understatement. In those days, the Apollo crafts landed in the sea to be picked up by American aircraft carriers. On they went to a life that, for them, was changed forever. In 2008, Commander Armstrong was recognised by the University of Edinburgh, which awarded him an honorary degree. I recommend watching his speech, during which he told the fascinating story of how he had discovered that two of his most revered scientists of all time—our own James Watt and Benjamin Franklin—were already members of a lunar society in the 18th century. He had to find out whether their research could help him on his Apollo missions. He even spoke in a Scottish accent as he recounted how, to his surprise and amusement, he discovered that the two gentlemen could best get home from the meetings at which they were reasonably regular attenders, after having enjoyed some conversation, whisky, dinner and claret, through the darkened streets of Birmingham when the moon was full, so their regular monthly gatherings became known as meetings of the lunar society. Neil Armstrong, our reluctant and gentle hero, revelled in telling that story in Edinburgh, and the warmth of the manner in which he recounted it tells us something about the love and the passion that he had for science and our achievements throughout the centuries. Neil Armstrong is one of the greatest heroes of all time. When the memory of other individual achievements fades with the passing of time, his name will stand out proudly for ever more. Centuries will pass, but he will always be the first man to have set foot on another world—an ambassador for the human race and for peace. The eagle landed in 1969, and it will forever remain a symbol of man’s achievements in space. I hope that it will also remind future generations that a very special man took to the skies on our behalf and came back safely to relive the dream with us.

It is interesting that more humility on the subject seems to have been shown by Patrick McLoughlin MP than by some of his Tory colleagues in this Parliament. Nevertheless, can the minister seek assurances from the United Kingdom Government that whatever inquiry is set up will be robust and independent, given that it will be led by Downing Street and rail industry insiders?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what its strategy is for the roll-out of 4G mobile services. (S4O-01340)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that detailed answer. I am the convener of the cross-party group on digital participation, and one of the common messages that we hear is that rural communities in particular must not lose out when new technologies are introduced. Will the cabinet secretary reassure me that the Scottish Government will do everything that it can within its powers to ensure that the roll-out of 4G mobile technologies in Scotland will serve all Scotland, not only the areas that are most lucrative for commercial service providers?

My colleague Angus MacDonald, who spoke earlier, must have looked over my shoulder when I wrote my speech, because it contains a number of the points that he made. They are nevertheless worth repeating. As he is a farmer and I am not, I am encouraged about what I am about to say. It is fair to say that Europe’s common agricultural policy has been and still is the most complex and controversial farming policy of all time. I understand that it was established in about 1962 by the original European Union members of France, West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg. The noble objectives then were “to increase agricultural productivity ... to ensure a fair standard of living for the agricultural community ... to stabilise markets”, to provide certainty of food supplies and “to ensure that supplies reach consumers at reasonable prices.” To achieve those initial aims, the then member states devised two principal mechanisms. First, target prices were established, mainly to prevent imported cheaper foods from undercutting European prices. The second mechanism was intervention to take up produce that could not be sold at a price floor, because of a drop in prices. That artificially removed supply and prevented further price falls. One or two members have referred to the CAP terminology, which is bewildering. We hear about variable levies, price floors, intervention prices, coupling, decoupling, pillar 1, pillar 2, single farm payments, slipper farming, active farmers, VCS and on and on. Keeping pace with all the mechanisms and terminology is a challenge in itself. I am impressed that my colleagues around the chamber seem to be well versed in all that. The bureaucracy and red tape that surround the CAP often make us wonder how farmers have any time to grow anything. One consequence of the drive to establish higher prices was that European farmers produced more food than was needed. That led to the butter mountains and wine lakes of the 1980s, which one or two members have mentioned. Surely that was an example of the spectacular failure of the policy at the time. From the early days to this day, we have seen ever-changing emphases that have pandered to vested interests in one way or another. Currently, 27 member states—or 28 states, as Stewart Stevenson said—are negotiating for a better deal for themselves. That is epitomised by the 7,000 amendments that are due to be considered in November. Turning to the present day, CAP negotiations at member state level are—as we know—carried out by the UK Government. If we look at one or two statistics that highlight the marked differences between Scotland and England, it becomes clear that a UK-based CAP strategy does not fit Scotland. In Scotland, 85 per cent of our agricultural land has less favoured area status, in comparison with 17 per cent of agricultural land in England. Given that much of Scotland’s beef sector is within LFAs, that status becomes much more important to us than it is to England. That differential in land quality was recognised in the early days of CAP, and it continues to be important to Scotland. Colleagues have already explained the significance of pillar 1, in which Scotland gets only 48 per cent of the average payment per hectare as against England’s 85 per cent. In pillar 2, we have the lowest allocation in Europe and receive about a fifth of what Ireland gets, when our two countries have similar agricultural production capabilities.

I am trying to make the point that, if Scotland was negotiating as an independent country, we would get a better deal than we do under the present circumstances. I am not criticising what England gets, which is probably what it is entitled to. However, because Scotland’s allocations are based on a historical UK analysis, we lose out and do not get what we would get if we were an equal member of the union. It is much the same with our allocation of MEPs, which is based on the reduced allocation to the United Kingdom as the larger EU member state. If Scotland was independently represented in Europe, we would have about double the current numbers, making our total comparable to that of Denmark. It is important to say something about global food production and how the European CAP affects that. The CAP policies have had serious consequences for food producers in the third world, who experienced the dumping of cheap surplus food in their markets. While Europe propped up its own prices by buying and storing excess produce, third world markets became a dumping ground for our excesses. The effect was to seriously hamper the ability of third world producers to compete fairly. A report from the Commission just last year reminded us that the world population could reach 9 billion by 2050 and that, consequently, demand for food will rise by 70 per cent. It is clear in that context that food production will need to be encouraged and supported in the countries with growing populations. The CAP reforms have gone some way towards reversing the protectionist regime in the EU and its negative impact on third world food producers. However, it is important that Europe begins to view food production as a world issue, and not a European issue with the aim of protecting local markets. We have a duty to think ahead about the impact of CAP on world food producers so that we can act collectively and responsibly in future if we are serious about sustainable growth on a world basis. I wish my colleague Richard Lochhead every success in his continuing negotiations on behalf of Scotland in the United Kingdom and in Europe, and I am delighted to support the Government motion.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to encourage new business start-ups in Kilmarnock and Irvine Valley. (S4O-01279)

The minister is right to highlight the positive effect that the small business bonus scheme is having. However, some difficulties remain in the crucial first year of establishing a business. Will the minister consider that further to see whether any additional help and advice could be offered that might allow more small businesses to get through that important first year?

I am grateful for the opportunity to contribute to the debate. A £1 billion investment in transport is already happening this year, and £5 billion-worth of investment is to come to the railways from 2014. That is a clear sign from the Scottish Government that we intend to continue our development of a modern railway service for Scotland. Colleagues have already mentioned the range of developments that are being undertaken, and the minister’s announcement has certainly been welcomed by the political administrations in Glasgow and Edinburgh. Why would they not welcome it? With the £650 million that will go into the Glasgow to Edinburgh service, journey times will be reduced by another 10 minutes, Queen Street station in Glasgow will be redeveloped, the Edinburgh gateway station will enable connections to services to Edinburgh airport, and passengers will be able to conduct their business on the trains using wi-fi technology.

Mr Findlay has surpassed himself in his capacity for talking rubbish. The investments will not just benefit the travelling public, but will provide secure employment the for many people in Scotland who will design, test, build and deliver the projects for us. Just about every trade that I can think of will be engaged in delivering the work for us. That is an example of how the Scottish Government is committed to helping Scotland’s economy to get through these difficult times. I welcome the fact that billions are being spent as proactive investment in our transport infrastructure. The job creation that goes with that surely represents a far better way to help our economy to recover from recession. As we have the minister’s ear for the duration of the debate, I want to offer a few comments on how we might capitalise on the investment commitments that are being made in order to achieve step changes in passenger numbers on the railways in future years. First, a key area for further action is to develop more park-and-ride facilities, particularly for our bigger traditional towns. Historically, established old towns such as Kilmarnock in my constituency have had little if anything in the way of park-and-ride facilities near their stations because they were just not thought of before the modern era. In order to make the important step change of getting more people out of their cars and on to the trains, I hope that we will think carefully about developing adjacent to them more park-and-ride facilities that can truly compete with the already excellent bus services from Kilmarnock to Glasgow and other towns. Secondly, ticketing and pricing strategies could be simplified to make it easier for travellers to choose the train. I sometimes feel that the pricing policy, based on the peak and off-peak system on the trains, compared with the much simpler pricing for bus journeys, prevents people from using the trains. If we have more trains and more capacity on offer to the public, perhaps the need for overcomplicated peak and off-peak arrangements will diminish a little. The minister’s announcement of investment in Scotland’s railways over the coming years is a clear indication that the Government is committed to a modern railway system that is fit for a confident Scotland in the 21st century. We have an excellent track record of supporting Scotland’s infrastructure, and the £5 billion that is coming down the line will help us to deliver that vision. I am happy to support the Government’s amendment.

The minister will also be aware of the dreadful condition of many schools in Scotland that were left behind by Labour in its pursuit of private finance initiative schemes for a few. Having visited some of those schools in my constituency last Friday and seen some of the conditions that our children and teachers have to endure—[Interruption.]

Can the minister assure me that the programme will reach as many schools as possible to ensure that learning and teaching can take place in an environment fit for the 21st century?

I welcome the progress in the Ayrshire further education region, where a joint partnership board has now been established; of course, I also welcome the SNP Government’s £50 million investment in a new college facility in Kilmarnock. How does the cabinet secretary see the code of good governance for higher education in Scotland taking shape? What is the timescale for delivery?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to grow the economy in Kilmarnock and Irvine valley. (S4O-01187)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his detailed response. He will be aware of the disappointment of the board of make it Kilmarnock at Diageo’s decision to not support a legacy fund for the town, which was compounded by its recent announcement of its billion pounds investment elsewhere in Scotland. Will the cabinet secretary assure me that everything possible is being done to support East Ayrshire Council to progress its efforts to rebuild the economy in the area, and will he perhaps invite Diageo to play a greater part in that process?

The latest European Union construction figures show that, in April 2012, production in construction fell by 18.1 per cent in the UK. That was by far the largest recorded fall among the member states—Slovenia was a distant second, with a fall of 9.3 per cent. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the evidence against the UK Government’s austerity agenda is stacking up? Will he join me in calling on the UK Government to bring forward £300 million for the Scottish Government to invest in shovel-ready projects?

It is a pleasure to follow David Stewart’s speech, which was extremely thoughtful indeed. I am grateful for this opportunity to contribute something to the debate and to share with the Parliament some personal experiences that are relevant to the topic. I am pleased to see the work coming forward and I am sure that it will be well received by victims and witnesses across Scotland. As the cabinet secretary, ministers and members will know, on 8 February, the Public Audit Committee issued a report to Parliament following up on the work that was carried out by Audit Scotland on the criminal justice system. It made a number of recommendations that chime with the approach that is being taken in the current consultation paper and which will hopefully become part of the new bill. Audit Scotland reminded us that we spend some £857 million a year on our criminal justice system and said that “there needs to be significant improvement in … how well victims and witnesses are supported and kept informed about what is happening in their case”. If we take a closer look at what Audit Scotland was saying, it becomes clear that while we can see in great detail the offender’s journey through the criminal justice system—from committing their crime through to being arrested and charged, appearing in court, being sentenced, and then serving their time—and, even beyond their sentence, their journey back into society, which is just as well developed and supported, what is not at all clear is the victim’s pathway through the process, including where they enter or leave the system and who looks after them throughout their journey. Since the victim is the person whom we are supposed to be serving in our justice system, it seems strange to me that support mechanisms for victims are not as well developed. I can attest to that from personal experience. Some years ago, I was the victim of an attack by a mindless drunken thug. However, from the day on which I spoke to the police and gave them a statement, there was no further contact with me, other than a letter referring me to a victim support agency. I heard nothing from the fiscal service about what the outcome of the case was and was told that I could get the information if I phoned in and asked for it. Sadly, that is still the case for people. Only yesterday, the local fiscal in my area confirmed that in certain summary cases we still do not routinely inform victims of the outcome that was reached in their case. I say to our Government ministers and to members in the chamber that that is not the way to treat victims of crime. Victims must be treated with respect and have a right to be informed of the outcome that the justice system has reached in their case, no matter how minor the offence is regarded as being. If we can inform the offender of the outcome—as happened in my case—we must surely inform the victim, too. I am greatly encouraged to see the Scottish Government placing considerable emphasis on the issue in the consultation paper, and I am hopeful that that commitment will be clearly stated in the new bill's proposals. Indeed, the draft European directive makes no distinction between the victims of different types of crime or the information that they should receive, so I look forward to that principle being applied to all victims. Another issue that continues to give me cause for concern is how we support and protect witnesses who may be called to give evidence in court—Duncan McNeil and Alison McInnes touched on the issue earlier. A few constituents have told me about having appeared at court as witnesses only to be confronted by the accused’s family members either outside the court or within the corridors of the court buildings. That can be an extremely intimidating experience for many witnesses, and we need to do more to guarantee the protection of witnesses from the kind of intimidation that can and does go on in such circumstances. Again, I am heartened by the objectives that are set out in the consultation paper about protecting the personal safety of witnesses, but I would be obliged to the minister if she would expand a little on whether the issue of offering further protection for witnesses is on the Government’s radar. If time permits, I would like to address the issue of the rehousing of offenders in our communities upon their release—in some cases, they have been rehoused close to the families of murder victims—and I would also like to pay some attention to the information that is given to and shared with families in such circumstances. Incredible distress can be caused to families. The Scottish Prison Service and local councils need some additional powers to address the issue, so that families feel that they are involved and consulted. Members have commented on the wider aspects of the consultation. It is encouraging to see that a much sharper focus on victim and witness issues is at the forefront of the Government’s thoughts. Making offenders directly accountable for the damage that they have done to their victims through a surcharge or compensation payment scheme is to be supported. Most offenders currently think that they pay their debt to society by serving their time or paying their fine. It is welcome that such a scheme will get the message over that it is their victim who is owed the apology, the compensation or whatever is deemed to be appropriate. The proposals chime with what my constituents have been sharing with me for a number of years and, as a victim of crime, it gives me some comfort, too, that the Government is addressing these long-standing issues. Doing so will greatly improve the support we give to victims of and witnesses to crimes in Scotland.

I am grateful for the opportunity to offer a small contribution on the issue. Although parliamentary reform would not exactly be up there along with the great debates heard in the chamber over the years, it is a crucial part of how we go about our business on behalf of the Scottish people. The Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee members have done a pretty thorough job and have responded well to the Presiding Officer’s request that they re-examine, after 13 years, ways in which to better meet the needs of the people we serve. Members have already covered the ground pretty well. As speaker number five from my side, I probably do not need all of the allocated time and hope not to repeat too many of the messages that members have already heard. The principal change, which members have already discussed, is the move to what the media might call a three-day week. It has always been unfair to portray the Parliament, as some sections of the media chose to do in the lead up to the reform, as being part-time and operating in session for only one and a half days a week. As members will confirm, our time is pretty well allocated throughout the three days to a variety of duties that involve committees—as Hugh Henry mentioned—engagements with constituents and debates in the chamber. However, the new proposal appears to level the workload out a bit and should bring the work of the Parliament to the attention of a greater number of people across a wider part of the week. Of course, time will tell, and the real test of the reforms will be the quality of the business that we transact and the attention that it gains from the wider public.

No, thank you. I have only four minutes and I have already chopped two pages off my speech. The extra members’ business debate is very welcome, as is the increased provision for back-benchers’ topical questions. As a member who was lucky to secure quite a number of members’ business debates in the previous session of the Parliament, I would say that the quality and topicality of members’ business debates has improved in this session. The move to permit a wider scope of subject material for members’ business debates in the future will significantly enhance the role that back benchers can play in the Parliament. If we consider the experience and knowledge that many members of the Parliament bring to this place, it is a positive step forward to open up this part of our work so that we get the most from the experience of parliamentarians. Who knows, in future members might be treated to a members’ business debate from me looking at the Scottish software industry, or at how Scottish and Irish traditional music has helped to shape the cultures of both countries, or at how the emerging democracies in the former Balkan countries, such as Kosovo, are looking to Scotland when they establish systems of governance and accountability, or even perhaps a glance at the impact of local football clubs, such as Kilmarnock Football Club, in contributing to their local economies. We do not hear from members on subjects that they have some knowledge of or are close to their hearts because there is not the scope to do that under the current arrangement. The new arrangement offers new opportunities to us all and that will, I hope, enhance the reputation of the Parliament. If the proposals are agreed to by the Parliament, I very much hope that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments committee, and indeed the members, keep an eye on what is and is not working. We are right to claim that our Parliament is family friendly and I am certain that that aspiration can be maintained even if we spread the business across the three days as proposed. The fact that most of our parliamentarians will be here on the three days means that we can look forward to more requests to come here and I hope that we will see yet more schools and community groups coming to visit us after the changes take place. The committee has carried out invaluable work on our behalf and has carefully weighed up the advantages to the Parliament as a whole of the changes that it proposes. I commend the work done by the committee members on the subject, and I look forward with great interest to the implementation of its recommendations.

I had the great pleasure of visiting the Ayrshire mission to the deaf in Kilmarnock on Monday. One of the big issues that it raised with me was the difficulty that deaf people have in dealing with the corporate world, particularly on the telephone. Many businesses will still not speak to anyone other than the customer on the telephone. Perhaps the Government could look at persuading our friends in the corporate world to allow proxies to represent deaf people on the phone, and for that to somehow be embedded in the system. I am sure that it would be a great help to deaf people.

4. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to strengthen the role of mediation in resolving family contact disputes. (S4O-00982)

The minister will be aware of the devastating effects of contact agreements being broken without any explanation, usually as a result of a family dispute, and the consequent damage to children. Will the Scottish Government give some consideration to requiring parents who do that to present a case to the mediation service to ensure that a clear explanation is recorded and can form the basis for discussion to resolve disputes as early as possible?

12. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will consider introducing the transcatheter aortic valve implantation heart valve procedure. (S4O-00870)

It appears that the TAVI procedure is already deployed in many countries; indeed, the British Heart Foundation has estimated that some 40,000 such procedures have been carried out worldwide. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for giving me an assurance, which will be welcomed by many patients in Scotland who suffer from a heart condition and may benefit from the procedure. Is there any possible indication of when the procedure may be available and the locations in Scotland at which it will be available?

I take the opportunity to endorse the comments of the panel’s convener and to welcome the nomination of Caroline Gardner for the post of Auditor General. When our public finances are under closer scrutiny than ever before, it is vital that our new Auditor General embraces the task of providing an effective and independent scrutiny service to the Parliament. I am certain that Caroline Gardner will fulfil that role very effectively. I am happy to support the nomination.

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will consider establishing closer working relationships with the emerging democracies in Europe in order to share best practice. (S4O-00749)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that we recently had visits to our Parliament from the republics of Montenegro, Macedonia and Kosovo. The common message from them is that they see Scotland as a good example of a country that has reliable and effective scrutiny mechanisms to hold our Government to account, which is something that they clearly wish to develop further. Will the Scottish Government consider regularising our association with those countries, using technology and other means, to allow the dialogue and sharing of good practice to continue?

As the last of the quartet of co-conveners of the cross-party group on co-operatives, I thank you, Presiding Officer, and I thank Helen Eadie for bringing co-operatives to the attention of the Parliament, once again, through this members’ debate. As I said in one of my previous members’ debates on co-ops, their time has well and truly come. This year is as good a time as any to highlight not only their record of achievement but the very real opportunities for their future in establishing new businesses and social enterprises. I am sure that everyone is aware by now that the principles of co-operation were perhaps first established in 1761 in Fenwick in my constituency when a group of local weavers signed a charter outlining their commitments. The weavers resolved that they would be “honest and faithful to one another ... and to make good and sufficient work and exact neither higher nor lower prices than are accustomed”. The first society members demonstrated one of the key strengths of our current co-operative model—a clear focus on the needs of members and the local community. It opened a shop and made bulk purchases of essential goods, which were resold to members and their families. It also loaned money to members at preferential rates. I said perhaps first established because our local experts, the twa Johns, Smith and McFadzean—one of whom I can see in the public gallery—have been at pains to point out that, although the Fenwick weavers have clear documentary evidence placing them ahead of all others, including Rochdale, by some 80 years, some other evidence may emerge from elsewhere to thwart Fenwick’s claim. I hope not. As Ms Eadie says in the motion, there are nearly 500 co-ops in Scotland turning over a staggering sum of £3 billion-plus. That is nearly 4 per cent of our GDP and is a considerable contribution to the Scottish economy. It has been estimated that there are more than 130,000 co-ops across Europe, with more than 80 million members supporting 2 million jobs. That is quite staggering when we think back to their humble beginnings. The Fenwick weavers have a lot to answer for. Some time ago, I had the pleasure of meeting the Mondragon Corporation in the Basque country, which is one of Europe’s biggest and most successful co-ops. Claudia Beamish mentioned it earlier. There are more than 100 companies in that organisation. In the chat, I was interested to hear that it transfers its worker-owners around the various co-ops if anyone is facing a particular difficulty. I hope that employers and businesses in the wider economy will consider that principle of looking after worker-owners and retaining them to work in other growing sectors of the economy. Locally, we are, of course, blessed with many and various impressive examples of co-operation. Our very own Kilmarnock Supporters Society operates as a community benefit trust. The Killie trust was established in 2003 with the help of Supporters Direct, which James Kelly mentioned, and it has raised more than £120,000 for a variety of local causes, including setting up community bursaries, supporting young female exercise and dance groups, and supporting work to improve the 3 Rs among youngsters through the medium of football. Perhaps that is an intriguing and welcome initiative. The recognition by the United Nations of the contribution that the co-ops have made since the early days is as welcome as it is fitting. Depending on who we believe, the global economy is in meltdown, currencies are at risk, and some countries are in danger of going out of business. Debt is no longer sustainable and the world has to change. The time for co-ops has therefore come, as I said at the start of my speech. They are reliable, honest and sustainable, and people trust them and share their founding principles, which put their communities first. Their approach to business and social enterprise is surely a model that will find greater prominence in the changing economy of the 21st century. I am happy to support Helen Eadie’s motion.

As a computer science graduate in the dim and distant past, I could only dream of the kind of vision that is set out on page 11 of the Scottish Government’s action plan—that of a family using technology to learn, to have fun, to connect with new people from other countries, to catch up on favourite television programmes that have been missed and to keep in close contact with loved ones around the world using live video streaming. The crucial element in all of it, apart from the fabulous developments in software and hardware that make it possible, is the need to make it possible for all our population, no matter where they live. We should make no mistake: a technological revolution is well under way that will offer society the ability to do things in such a completely different way that it will change for ever how we live, work and make connections with one another. Distance will no longer be a barrier to that. I am happy to see that the Scottish Government’s paper recognises that and places considerable emphasis on the need to close the various gaps that we know exist. Achieving the step change of between 40 and 80 megabits per second for up to 90 per cent of premises in the next three years is excellent. The possibility, in today’s terms, of speeds of up to 100 megabits per second and, beyond, to 1,000 megabits per second—1 gigabit per second to those in the know—is an incredible prospect. Rightly, too, attention is being paid to the well-known not-spots and slow-spots that have been mentioned by colleagues—places that are currently not served particularly well by the technology due to their geography or small customer numbers. The theme of the debate is how we will develop the infrastructure to give Scotland a world-class service by 2020. In progressing the plan, however, we must not lose sight of the social digital divide that has existed for many years. Figures published by Ofcom on fixed broadband access show that, although Scotland exceeds the UK figure for broadband take-up among the 35 to 54 age group, we seem to lag behind the UK in take-up among older age groups and lower-income groups. The figure for greater Glasgow, which is now 50 per cent, has been historically much lower even than the figure for Scotland, which is now 61 per cent, and the figure for the UK, which is now 74 per cent. However, I urge caution in that those figures do not include mobile broadband and there are other ways in which the public accesses broadband services—particularly smartphone technology. I am the convener of the cross-party group on digital participation and it is clear to me, from the many shared experiences around Scotland, both urban and rural, that work still needs to be done to close both digital divides—the geographic and the social. The work to tackle the latter may be for another debate but, as the gap widens, even the best technology on offer will have little impact on the lives of ordinary people if they continue to disengage from it. That point was made by one of my Labour colleagues. I recognise and welcome the contribution that has been made by the Royal Society of Edinburgh not only to the debate but to the work of the cross-party group. Through Professor Fourman, the society has been a steadfast supporter and driver of many of the issues under discussion, which are contained in the infrastructure action plan. Its comments in welcoming the ambition of the Scottish Government to achieve the standards that it has set via open-access or technology-neutral solutions is much appreciated and I look forward to working with the society on future occasions. As the action plan also makes clear, the required level of service cannot be delivered entirely by the public sector or, indeed, the private sector on its own. Working in partnership can achieve the Government’s aims. Just last month, we heard of BT’s latest investment plans, which will bring superfast broadband to another 277,000 homes and businesses, 21,000 of which are in my constituency. Using a mixture of fibre to the cabinet and fibre to the premises, that will offer speeds of 40 megabits per second and upwards to 300 megabits per second. Those speeds will mean that families will be able to do all those things that I mentioned at the same time, downloading music in seconds and taking under 10 minutes to download full-length, high-definition movies. Fourth-generation mobile coverage is also just around the corner. Ofcom estimates that the demand in western Europe for mobile data services such as video streaming, messaging and social networking could increase by 500 per cent over the next five years.

Absolutely. The member’s point is well made. One of the key things about technology is that it has to serve the whole population, particularly the disabled community, which sometimes depends on it rather more than we do. Sometimes a discussion about the power of technology can be blurred by our terminology and have little meaning to the people whom we serve. I began by saying that this technology will change the way we live, the way we learn, the way we work and the way we communicate. There are limitless possibilities for our schools and how they engage with the online world in which we live, and there are many advantages to our citizens’ being able to access vital information that directly affects them. As that computer science graduate from the dim and distant past, I think that this is the most exciting time of all to be part of this technology revolution, to support the Scottish Government’s proposed work and to give Scotland the world-class service that will open up so many doors to a brighter future. I am pleased to support the Government’s motion.

11. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in developing the cities strategy and what role towns and villages can play in this. (S4O-00559)

Will the cabinet secretary ensure that our towns and villages are not disadvantaged by any leverage effect that the funding that is given to cities in support of the strategy may introduce?

I am the last speaker in my group and we are fast approaching time added on for stoppages in the debate, but there is still an opportunity for some members to score a late winner and grab victory from the jaws of defeat. The Scottish Government has played a blinder, even agreeing to a replay at the request of its opponents, in the interests of sportsmanship. The Opposition has been thrown hastily together with last-minute changes and comprises a variety of players from different teams, all with different tactics and no clear idea of how to influence the outcome of the game. However, in the world of politics and the Scottish Parliament, there is still hope, even in the few minutes that remain, that we can unite and score a victory against bigotry at Scottish football matches. We should remember that the vast majority of supporters of all our clubs will not be affected in the slightest by the bill. They are the majority who behave and act responsibly, support their team and are great ambassadors for their clubs.

I hope that every football fan in Scotland and, indeed, throughout the world desists from singing songs that poke fun at or criticise their opponents and fans of any other clubs. The bill is aimed at the small minority who disgrace their clubs, embarrass their fellow supporters and bring shame on Scotland through their behaviour, regardless of the public disorder that could occur. It has been suggested that the bill will criminalise fans for having a sing-song and that it diminishes freedom of speech. However, it does neither of those things. The Lord Advocate explains that the current offence of breach of the peace is not sufficient to deal with the problems that we have and that proving that sectarian chanting causes alarm to a reasonable person is not as straightforward as some people suggest that it is. The bill attaches an offence to conduct and behaviour that could lead to public disorder, as the Lord Advocate, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and many others have asked for. Who can support a view that behaviour that is likely to lead to public disorder should not be an offence in Scotland? That is what the bill does, and it should be supported by all decent fans and organisations. Throughout the debate, we have heard that the bill does not do this or that, that it should be not only about football, that sectarianism is far wider than football, and that we must educate and work with everybody for a common solution, and so on. There is merit in that, and I know that some great work is being done, with more to follow. I was pleased to hear in the minister’s statement that the Scottish Government has allocated an extra £9 million for community and education grass-roots work. The bill is not going to be enough to eradicate sectarianism in Scotland; nobody said that it was. However, this problem is one rotten egg in the sectarian basket that is being cracked tonight; hopefully, the stench will diminish with time. It is more than a pity that some members prefer to oppose the measure unless the whole basket of rotten eggs is cracked in a oner—something that those members failed abysmally to do for years when they were in government. We must support the bill tonight as a Parliament. It is a good measure that clarifies the breach of the peace law for our police officers and sends out a clear message to the bigots who stalk our football grounds masquerading as supporters that Scotland will no longer tolerate their behaviour. The bill should be the beginning of a process of engagement that reaches out to all decent supporters and organisations that say that enough is enough. We must work together and gather in all the good ideas that have been offered over the past few months. Education, mutual respect and co-operation should—and always will—triumph over the forces of bigotry which, if left alone and unchallenged, fester and corrupt us all. The world is watching us closely to see whether Scotland’s Parliament is ready to make a stand against the bigots. We might not be able to do that in football, but in the Parliament we can all grab a victory before the referee blows the whistle on another towsy encounter at Holyrood.

I congratulate my colleague Kevin Stewart MSP on securing the debate and thank him for bringing the matter of how we celebrate St Andrew’s day to the Parliament’s attention on St Andrew’s day itself. Our national day for St Andrew has been overshadowed to a degree by the dispute over United Kingdom public sector pensions. An unintended consequence of that has been that more people than normal are having a day off and I very much hope that Scotland, our nation and our patron saint, Andrew the Apostle, are somewhere in their hearts on this difficult day. As my colleague said, we owe a debt of gratitude to Dennis Canavan for pursuing this issue on our behalf and ensuring that much more could be done to make it a national day to celebrate. I know that we share Andrew with our friends in Greece, Russia and other countries and that we share our blue-and-white saltire with the island of Tenerife. From my own, admittedly limited knowledge—confirmed, thankfully, by Kevin Stewart—I am aware that Andrew was crucified by the Romans in Patras around AD 60 on a saltire-shaped cross at his own request, which suggested that he did not feel worthy to be put to death in the same manner as his saviour Jesus. His relics are scattered around the world, including here in Scotland. Obviously, we will never know for certain whether we Scots or Picts adopted Andrew as our saviour at the battle of Athelstaneford after praying to him for victory and the subsequent appearance of his saltire in the sky. However, the story is shared with children around Scotland as one of the sources of our close attachment to him and his adoption as our patron saint. In these modern times, we do a lot to celebrate St Andrew’s day and to share with the world the best of what Scotland has to offer. However, we could do a lot more. Perhaps we should, as some members have suggested, take some pointers from our Irish cousins, who push the boat out and celebrate St Patrick’s day in grand style. Ireland has a national public holiday and families get together, celebrate Ireland and basically invite the world to the party. Not only is it a wonderful day for people to come together, it offers a huge boost to trade in Ireland and beyond. What is stopping us emulating or bettering that in Scotland? Sadly, we seem to haggle over having an extra day, a substitute day or a flexible day and cannot make our minds up about what is best.

Absolutely. Let us hope that we can change things and make St Andrew’s day a day to remember in Scotland and a day on which we invite our friends in the world to come and celebrate with us. With our cultural diversity, our music and our poetry, we have much to offer the world. I want to finish this brief speech with a small offering I picked up some years ago that takes the liberty of imagining Andrew on the cross at his crucifixion and wonders what might be going through his mind. “You have brought me to such despair that seemed gone, lost in the shining light I had found. For a moment a raging anger casts a shadow upon my faith. But passes quickly with the love I have for my true saviour. And to future people yet unknown I vow to hear your prayers and wrest you from the evil scourge of subjugation. Not yet the blood of Andrew spilled. Not yet the nation Scotland born. But from this day throughout the lands where freedom lies unwon l will protect and deliver your people ... ... for Libertie shall be their just reward!” I am delighted to be able to speak in this short debate and to offer my whole-hearted support to Kevin Stewart for bringing St Andrew’s day to the floor of the Scottish Parliament.

I congratulate my fellow Ayrshire MSP John Scott on securing the debate and bringing the matter to the Parliament’s attention. As members said, the motion has been overtaken by NHS Ayrshire and Arran’s decision to withdraw its closure proposal and maintain orthopaedic trauma services at Ayr. It is a wee bit concerning that only in September we were dealing with the possibility of the unit’s closure and the ensuring public reaction, which reached the Parliament, and that only a month later it was announced that the unit would stay in place. We might never know whether the decision was the result of the response from the public and Ayrshire’s MSPs, who signed the motion that condemned the proposal. It seems to me that such proposals need more careful consideration before they see the light of day. In March, the board advertised for a consultant in orthopaedics and trauma, who would be based primarily at Ayr hospital. Although the papers for the post mentioned the review of services that was taking place and the possibility of relocation of trauma services to Crosshouse, we must wonder why the board embarked on the recruitment drive if it wanted to close the unit. A glance at the statistics tells us that the Ayr unit received more than 1,000 emergency in-patient cases in 2009-10. If that number of cases were transferred to Crosshouse, Crosshouse would deal with more than 3,500 cases per year, while Ayr would handle only elective orthopaedic in-patient services. Such an approach would mean that people, many of whom travel quite a distance from around the south of Scotland to get to Ayr, would need to make an additional 40-mile round trip to Crosshouse. An unintended consequence could surely be that all accident and emergency cases would end up in Crosshouse. If a paramedic was not certain that an injured person would not require orthopaedic trauma support, a precautionary approach might be taken and ambulances might drive past Ayr to reach the trauma unit at Crosshouse, on every occasion. That is why issues such as the one that we are debating upset the public. When proposals are drawn up, it is not clear to me whether a public impact assessment is carried out, so that the full implications can be properly set out against the suggested benefits of change. Equality impact assessments must be carried out, but does the minister think that they sufficiently assess the impact on the public, who might face much longer journeys to access health services? Scotland’s health service is among the best in the world, and we take great pride in seeing it delivering for the people of Scotland. If this is an example of a proposal that never really was, I respectfully ask Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board to consider very carefully how it communicates its thinking on such issues to staff and the public in the future. If it takes the trouble to mention the possible relocation of trauma services to Crosshouse hospital in a job advert, the public and their elected members are entitled to express their concern. I sincerely hope that the minister will respond positively to members’ comments and the issues that have been raised in the debate.

The First Minister is aware of the circumstances surrounding the tragic death of my constituent Alison Hume in Galston in 2008 and the fatal accident inquiry report that was published yesterday by Sheriff Leslie. In light of Sheriff Leslie’s comments about significant failures in handling the incident by senior officers within Strathclyde Fire and Rescue, will the First Minister assure me that there will be a comprehensive review of the rescue capabilities of that service that puts saving lives first and foremost?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making in improving the accountability of factors to the residents of housing estates in relation to landscape maintenance. (S4O-00333)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that detailed answer. I bring to his attention the near-farcical situation in my constituency, where some residents have two factors doing the same work and charging residents through separate bills. What action can local people take to stop that practice?

I now know how it feels to come on as a late substitute in a football match with only a few minutes to go. I was very keen to be part of this debate because it has to be one of the most important debates that the Scottish Parliament will have in its fourth session. Let us make it quite plain: the bill is an attempt by the Government to take forward a process that says loudly and clearly that offensive and threatening bigoted sectarian behaviour will not be tolerated in modern Scotland. That is certainly a tall order, but our Government must not waver or pander to those who will find any excuse to prevent change, rather than embrace a long-overdue attempt to rid Scotland of its shabby legacy of bigotry.

I do not have any time. I am very sorry, but I have already cut my speech down to five minutes. That will not be easy and there will be countless opponents of the bill forming a wall to prevent it going through. The events that led us to where we are today must rank as some of the most disgraceful in our history—all the world looked on in disbelief. It is bad enough for ordinary citizens who have lived with these problems for generations but, as legislators, surely we now have a duty to act and to try to work towards a solution to help our great game of football. The bill is not intended to be the complete package—there are other issues that will require our attention in the future—but the wider public support something being done here. The Lord Advocate tells us that the law as it stands is not sufficient to help us. Police and prosecutors also tell us that they need help to deal with the problem. As the minister and other colleagues have said, two criminal offences will be created: offensive behaviour likely to incite public disorder; and making communications containing threats intended to incite religious hatred. We can argue, as we have done today, whether they are sufficient, clear or even enforceable, but there is public support for measures that will begin to face down the minority who confuse freedom of speech with the freedom to express threatening and hate-filled views of their fellow men and women and thereby risk serious public disorder. Along with colleagues in the Parliament, I had the privilege of attending the recent British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly meeting, where I met some wonderful people: nationalists, unionists and republicans—elected members coming together in a spirit of co-operation to maintain the peace process and foster closer links among the Celtic and British nations. Even there, among the most respected politicians of our generation, tensions can rise between the traditions. The responsibility on all our shoulders is great indeed, but there is a clear willingness to work together to move forward. In the context of a debate like this, surely it has to be possible to hang up our brightest colours and sing in honour of our own football club and history without resorting to attacking and vilifying our opponents for their religion and their history. Even as a fervent Kilmarnock supporter, I say to our two great Glasgow football clubs that, when they next come to Rugby park, by all means let us hear about James McGrory and Paul McStay and about Jim Baxter and John Greig, in a positive celebration of the greatness of those footballers. The Irish writer Malachi O’Doherty summed things up perfectly when, reporting on the breathtaking visit of Queen Elizabeth to Dublin in May this year, he said: “You cannot now stand for the Soldier Song without a sense that the Queen herself is in spirit standing beside you. The gesture of laying the wreath at the garden of remembrance in Dublin was so potent that the question must be asked why it was not possible before. And just as a shrill note has been removed from the Soldier Song, surely God Save the Queen need never again sound embarrassing or repugnant in Irish nationalist ears. After an Irish President has stood for it beside the Queen in the middle of Dublin before a memorial to the icons of the Irish revolution, Patrick Pearse and James Connolly.” If the heads of state can set that fine example, surely the rest of us can follow it. I ask the Labour Party to drop the amendment. It does nothing to help to tackle the problem that, in 2011, when presented with an open goal and a chance to collectively show the bigots the red card, Labour was found wanting and did nothing.

We should get behind the Scottish Government and send a clear message that Scotland is moving forward to a brighter future, where tolerance, mutual respect and understanding are the real signs of progress in this nation.

I am delighted to contribute to this debate on the digital future of Scotland’s heritage. From my perspective, as a computer science graduate from the University of Strathclyde—in the 1980s, let us say—I can tell Parliament that the technological advances in hardware and software in the past few decades have been incredible and have brought us to the rich place in which we find ourselves today. Thirty or so years ago there were no PCs, no laptops, no internet and no mobiles, and few, if any, digitised resources. The microcomputer revolution was just about to start and the capabilities of the early machines were pretty limited. I recall bringing a microcomputer home from work one day. It took both me and my brother to lift it out of the car into the house. When I plugged it in, all it could do was run an old word processor, the name of which I have long since forgotten. Graphics? A graphics circuit board was needed for that, and it did not work. Back then, using that kind of technology to provide resource material for our schools was a challenge for the creative skills of the talented software engineers of the day, and for the teachers, who were all a bit bemused by the microcomputer revolution. However, as far as I am concerned that was the start of the technology revolution that has delivered so many benefits to us now and has provided such an incredible library of digitised resources. I visited the Parliament’s education centre yesterday and saw the amazing resources there. When I saw the scanner equipment that is used to digitise our heritage sites, I was reminded of its ancient equivalent dating back to the 1970s. Picture a book about Rome, with colour pictures of the ruins showing the Colosseum, the Forum and so on. To see those buildings as they were, we had to flip a laminated page with illustrations of the missing bits of the buildings drawn on it and then superimpose that over the original page to see the buildings in their former glory. That was a popular way of illustrating ancient sites, and I suppose it was the best technology of its day. I still have the book. I was wondering why the staff from the Scottish ten were showing the cover of Deep Purple’s “In Rock” album from 1970, until I realised that, as the minister mentioned, Mount Rushmore had been digitised, too. I am sure that my colleagues will tell us more about the Scottish ten during the debate, and I look forward to that. One of the other jewels in our digital crown is the advances that have been made in providing access to ScotlandsPeople’s records. Anyone who has seen “Who Do You Think You Are?”, which was mentioned by Patricia Ferguson, cannot fail to have been impressed by the stories of those who have embarked on a journey to discover their family history and origins. I am no different. I had the great pleasure of visiting the Burns monument centre in Kilmarnock, which has a fantastic genealogy centre where I was able to track down my own ancestors, with the help of the centre staff and my colleague Councillor Hugh Ross, an acknowledged expert in that field. Even within the current limitations of the service being provided to my local authority at the moment, it was a great joy to discover that my great-great-great-grandfather was one Timothy Coffey, born circa 1815 in County Tipperary in Ireland. The potential is incredible. The fact that there are so many ScotlandsPeople’s records—of births, baptisms, marriages, wills and testaments, deaths and indeed poor law records—is astonishing. I am told that there are about 80 million records online now. Our new body, the National Records of Scotland, is in the privileged position of being the custodian of the history of our people. Immediately, our past becomes our present and we can, in a real sense, bring our ancestors back with us to discover who they were—and who we are. It is estimated that between 28 million and 40 million people around the world claim direct Scottish ancestry. In America alone, in the 2000 census almost 5 million people reported having Scottish ancestors. Incredibly, that figure rose to 20 million when people cited partial Scottish descent. The huge potential of that resource for tourism in Scotland is there for all to see. With careful planning, and by opening up visitor opportunities at our genealogy archives, we can plan to develop a new industry from the culture and heritage that our ancestors have left behind for us. However, we have to ensure that all our data is available, at an affordable price, to all our genealogy centres. I suggest that the recent proposal by the National Records of Scotland to charge about £1,000 per computer to access our own data is unreasonable. I hope that the minister will review that proposal, given the level of investment already made in places such as Kilmarnock. We have come a long way from the early days that I described, when I was fortunate enough to be involved in the development of digital technologies and resources. Scotland has a mass of data and knowledge about our country and people, and we must share that resource with the world for everyone’s benefit. It may well be a long, long way to Tipperary, but from the genealogy centre in Kilmarnock, it was only a short journey for me—and a few clicks on a PC—to discover my own family’s origins. I commend the Scottish Government’s initiatives in this area and all the digital innovations that we are about to see. I am delighted to support the Government’s motion.

11. To ask the Scottish Government what change there has been in the number of students taking computer science as their main subject at university over the last four years. (S4O-00164)

The cabinet secretary is well aware of the impact that computer science and software have on modern society. Is he concerned that student numbers for the subject appear to have dropped off? Will he consider measures to further promote interest among our school pupils—and particularly female school pupils—in computer science and software engineering?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what measures it has taken to enhance economic growth in Kilmarnock and Irvine valley. (S4O-00115)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer. As he knows, my constituency already suffers higher unemployment levels than Scotland as a whole. That situation will be made much worse next year when Diageo finally leaves the home of Johnnie Walker in Kilmarnock, taking with it 700 jobs from the local economy. Will the cabinet secretary take those factors into account when, in due course, he considers possible enterprise zones for Scotland?

I lodged the motion to help to restore some balance to the story that the BBC told about my community in Onthank. Despite the film makers’ initial promises that the film would be balanced, it turned out to be nothing of the kind. We did not expect a gloss-over of many of the problems and issues that can be seen anywhere else in Scotland, but we were entitled to expect some balance from a publicly funded broadcaster that takes money from people in licence fees only to turn against them by depicting their community in such a way. It was tabloid TV at its worst. Local people were kidded and conned by the venture. They feel used and abused, and many who agreed to be filmed now wish that they had not done so. It simply is not good enough to say that it was an exposé of chaotic lifestyles and an insight into addiction. If that was the case, why was it necessary to accompany the stories with the depressing visuals of water running down the drains on a rainy day and graffiti-covered walls and shots of privately owned derelict flats? That was what upset so many local people. The film showed vulnerable, at-risk people parading and playing up in front of the camera, but showed the wider community in a very poor light, too. As recently as a few weeks ago, local children who were playing football for their school team were jeered as “The Scheme” team. There is no defence for that, and there has been no hint of an apology from the BBC. We will not find out the impact on the community as a whole if we read the brief from Ian Small from the BBC, as it does not mention that. I take it from that that the BBC is not interested in how the community in Onthank feels about the programme that it commissioned. All that we got was the usual stats about how good the viewing figures were. If the programme is the best thing that the BBC has done in Scotland for 10 years, that raises questions about what on earth it has been doing with its public funding for so long. It was wrong and dangerous to expose on TV for nothing more than public entertainment people who are already at risk and lead chaotic lifestyles. I am sure that the public are following with some alarm the progress made by a few of them since the programme was shown. What will happen to those people when the interest fades, the interviews end and the money runs out? Who will look after them? It certainly will not be the BBC; rather, the decent, honest folk of Onthank, the local authority and voluntary staff will pick up the pieces from those chaotic lifestyles and try to help people to recover some kind of normality. How dare people breenge into our community, do that to us and then swan off into the sunset, leaving behind nothing but an angry community and broken hearts. Mr Small has claimed that what was on screen was neither contrived nor constructed. How on earth did the camera crew manage to be in a house when the kids were already late for school, with their mother still in her bed? Did they have a key to get in? Did the mother let them in and then go back to bed to get a better camera shot? During all that rubbish, why did nobody think about the kids and get them to school on time? I suppose that the film makers and then the BBC opted for the dramatic rather than thinking about vulnerable kids. It was convenient that the camera also just happened to be rolling for another scene in which a girl came out of her house to slap another person in the face, perfectly on cue. That was purely a coincidence, of course. If the programme had stuck strictly to the characters only, there might have been a case for it, even with the concerns that I have expressed for their long-term welfare, but it did not. It strayed beyond them to show in the worst possible manner the community that I was born and brought up in, and that was wrong. Anybody who bothers to look will see that Onthank is a wonderful place to live in. The schools in it—Mount Carmel and Hillhead—are booming and local families are queueing up to get their kids into the local primary and nursery schools. Only on Tuesday, I attended the prize giving at Onthank primary school, which has a thriving Gaelic unit. The event was packed to capacity with proud parents, grandparents and youngsters. I know that the BBC was not interested in telling that story. I would like a clear message to go out to the BBC from this debate that, in the whole controversy, it is the one body that is open to severe criticism. Everybody else has an excuse for their part in the programme. The programme makers are clearly in the business to make money, and they certainly did that on the back of some of the most vulnerable people in Scotland, especially as they were able to sell the programme for broadcast outside Scotland. When the BBC was comparing the edited programmes with the apparent objective of the series, it should have demanded changes, not least to the title of the series. There was no one scheme in the programme, and there never was. Those who appeared on screen did not all come from Onthank, and the programmes gave no sense of the complexity of life in Onthank or in any other scheme in any meaningful sense. When the BBC realised that it was being given a programme that focused almost entirely on the lives of people directly and deeply affected by drugs, alcohol and crime, it should have insisted that the families were drawn from a much wider area and that a single scheme and its residents should not bear the brunt of the media focus. The people at the BBC who flunked that decision should hang their heads in shame, and their subsequent failure to acknowledge the error is an example of the media at its worst—being prepared to exercise the power of the press without taking responsibility for the consequences. The BBC has a duty to come back to Onthank and repair the damage that it has done to the community. We did not deserve to be treated like that. In a perverse way, the programme has galvanised the community by giving us a keener sense of identity and a determination to promote the many positives that we share in Onthank. Let us see if the BBC is up to the challenge of helping us to recover, and perhaps a new film about Onthank will be its next best seller.

9. To ask the Scottish Government how it will improve flood risk management in Kilmarnock and Irvine Valley. (S4O-00080)

I thank the minister for that answer and also welcome the Scottish Environment Protection Agency consultation that will take place in potentially vulnerable areas. It highlights two areas in my constituency where the average losses are estimated at £16 million a year. Will the minister ensure that residents and businesses in my constituency are encouraged to participate fully in the consultation and that their concerns are fully considered as part of any decision-making process?

I, too, congratulate my colleague Bob Doris on bringing the subject of sectarianism and racism to the Parliament. As it can rarely be discussed with calm voices or without passion and emotion, it was a bold step for him to take. If the subject needs anything, it needs calm heads and a little bit of wisdom to take us forward to where we all want Scotland to be. Where is that? What do we all want Scotland to be? For me, we want a Scotland that understands and respects differences, promotes common ground and seeks to assure people of the other persuasion that their views, faith or otherwise are respected and protected. The bilious nature of sectarian chanting at football matches cannot seriously be explained in terms of religious differences. To justify such behaviour in the name of one’s religion must surely make the clerics of all faiths cringe at the very prospect—“Not in our name”, I can hear them proclaim from their pulpits—and, in reality, few, if any, of those who do the chanting will be in church to atone for their sins of the previous day. As someone whose origins are in Ireland but whose family are all Scots till our dying days, I know how difficult the journey has been for many. Indeed, my own grandfather chose to name my dad William in an effort to avoid any possibility of bigoted treatment as my dad grew up. Someone whose name was Tom or Dan, or Pat or Mick, had to watch out—there was no job for them. “What school did you go to?” seemed to be the only question at job interviews in those days. Have we moved on from those grim days? I think that we have made considerable progress in our schools, our businesses and our factories, and in Scottish society as a whole. The visit to Scotland last year by the holy father Pope Benedict was warmly welcomed by all faiths in Scotland, and I believe that that was genuine and heartfelt. Many non-Catholics to whom I spoke told me what a wonderful occasion it was for Scotland. If we are to make more progress in tackling the issue and ridding Scotland of sectarianism, we need to do even more to move us away from those ancient rivalries that simply perpetuate a sense of division. That does not mean that people need give up on their history and heritage, but it does mean that they should not use them as a stick to beat their neighbour. We are, indeed, one Scotland, many cultures; perhaps we are many religions, too. The true test of a modern Scotland and whether we have reached where we want to be is whether we offer a hand of friendship to those with whom our ancestors may have had differences in centuries gone past, and that hand of friendship is taken with a smile and returned in equal measure. I have no doubt that Scotland will make that progress, and I commend my colleague Bob Doris for bringing the matter to the Parliament’s attention.

Taking Scotland forward at a time of deep recession when the country is facing substantial cuts in its budget, is—to put it mildly—a challenge for our new Government and the cabinet secretary. That so much has already been achieved shows, in my view, not only the quality of the team that we have in place, but that the vision is there to move Scotland forward even in these economic circumstances. Taking Kilmarnock and Irvine Valley forward will present even greater challenges locally when Diageo finally leaves with, after 192 years in the town, the Johnnie Walker identity—leaving behind an additional 700 unemployed people and directly affecting thousands of local families. Although the plant is not yet closed, the impact of the decision is already being felt through a decline in the number of vacancies being advertised right across East Ayrshire. Research by the Trades Union Congress shows that East Ayrshire has already moved to the bottom of the jobs league table, with more people chasing each vacancy than in almost any other part of the UK. As the figures show, Diageo could not have picked a worse time for its announcement. It came on top of the 2008 recession, which more than doubled the number of applicants chasing each job across the whole of the UK. The Scottish Government is right to pursue more powers to deal with the crisis. We need solutions that suit Scotland, and we need the power to reindustrialise Scotland with industries fit for the 21st century. We also need to take all of Scotland with us down that road. As they have shown by their support for the SNP, towns such as Kilmarnock want to be part of that future. We want Scottish Enterprise and companies to look again at what communities such as ours can offer. The people of Kilmarnock are now looking to Diageo, to East Ayrshire Council and to the Scottish Government for solutions for a sustainable future. Whether that is achieved through an enterprise zone, through an urban development company or through some other mechanism is less important than there being evidence of commitment to attract the private sector investment that we need in order to rebuild our economy. I would like to talk for a wee minute about public sector procurement. As the local elected member, I have been approached by companies in my constituency from a diverse range of industries—from utilities to information technology, and from printing to construction. Many of those companies have worked for years on contracts let by the Scottish Government or its agencies, or with local authorities. They have all expressed some concern at the growing complexity of public sector procurement mechanisms and their impact on small indigenous companies. They all recognise the need for efficiency in procurement and for cost savings in the face of current financial pressures, but they have highlighted the need to be mindful of the importance to Scotland of its indigenous companies. I welcome the work that has been done during the past four years to increase access to information about public sector contracts. However, although that has allowed many SMEs to access the information, we also need to ensure that procurement methods do not discriminate against companies that focus on the Scottish market alone. When tenders can result in the allocation of work for up to five years ahead, it is vital that Scottish companies are able to access public sector work here in Scotland. Without that base, they are unlikely to build the ability to compete in international markets. With that situation in mind, I welcome the Scottish Government’s plan to establish a small business unit to help SMEs in Scotland to apply for public sector contracts. That is the kind of initiative that will strengthen our business base. I will say a bit more about the digital highway and so on. As someone who was convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on digital inclusion in the previous session of Parliament, I recognise that a high-performing digital network is as important to Scotland’s economic development today as the roads, railways and canals were during the first industrial revolution. It is great to see inward investment from companies such as Amazon, but it would be even better to see more Scottish companies building their presence on the web, so I welcome the £50 million next generation digital fund that is on the way, which will provide a real boost for business and will help to challenge the digital divide in Scotland. I caution that the digital divide is not simply a rural issue—parts of urban Scotland, particularly in Glasgow, are also falling behind in the race to get online. There is a great deal of overlap in the actions of the Scottish and UK Governments in that area, and we need to get the best out of what will be a considerable investment. The Royal Society of Edinburgh is already doing some cutting-edge work on digital infrastructure, and it is good to see that being picked up by the UK Government, but the funding needs to follow the ideas if we are not to fall behind other countries. If we achieve our goals for Scotland and for my constituency of Kilmarnock and Irvine Valley even in the present economic circumstances, we will certainly have cause to celebrate. The clear pledge from the Scottish Government is that, alongside East Ayrshire Council, it will work flat out to achieve those goals and to take Scotland forward to the better future that we all hope for.

18. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in reducing the level of health care acquired infections in hospitals in NHS Ayrshire and Arran. (S3O-13305)

Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating the staff of NHS Ayrshire and Arran on achieving historically low rates of infection for Staphylococcus aureus and Clostridium difficile? Does she agree that Labour’s failure to protect the national health service budget threatens to undermine the progress that has been made under this Government?

I welcome this opportunity to highlight the campaign for recognition of the Fenwick Weavers Society and its contribution to the development of the co-operative model. I welcome to the gallery guests from the modern Fenwick Weavers Society. I mention in particular lain MacDonald, the former director-general of the International Co-operative Alliance. Because some of the founders were not available on 14 March 1761, today is actually the 250th anniversary of the first signatures on the charter that set up the Fenwick Weavers Society. To echo those events, and with the society’s agreement, the First Minister today signed a copy of the new Fenwick charter. Members who will not be attending Monday’s event will have an opportunity to sign the charter after the debate. When we last debated this subject, the campaign was getting into its stride. The twa Johns—John Smith and John McFadzean—and the Fenwick committee, were working hard to draw attention to the events of 1761. Now, almost three years later, the 250th anniversary is upon us and the campaign has made great progress. Unfortunately, as members might be aware, the Co-operative Group overlooked Fenwick in its current advertising campaign. I am sure that those of us who are attending Monday’s event will want to take that up with the group’s representatives. The campaign has succeeded because at its core is real respect for the history of Fenwick and of Scotland. There is also a commitment to implementing the principles that were set out in the original charter that was signed in 1761, and that is reflected in the modern charter, which opens with the words: “We, the undersigned, honour the actions of the sixteen weavers of Fenwick who, in the sanctuary provided by Fenwick Church, put their names to a charter, which set up the Fenwick Weavers Society in a co-operative venture on 14th March 1761.” The initiatives to mark this important anniversary include the development of a village heritage trail, which demonstrates how Fenwick’s history reflects wider social and economic changes. The trail illustrates the context in which the Fenwick Weavers Society was born and operated. It is a valuable reminder that when people face challenges, hardship or oppression, they can respond positively—and with some ingenuity, into the bargain. Over the past 250 years, the legacy of the Fenwick weavers has played a significant part in shaping our world. We can trace the idea of a formal co-operative, founded on a clear statement of values and principles, as it spread from Fenwick throughout Scotland to the UK and further afield. We know that in 1777, a co-operative was set up in Govan, and then others were set up in communities all over the west of Scotland. By 1830, there were 300 co-operative societies in existence. David Dale, the founder of the New Lanark mill and the father-in-law and business partner of Robert Owen, was undoubtedly a factor in the spread of the Fenwick idea. Dale was born in Stewarton, only four miles from Fenwick, and was just 22 years old when the Fenwick charter was signed. He was a weaver to trade and, together with some Fenwick residents, he was a member of the Secession Church. As a pastor in that church, he engaged with communities all over the west of Scotland. David Dale undoubtedly valued the democratic and co-operative developments that were taking place around him. It was his decision to put New Lanark under Robert Owen’s management that gave Owen the platform to promote his ideas. By the mid-19th century, with an ever-growing number of co-operatives, the movement was ready to move on to the next stage. At that point, not only does Rochdale enter the story, but quickly thereafter, so too does the development of co-operative wholesale societies in both England and Scotland. By that time, the Fenwick Weavers Society was winding down as power looms in places such as New Lanark replaced the weavers. Despite that, Kilmarnock and Loudoun continued to play their part in the development of co-operatives, with societies in Kilmarnock, Galston, Newmilns and Crosshouse all active in the Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society. Given that history, it is right that over the next few days Fenwick should be the centre of attention for the co-operative movement. The modern-day society has succeeded in attracting leading figures of today’s worldwide co-operative movement. I look forward to joining the society in welcoming Pauline Green, the president of the International Co-operative Alliance, together with Charles Gould, the current director-general, and the many other guests who will join the local members of the society on Monday in Fenwick to mark the contribution that was made by those 16 pioneers. It is particularly fitting that Mr Lezamiz of the Mondragon corporation in the Basque country will also join us on Monday. Other members may wish to take up this point, but I see Mondragon as being a further stage of development in the co-operative model, and one that we should certainly be looking to bring home to Scotland. With its early growth built on manufacturing, Mondragon has developed a wide range of co-operatives, including its own financial and educational institutions. Scotland could certainly learn from that as we rebuild our economy in the wake of the banking crisis. In 2009, Scotland celebrated its year of homecoming to mark the 250th anniversary of the birth of Robert Burns. 2011 marks a year of homecoming for the co-operative movement, as it revisits the true roots of the movement: the point at which the revolution really began when 16 weavers in a small Ayrshire village signed up for what is now recognised as the world’s first formal co-operative.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member said that the recognition afforded to the committee was an indication of failures in the system, but it is not, because that is not what audit is about. It is about identifying opportunities for improvement. What the member said about failures is the classic mistake that people who do not understand audit say about it.

I will be staying for the entire debate. It has been an enormous pleasure to serve on the Parliament’s Public Audit Committee for the entire parliamentary session. Contrary to popular belief, the committee is one of the most interesting and challenging committees in the Parliament. It covers every area of the public sector in Scotland and offers members a real opportunity to learn how Scotland works. One minute we might be looking at the cost of hip replacements in the NHS; the next we might be skiing down the slopes of the Cairngorms, clutching the audited accounts as we go. The diversity of the committee’s agenda was as fascinating as it was challenging. I recall spending many a late night poring over some new aspect of the public services and trying to give of my best to hold it to account. A mention of audit is usually the signal for our colleagues to announce that they have something else to attend to and scurry off to the garden lobby. Little do they know that they are missing a great opportunity to get their teeth into just about every corner of the public sector. Our members know the value of the experience and jealously guard the committee’s reputation. Audit, of course, is about looking at systems and processes, taking a snapshot in time, reporting what is observed and recommending actions for improvement. It is not about blaming and finger pointing—although the temptation to do that when politicians are in the frame is sometimes overwhelming. In the main, Audit Scotland’s reports have painted a picture of excellent service delivery in Scotland, which we should recognise. Guiding the committee on its merry way are, of course, Audit Scotland, led by Robert Black, the Auditor General for Scotland, who is in the public gallery, and our hard-working team of clerks. Audit Scotland’s reports are superb. They provide us with a framework that allows us to examine various services in minute detail. The quality of reporting and the advice that is given are of great benefit to the committee and ultimately to the Government in planning future services—the advice must surely be the best that any Government could wish for. Our wonderful clerks hang it all together. Their diligence and skill in interpreting members’ views have been a great help to everyone who has served on the committee. During the past four years we have been on quite a journey together. We have looked at a wide variety of areas in Scottish public life: police call management; local authority audits; numerous NHS services—one or two members mentioned our visit to the Western Isles; major capital projects; prisons; the Commonwealth games; public finances; the Cairngorm funicular; civil contingency planning; the national fraud initiative; VisitScotland; the gathering; and the ScotRail franchise. I am sure that members recall the visit to our committee in December 2009 by members of the Northern Ireland Assembly, including members from Sinn Féin, the Social Democratic and Labour Party, the Democratic Unionist Party, the Ulster Unionist Party and the Progressive Unionist Party, who all worked together with us, here in Scotland. That was a wonderful day. For me, one of the most important messages to come out of Audit Scotland’s reports is the clear need for our public service providers to adopt recognised management systems, to invest time and energy in the planning and cost estimation phases for capital works in particular, and to learn lessons by doing thorough post-project evaluations to assist them with future service design. That was a recurring message throughout the past four years, and I am hopeful that our public service providers will fully embrace that wise advice from Audit Scotland and our committee. Our meetings were not without their lighter moments. I recall that the committee flew into Stornoway one day in an aeroplane that sounded and looked more like an oven on wings. We had great hospitality, and I recall one of our members, Stuart McMillan, rushing off after the meeting to get his order of Stornoway black pudding before he left. We heard the business plan for the Cairngorms ski facility that might have ended up not involving any skiing at all. That was a bit concerning. We also heard some classic “Yes, Minister”-type responses from some of our civil servants, who are occasionally masters of the evasive, but in a very polite way. We were told about some unfortunate people in hospital who were forced to remain there for weeks on end because there were no buses to get them home. We eventually ran out of adjectives and were right sair astonished on many occasions. We have been astonished this morning as well. My personal favourite must surely be the much-loved Queen’s and Lord Treasurer’s Remembrancer, which I am sure I do not have to remind members had no accountable officer for months on end and did not produce any accounts for two years. However, nobody noticed until Audit Scotland came along. I recall fondly the comments of Mr Phil Grigor of Audit Scotland, who announced to a stunned committee that it was “A treasure trove” worth £5 million and that “anything that comes out of the ground that is of value ... is passed to the state ... Anything that belongs to no one becomes the King’s—or the Queen’s, in this state—is the remembrancer’s mantra.”—[Official Report, Public Audit Committee, 17 June 2009; c 1175.] It was the only time that I saw the convener stumped for words. It was a classic moment in the life of the Public Audit Committee. Who said that audit cannot be fun? The Scottish Parliament’s Public Audit Committee, aided and abetted by Audit Scotland, delivers a hugely important service to the people of Scotland. The system that we have is respected throughout Europe and should be cherished. In line with its own preaching, the system should also look at ways of improving. A thought from me is that the committee, Audit Scotland or some other body could take on the role of checking up on whether Scotland’s public services have paid heed to the recommendations that we have made over the course of our work. I commend the committee’s report to the Parliament.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what support it provides to the development of co-operative enterprises. (S3O-13156)

There is now significant international evidence that worker co-operatives and employee-owned businesses are more productive than conventionally owned companies. Much of that evidence has been brought together by David Erdal in his book “Beyond the Corporation: Humanity Working”, which will be launched this evening at the National Library of Scotland. Given that increased productivity is the key to growing Scotland’s economy, has the minister any plans to encourage the availability of financing for those who are pursuing employee ownership or worker co-operatives, beyond that which the Baxi Partnership already provides?

3. To ask the Scottish Government how it prioritises community safety prior to prisoners with a history of violence being released on licence. (S3O-13038)

I thank the cabinet secretary for meeting Ewan and Margaret McGrand, whose daughter Vikki was murdered in 2008 by Gavin Boyd, who was released on a 13-year licence in 2006. I am concerned at the absence of a review process and risk assessment for prisoners who are subject to automatic release. Is the cabinet secretary satisfied that enough is done to secure early recall for prisoners freed on licence who present a continuing threat to public safety? In addition, does he agree that, to help families when things go wrong, an independent review should take place and summary findings should be published if any offender freed on licence is implicated in a murder?

We should see today not as the end, but as the beginning of a process of change in how the NHS handles complaints—especially complaints potentially involving medical negligence. As a constituency MSP, I have found the handling of such complaints the most unsatisfactory aspect of my constituency work. I know that those who get as far as consulting their MSP will represent some of the most difficult cases that we have to deal with, and we all know that many complaints are dealt with perfectly well and that people are generally satisfied with the responses that they receive, but it is clear to me that there is some dissatisfaction with the present arrangements. In passing the bill, the Parliament is signalling its recognition of the need for change. The current arrangements appear to discourage complaints. That was confirmed in research that was carried out by the Scottish Health Council in 2009, which found that 53 per cent of those who experienced a problem with NHS treatment took no action. Many people believed that lodging a complaint would make no difference, and some patients were concerned that it could affect their treatment and their relationship with health professionals. In addition, many of those whose problem was with medical care were too busy coping with the consequences to complain. The statutory right to complain that is included in the bill needs to be widely publicised. Also, through new patient advice and support systems, patients must be encouraged to provide feedback on their care, including positive responses when things go well. When necessary, patients should be supported to submit formal complaints, and there should be a clear expectation that they will be treated seriously and with respect. In my opening remarks I said that there is a need for a culture change. One of the areas in need of such a change is where the complaint refers to an action that could be defined as medical negligence. Because many patients and staff believe in the NHS as a mutual organisation, such complaints cause particular difficulties. I know that they consume vast amounts of clinicians’ and managers’ time and that, too often, they damage the relationship between the NHS and patients. In parallel with the bill, the Government is taking advice on a system of no-fault compensation. I know that such a system will not resolve all complaints of medical negligence, but it could focus attention on learning lessons rather than having managers and doctors fighting off inquiries of patients or, indeed, lawyers. I look forward to seeing the final outcome of that work. As has been said often throughout the debate on the bill, managing complaints within the NHS must strike a balance between the managerial and the clinical. The approach that is adopted by clinicians, especially senior consultants, will be a critical factor. Complaints should be seen not as a threat but as an opportunity for service improvement or as an opportunity to learn, as Richard Simpson said. I hope that everyone who works in the NHS—clinicians, management and staff—will embrace the bill as a major step forward and a golden opportunity to make Scotland a better place, and I hope that the chamber will fully endorse the bill at decision time.

I, too, congratulate Joe FitzPatrick on securing the debate. As colleagues will be aware, none of the remaining four science centres is based in Ayrshire, never mind Kilmarnock and Loudoun, but that does not mean that the debate does not affect my constituents. I will take the opportunity to highlight the issue of science engagement in communities and the part that the centres can play in supporting that. Over recent years, I have highlighted the alarmingly low level of public engagement with science in Ayrshire. In October, I hosted a science summit with the assistance of Kilmarnock College, which attracted more than 100 participants not just to discuss the local situation, but to hear first hand from a range of Scottish and UK organisations with an interest in science engagement. In arranging that summit, I enjoyed tremendous support from Glasgow Science Centre and its then chief executive, Kirk Ramsay. In one of those strange coincidences that we find in Scotland, it emerged that Mr Ramsay was a former student of Kilmarnock College. As an engineer, he is also an admirer of the work of the Rev Robert Stirling of Galston, whose innovative approach to power generation is, after nearly 200 years, re-emerging as having major potential in near-zero-carbon power generation. Not only did Mr Ramsay and his staff support the event whole-heartedly, but the Glasgow Science Centre proved to be a unique resource, not just because of its own activities, but because it plays host to a range of outreach activities. In particular, it acts as an extremely effective base from which the British Science Association is able to provide invaluable support and information for those of us who have an interest in science engagement, but who are unfamiliar with the wide array of organisations that are active in the field. It became clear, through the summit process, that although there is too low a level of science engagement in the wider community, there is still no lack of enthusiasm and commitment. That includes the many excellent science teachers in our secondary schools and colleges, and the highly motivated primary school teachers who inspire an interest in science and in the wider science, technology, engineering and mathematics—STEM—agenda subjects. That is something on which we are starting to build, with a number of local schools obtaining science engagement funding since the summit took place. I look forward to taking that work further. I see that aspect of outreach by the centres as being important because, in return for their national funding, the centres must be able to demonstrate benefit for all sectors of the community, not just those who are lucky enough to have a centre within easy reach. From recent work that was done by Market Research UK Ltd on behalf of the Scottish Government, it is clear that outside school visits, direct engagement with the centres is heavily skewed towards higher-income households. The centres must use their work with schools as a means of broadening awareness of what they offer, not just to support the curriculum for excellence, which is very important, but to encourage regular and lifelong engagement with science. As a computer science graduate with a software development focus, I am concerned to hear that interest in that important and vital area is diminishing. Scotland has an excellent reputation in software development and I very much hope that the science centres will also consider ways in which to influence that situation in the near future. The Glasgow Science Centre is a very important resource for my constituents, especially young people who want to explore a range of issues and experiences to guide their choices of career. I will certainly do what I can to ensure that we develop engagement with the centre in the years ahead.

The minister may be interested to note that the cross-party group on digital participation also discussed the subject earlier this week. Professor Michael Fourman reported on the Royal Society of Edinburgh’s recommendation that fibre backhaul should be available within reach of every accessible community in Scotland. Will the minister outline any work that is taking place with the UK Government and service providers on the implementation of that recommendation?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate on a budget that is clearly very challenging but also, possibly, the most important budget that the Parliament has considered. That the budget is challenging is beyond dispute. The Finance Committee rehearses the debate between the Scottish Government and the UK Treasury about whether this year’s cuts are £900 million year on year or, as the Scottish Government argues, an even more staggering £1.3 billion. What cannot be disputed by any party is that for the first time since it was reconvened, this Parliament is having to deal with cuts in public services on a scale that has not been seen since the Thatcher era. It is also beyond dispute that the cuts flow directly from decisions made by Westminster Governments, started under the Labour Party and accelerated by the current coalition. If they are to be honest with themselves and the public, Opposition members must acknowledge that the cuts are the true face of Scotland’s much-vaunted union dividend.

The point about the small nations is that no matter what difficulties they are facing, not one of them is suggesting that independence for their nation is a bad thing and that they would prefer to be cocooned in some larger union. It is the scale of the cuts that make the budget the most important that the Parliament has considered. As the people of Scotland deal with the consequences of the cuts, they are looking to the Parliament—our Parliament—to do more than just manage the resources that are handed down from Westminster. They are looking for an understanding of why the cuts are being imposed, and for leadership so that Scotland can avoid getting into this position again. Opposition members have so far failed to address those issues, preferring instead to issue the dire warning that if Scotland was not a part of the union, the position might be worse. It strikes me as a weak argument that after 300 years of the union, the best that Scotland can expect is years of cuts and job losses and the decimation of its manufacturing base—which was once world leading—by policies designed to support an unsustainable financial services bubble.

It is a wee bit rich for Labour to stand up here and say that it would have saved the banks, when it allowed the banks to run amok in the first place. If we look at international comparators, we see that that argument is simply not true. The small countries across Europe that are mentioned include Austria, Denmark, Norway and Sweden, as well as the much-maligned Ireland, which many unionist politicians criticise in this Parliament, to their shame. According to The Economist, all those countries, which have populations below 10 million, have average incomes per head above those in the UK, France or even Germany, which is the most prosperous of Europe’s large nations. As Opposition members respond to the questions from voters about why we are facing the cuts, they might also explain why they believe that Scotland would be unique among small nations in being incapable of managing its own affairs in such a way as to grow its economy and sustain its public services. The Finance Committee report highlights the fact that Scotland’s public expenditure is not all delivered through the budget that is available to the Parliament. The budget adviser suggests, quite rightly, that the Scottish Government takes account of what is happening to public expenditure in reserved areas. We have already heard an example today of how that might work, with the suggestion that the Scottish Government should take responsibility for funding the future jobs fund when Westminster withdraws the funding. However, unfortunately, Labour fails to say where it would find the funding for that. We could argue that that is not a serious contribution to tackling the problems that we face, and it really lets down the very people whom Labour claims to represent. We have to ask ourselves where the Scottish Parliament’s responsibility to backfill bad decisions by the UK Government begins and where it ends. As the budget adviser said, defence spending is one area of expenditure that affects Scotland but is outwith the control of the Scottish Parliament. He highlighted the damage that will be done to our economy in the north-east of Scotland by the possible closure of the air force bases. However, recent figures provided by Westminster reveal just how little defence expenditure comes to any part of Scotland. While Labour was in power, Scotland lost 10,500 defence jobs and, according to the Ministry of Defence, only 10 of the top 500 senior officers are based in Scotland. When Opposition members highlight Scotland’s growing unemployment and the need for the Parliament to use its resources to address that, but fail to highlight the lack of a return to Scotland from the taxes that are paid to London, they do Scotland a great disservice. How much stronger could our economic growth be if we were able to raise and spend more of Scotland’s taxes here in Scotland? How many more services could we provide if we had the freedom to use Scotland’s assets in the interests of the Scottish people? The budget that is presented here today must be supported, and we should then turn our attention to how we can take control of Scotland’s resources in the interests of a better future for our people.

Will the minister take up with his UK counterparts the need for manufacturers to publish details of known faults with their products and for consumer organisations to take into account the variety of ways in which customers now choose to complain about products and services, notably via internet postings?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it has made in encouraging large food retailers to offer outlets in their stores to local food producers. (S3O-12671)

Is the minister satisfied that adequate arrangements are in place to help consumers identify Scottish and more locally produced produce? If not, will she work with the retail sector to ensure that the locality labelling arrangements for Scottish produce are improved, not just in large retailers, but online and in local food stores?

A friend of mine with whom I had lunch today asked me what the Scottish Parliament was talking about this afternoon. I said, “We’re debating the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.” He said, “Nothing new there, then.” As is demonstrated by the absence of amendments at stage 3, the bill has been developed by the Parliament in a consensual manner to address an issue that, although it is fairly technical, has a great impact on the communities that we serve. The need for a significant refresh and consolidation of law in the area can be seen from the fact that the three principal acts that will be amended by the bill date from 1953, 1979 and 1997. Over the 60 years since the passage of the first of those acts, a great deal has changed in how we view our environment and the threats that face it, and in our approach to dealing with the landmarks that we have created over many centuries. The consensus around the bill developed before it reached Parliament. It grew out of joint working involving both of the national agencies concerned—Historic Scotland and the Historic Environment Advisory Council for Scotland—as well as Scotland’s local authorities, which bear an increasing level of responsibility for managing all aspects of our environment, including the preservation of Scotland’s historic buildings and places. All those bodies are on the front line when the demands of today’s society and economy clash with the objective of protecting—and, wherever possible, providing access to—Scotland’s rich historic environment. As they discharge their responsibilities, it is right that they have a legislative framework that is clear in its objectives and that properly allocates both the responsibility and the powers that are needed to achieve those objectives. I will give an example from my constituency of the challenges that those who are working to protect our historic environment face. The King’s theatre—or the ABC cinema, as it is probably known to most people locally—was built in the early part of the 20th century and could hold about 2,000 patrons for a single show. It hosted operas, variety shows and musical extravaganzas, and it invited minors—young people—to attend on Saturday mornings in advance of the showing of a movie. I admit to being one of the kids who turned up with a sword in advance of the “Ivanhoe” movie. The theatre showed some of the early moving pictures and, by 1937, had caught up with changing fashions and so became a cinema, and added a balcony. Unfortunately, the interior of the building was devastated by fire in 1975, having been converted to a multiplex. It was eventually closed in 1999 and, sadly, remains out of use to this day. The building retains its fine Edwardian baroque frontage—I know because it faces my constituency office. However, despite being a grade B listed building, the old theatre is simply rotting away inside. A fine specimen of a tree now grows out of the frontage and is causing unknown damage. Despite the efforts of East Ayrshire Council, the owner has allowed the tree to continue growing. Therefore, I welcome the fact that part 3 of the bill will strengthen local authorities’ ability to deal with buildings that are simply being allowed to deteriorate, and to recover their expenses. I look forward to the act coming into effect, at which point I will press for the strongest possible action to arrest the decline of that fine old building. That building also demonstrates the need for flexibility. What exactly would we be preserving? Much, if not all, of the original interior has already disappeared through fire, redevelopment and neglect. We need a system that is flexible enough to secure the retention of that which is worth retaining, even if that means a degree of modification in the nature of the building’s use or in the restoration techniques or materials that can be used. In recent years, local authorities have been encouraged and supported in taking greater responsibility for the historic environment. I encourage the continuation of that approach as the act is rolled out, in the hope that the old King’s theatre—or the ABC cinema—in Kilmarnock can find a new purpose befitting its historic importance to the town.

Clearly, this is A76 day. A recent study demonstrated that signalling alone will not solve the congestion on the Bellfield interchange, which links the A76 with the A77 and the A71, which is a major access road for Kilmarnock. Will the minister ensure that Transport Scotland works with East Ayrshire Council to  address that issue, which is a real constraint on local development and on the economy of Kilmarnock and Loudon?

To ask the Scottish Government how many churches and charities have been required to reapply for exemption from water and sewerage charges following transfer of responsibility for administration of the scheme to Scottish Water Business Stream. (S3O-12215)

In 2002, Maxwell and Kilmarnock United Free church received a letter of exemption from water and sewerage charges, which it still has. Despite that, Business Stream is hounding it for non-existent arrears. Apparently, when the organisation took over the scheme, the church was indeed, as the cabinet secretary touched on in his response, recorded as vacant not as exempt and it now tells me that Scottish Water is insisting on a new application. Will the cabinet secretary take the matter up with Scottish Water? After all, voluntary groups that can prove exemption should not lose out because of mistakes in administering the scheme.

I am pleased to participate in the debate, not only as a parent but because, through my work with Learning and Teaching Scotland over many years, I have had an interest in curriculum for excellence since its inception. Through its debating system, the Parliament offers the people of Scotland an opportunity to see how their Government is, rightly, held to account. It also provides us with an opportunity to acknowledge the commitment of those who work in our public services, who put into practice many of the initiatives that start their journey in this place. Curriculum for excellence is one such example of the Parliament setting a direction of travel, which those who work in the education service have been striving to deliver for six years or more. Curriculum for excellence first came to my attention when I was working with LTS. The initial ideas, which came out of the national debate, were certainly new and challenging. What were the four capacities all about? How would we know when society, or the education system, had achieved the objectives of enabling all young people to become successful learners, confident individuals, responsible citizens and effective contributors? In 10 or 20 years' time, how will we be able to tell whether we have made a difference? Perhaps more interestingly, will we be able to attribute any positive outcomes to the curriculum for excellence? Although Scotland performs well according to many international comparisons, the education system that was inherited by the Parliament fails  far too many of our young people. In too many areas of Scotland, a high proportion of school leavers are marked as underachievers, and they proceed to what are euphemistically referred to as "negative school-leaver destinations". That phrase covers a group of young people who set out in life ill prepared to make their way and, in too many cases, without the basic skills that they need to establish themselves in the workforce. Literacy is one example of why we need to move forward with curriculum for excellence. Literacy is very important because of its wider benefits to the individual but, as employment patterns have changed, it has become a necessity for large parts of the labour market. As evidence that the system was failing, I refer to the literacy commission that was established by our colleagues in the Labour Party. It concluded: "For years in Scotland ... we have tolerated the intolerable. We have accepted a situation in which thousands of our young people leave school every year with correctable problems that leave them functionally illiterate—that is, without the basic literacy skills to function in a modern society." I do not know anyone who went into the teaching profession to produce school leavers who are functionally illiterate. That finding by the commission strongly suggested that there is a systemic problem, which we must urgently address. That is why we need to press ahead with curriculum for excellence and to embrace the opportunities and challenges that it brings. We should let our teachers get on with the job in hand. Our system failed to keep pace with the changes in Scotland's economy, and it is perceived to be ignoring the real needs of our youngsters, who expect us to offer them a better future. An increasing number of pupils in senior schools now see college as a more suitable setting for their continuing education. That might be down to a feeling that they are treated more like mature adults there, and it might also be to do with the unhelpful divide between academic and vocational courses. Too many pupils, especially weaker learners, see school as a place for academics—for those who are going on to uni. We need to remove that divide, not just between the vocational and the academic, but between school and college. The study of science is one area in which it is clear that different methods of learning and teaching have a part to play. Although traditional academic study is suitable for some pupils, others benefit from direct participation that is more hands on and gets them involved. From discussions with many of those who are involved in science education, it is clear to me that inspirational teachers are vital to encouraging  young people to engage with the subject. It should not matter whether the inspirational teacher is encountered in a primary school, a secondary school, a college or even the community. What matters is that, once the young person's interest is engaged, the education system should offer opportunities for continuing progress. I pay tribute to a teacher who is a constituent of mine, Mrs Morag Ferguson, who teaches at Annanhill primary school in Kilmarnock. Only last week, she won the SQA's science/engineering teacher of the year award. I had the privilege of seeing Mrs Ferguson in action, with an eager class of children who were learning about the sun. They were not simply listening to their teacher telling them facts about it, as with the chalk-and-talk fashion that we all know. They were drawing it and talking enthusiastically about it in little groups—about how it gave life to everything on earth and, of course, about the fact that it is very, very hot. The four capacities that I mentioned earlier were perhaps a little bit obscure for me way back at the beginning of this journey with curriculum for excellence, but they became clearer to me by the minute as I watched the work of those children and their teacher. That small example offers us a glimpse, not of the possible, but of the present and the future with curriculum for excellence. Our teachers are doing some wonderful things in Scotland's schools, and our children are already benefiting from new experiences. The staff in Learning and Teaching Scotland, with whom I worked for a number of years, will be thoroughly depressed about the attacks that have been made on them today in such a negative way by the Labour Party. I am desperately disappointed to hear that offering from Labour. I am of course delighted to support the Government's motion, and I commend it to the Parliament.

I welcome those who are attending this evening's debate both in the chamber and the gallery. I acknowledge the difficulties that were caused by the opportunity to hold the debate becoming available at such short notice. I must also acknowledge, of course, the work on the issue by Kim Hartley and her colleagues at the Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists. Members may be aware that the college has organised what looks like a very worthwhile conference on the subject to be held at Polmont young offenders institution on 16 November. I am sure that the event will be helpful in identifying new ways forward. At the heart of the debate is one of the big issues that faces us as we confront our current economic difficulties. The question is: if we prioritise services on which we have spent too little  money in the past, could we save money and possibly even improve outcomes? The Scottish Prisons Commission reported that it costs over £32,000 a year to keep someone in prison, and a staggering £200,000-plus per annum to keep a young person in a secure unit. Clearly, that sort of expenditure is best avoided, if at all possible. That said, of the young people who are convicted and enter the prison estate—there were more than 4,000 in 2006-07—over half will return to prison within two years. Why is that? What can we do to prevent such repeat expenditure on such a poor outcome in terms of protecting our communities? If I had the whole answer, I might be sitting where Fergus Ewing, the Minister for Community Safety, is sitting. The RCSLT has presented strong evidence that part of the solution—I emphasise that it is only part of the solution—lies in developing better insight about those who enter prison and in responding better to the challenges that they present. This week, the Parliament addressed literacy in Scotland. Although our level of literacy compares favourably with that of other Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, that has to be balanced against the fact that, by international comparison, Scotland fails its children most when we look at children who live in areas of concentrated deprivation. The data that the Royal College has presented show that, by the time they get to school, half of all children from disadvantaged communities have delayed or disordered speech and language development. What a challenge that must present to our teachers and our schools. The situation is even more challenging for all of us when we look at those who enter the prison system. Members might recall the research that former Barlinnie prison governor Roger Houchin published in 2005, which revealed that half of Scotland's prison inmates came from the most deprived 155 council wards out of a total of 1,000 wards, and that a quarter of all inmates came from the 53 most deprived wards. That is a staggering concentration that perhaps merited a more considered response than it got at the time. The Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists has presented evidence to show that, in addition to coming disproportionately from deprived backgrounds, those who are in prison display a high concentration of comprehension and communication disorders. I know that most of the following figures have already been made available to members, but with members' indulgence I would like to place them on the parliamentary record. More than 60 per cent of young people in the criminal justice system have a communication disability. In one United Kingdom institution, 23 per cent of those who were studied  had comprehension problems and up to 73 per cent had difficulties in expressing themselves effectively. In 2003, 26 per cent of young men in Polmont young offenders institution had clinically significant communication impairment and 70 per cent had difficulties with literacy and numeracy. More recently, in a parliamentary answer, the Scottish Prison Service stated that 64 per cent of women offenders and 90 per cent of prisoners in Polmont experience communication and literacy difficulties. Given that those levels are up to three times those of the general population, the identification of a link between communication and literacy difficulties and offending behaviour and imprisonment is not new or surprising. Such links are reflected in reports by Government and other agencies that go back over many years. It is also clear that such difficulties reinforce a cycle of poverty and offending and that that is concentrated in certain families and communities, with 65 per cent of boys with a convicted parent going on to offend. It surely goes without saying that poor communication and literacy are fatal to the crime diversion and prevention initiatives and the improved education and employment that we must bring to bear if we are to break the cycle, yet despite some good practice, efforts to address the issues still appear to be very much under development in the Scottish criminal justice system. For example, in response to a parliamentary question, the SPS confirmed that it does not assess all prisoners for communication impairment or difficulties with literacy and numeracy. Given the high incidence of those problems among its inmates, I found that surprising, so I would be interested to hear the minister's view on the issue. The Royal College and its partners argue that we need a whole-system response to the communication support needs of young offenders. That would include, for example, screening all young people who enter the criminal justice system, communication skills training for all professionals who work with young offenders with a communication disability, and a serious review of the impact of speech and language therapy on reducing reoffending. All parts of the justice pathway should be aware of communication support needs and have the skills to manage them. In that connection, I was pleased to see the literacy strategy that was recently approved by the south-west Scotland community justice authority, which specifically recognises the value of speech and language development. An important issue that is often raised by practitioners is the need for continuity of involvement. It is no good to recognise and respond to a need when someone  is in prison if the support is withdrawn or lost as soon as they leave. Even at a time of financial stringency, the question might be not whether we can afford to improve our approach to the issue, but whether we can afford not to do that. As I said at the beginning of my speech, what is proposed might not be the whole answer, but it looks to me as though it should be a more significant part of our response. I commend the Royal College for its persistence in pushing its case. I look forward to hearing the contributions of other members who are able to be here this evening and, of course, to the minister's response.

I add my congratulations to James Kelly on securing the debate. In his speech, he omitted to mention one of the most significant events in Scottish football history, which was Kilmarnock winning the league in 1965 by defeating Hearts 2-0 at Tynecastle on the last day of the season. I was there to see it. I, too, can attest to being a shining example of the positive impact that sport offers, having run a few Glasgow marathons in my day—I managed a best time of 3 hours and 30 minutes or thereabouts. I played school football and, for several years after university, amateur football in Ayrshire. I can say honestly that that was an education that was far beyond what I had imagined was possible. My favourite memory that I must slip into the debate is this: Scotch Corner Thistle 3, Stevenston Dynamos 0. That was a triumph for the skilful Kilmarnock-based team over its lumbering adversaries from Stevenston. Many of my former teammates still play, well into their 50s. One of them recently invited me back to the Friday night team meeting at the Galleon sports centre in Kilmarnock. I do not have too many opportunities to go to that, but it is fantastic that many keep up their sporting interests well into their middle age.  On a more serious sporting level, the debate takes place against the background of the Commonwealth games. It is great that team Scotland is beginning to make an impact on the medal table, as members have said. Our Scottish weightlifting team includes two representatives from my constituency: Graeme Kane from Crosshouse, who competes today—possibly now—and Peter Kirkbride from Hurlford, who starts his competition on Saturday. Peter is the current British champion at 94kg and is an old hand at the Commonwealth games, as he finished sixth in the Melbourne games of 2006. Graeme is the under-23 champion at 77kg and is making his first appearance at the full Commonwealth games. I wish them both well in their competitions this week. The appearance of those two athletes at that level of competition is down to the good work that the Kilmarnock weightlifting club and its coach, Charlie Hamilton, have done for many years. As Graeme Kane tells it, he got into the sport simply through reading an advert in his local paper and going along to the club—it was no more complicated than that. That was six years ago, when he was 16. The work that he has done since then has taken him all the way to Delhi and the Scottish squad. Such stories justify the emphasis in James Kelly's motion on working at the grass roots and ensuring that as many people as possible have access to and take up the opportunities to participate in sports of all kinds. My constituency has several facilities for sport and leisure. Newmilns Snow and Sports Complex offers young and old the opportunity to learn and practise skiing techniques. The Galleon centre is a popular venue that offers a wide range of sports for every taste and ability. From football to rugby and from cycling to bowling, a huge amount of sport takes place in Kilmarnock and Loudoun every week, as I am sure is the case across Scotland. Local clubs, many of which are run entirely by volunteers, are the entry points to sports for the potential Commonwealth games and Olympics stars of the future. They represent an investment in our future, not just for the medals tables at international events, but for the social and physical health of Scots of every age. I know that dancing has not yet made it on to the competitive stage at Delhi, but I will finish by acknowledging another local participant in the games—Stewarton girl and dance student Joanne Allison, who is off to India to take part in the closing ceremony next Thursday. I wish the Commonwealth games participants from Kilmarnock and Loudoun and team Scotland a safe and successful visit to Delhi. I look forward  to the title of host city being handed over to Glasgow at the conclusion of this year's event.

I congratulate Ross Finnie on securing the debate. I also recognise the tremendous work that my colleague Kenny Gibson, the local MSP, is doing on the issue. A number of constituents have approached me about the issue, which impacts on the future of the whole of Ayrshire, and, indeed, the whole of Scotland. Many constituents have expressed many of the same concerns as the local community about the environmental impact of the proposal by Peel Energy, which is the parent company. I share those concerns, which I have conveyed to the Scottish Government. This evening I would like to make three wider points. First, is what is proposed needed? I well understand the difficulties that our Government faces in developing an energy strategy for Scotland for the years ahead in the context of Scotland's welcome and world-leading commitment to reducing carbon emissions.  On this particular site, it is worth noting that, when the development plan for Ayr county was approved way back in 1971, the late Gordon Campbell—the then Tory Secretary of State for Scotland, whom I am sure that my colleagues will recall—said that he "considers the land suitable for industrial purposes which require the unique facilities at Hunterston, and that he intends himself to control the development of the land rigorously so as to ensure the amenity of the area." To take forward that approach, the national planning framework identified the development of a clean coal-fired power station on the site as a crucial element of Scotland's future infrastructure. In looking at the background to the development and the proposal as lodged, I have been concerned that the statement in the national planning framework has been taken as a signal that a potential developer need not address the legitimate concerns of the local community and other parties. On the central question whether such a plant is needed anywhere in Scotland at present, I understand that the Scottish Government has commissioned an assessment of future energy demand and supply. That will assess the current electricity supply base, deployment rates for renewables projects and likely retirement dates for existing base-load power plants. The proposed plant might not be required to meet Scotland's foreseeable energy needs or to be a demonstrator project for the viability of carbon capture technology. If that is so, the proposal should be summarily rejected and the site should remain protected against unwarranted development. That brings me to my second point, which is whether we have the right partner. If the Scottish Government's view is that the plant is required, will Peel Energy, the parent company, be the right delivery partner for a critical part of Scotland's infrastructure? According to the company's website, it "is at the forefront of delivering low carbon energy for the UK" and has "a balanced portfolio of more than 3GW in generation or development including wind, tidal power, biomass and multi-fuel power plants with carbon capture and storage." Closer examination of the company's portfolio reveals that the Hunterston plant represents more than half that balanced portfolio. Of the other projects that are listed on the company's website, only three are identified as being in operation. They are all wind farms in north-west England, where many other Peel Holdings businesses are based, and their combined output is less than  80MW—one twentieth of the Ayrshire plant's proposed output. It is obvious that Peel Energy has its own definition of what makes up a balanced energy portfolio. It has been a power generator for just 10 years and has operated just one wind farm with an output of 3.6MW. The company does not have the resources or the track record to take on a project of the proposed scale or to respond fully to legitimate concerns about the project's long-term impact on the environment and the local community. My final question is whether the issue is for Scotland or the UK. Scotland needs to operate in the context of a UK-wide energy policy that continues to favour nuclear power and in which Scotland's renewables sector is heavily disadvantaged by connection charges to the national grid. Considerable concern is felt that the UK Government is so committed to the new base-load capacity that it will accept as demonstration projects proposals for new power stations that are likely to fail the viability test for full-output carbon capture. That could mean that new plants operate without an effective carbon capture mechanism for the majority of their capacity. The financial interests of Peel Holdings must not be allowed to dictate the site's use to generate carbon-releasing electricity for export. The Scottish Government should explore the use of compulsory purchase powers, if necessary, to ensure that the final decision on any energy-related development of the site is taken in Scotland and not in Westminster.

I, too, congratulate Gil Paterson on securing this debate to coincide with the 25th anniversary of the Scottish Cot Death Trust, and the manner in which he opened it. Mr Paterson clearly feels very strongly about the subject and, of course, it will be hard to follow David Stewart's personal contribution. However, I will do my best to contribute to the debate. We usually spend a lot of time in the chamber debating the big issues of the day and agreeing or disagreeing on just about every subject imaginable. However, in this debate, Gil Paterson and Dave Stewart have given us a chance not only to share some of the pains of the past, but to talk about hopes for the future and for Scotland's wee weans. As part of my constituency work, I have dealt with a number of families who have lost babies, so I know how devastating it can be when the parents have some explanation for their child's death. I can only imagine how much worse it must be when the death is unexplained. In researching the background for my speech, I found the trust's website to be very helpful and informative. Back in 1986, in the organisation's early days, there were 153 deaths, or 2.3 deaths per 1,000 births. As Gil Paterson pointed out, the current figure is 40 deaths a year. That represents a significant drop of about 80 per cent, and credit must be given to the work of the trust as well as to the input from bereaved families, who have helped us to understand the reasons for these sudden deaths. Will we be able to reduce that number further? Indeed, will we eventually be able to reduce it to  zero? Perhaps we will not, but at least we now know some of the high-risk factors. As Dave Stewart pointed out, males seem to be more vulnerable, with two boys being lost for every girl. Sixty per cent are lost during the winter months, particularly in areas of deprivation, and the peaks suggest that the riskiest period seems to be when the baby is around two or three months old. Armed with that information and other indicators, I will ask my local health board, NHS Ayrshire and Arran, whether it might be possible to try out some intervention to assist parents whose babies might be liable to those risks at those particular times. I do not know whether that it will be possible, but I will try. Such a move will prove to be well worth while if we can reduce the death rate even further. A key strength of the Scottish Cot Death Trust, as with many other organisations, is that people who come to the trust for help can be sure that they are dealing with someone who has a real interest in their plight and is committed to helping. The trust's range of services has clearly been developed in response to the needs of families who have been affected by the loss of a baby or very young child to cot death. Obviously the provision of a home visiting or counselling service the length and breadth of Scotland is financially challenging, but how else can we ensure that parents who are affected by the loss of a baby or child to cot death get to speak to a professional adviser who really understands what they are going through? The fact that the services are provided alongside the input of dedicated volunteers means that parents can be helped in a variety of ways as they try to come to terms with their loss. I am sure that many of those who first encounter the trust as clients are gradually transformed into active participants in supporting others, both through the befriending service and by taking part in the trust's family days. In that way, the trust's activities bring together parents and members of the extended family who are rebuilding their lives after a devastating common experience. Those links and bonds go well beyond the support that can be provided by public services and are one of the reasons why it is so important for the public and voluntary services to work closely together. I congratulate and thank the Scottish Cot Death Trust, commend it for the work that it has done over the past 25 years, thank my colleague Gil Paterson for bringing this very important matter to our Parliament's attention and look forward to further work in this area that will lead to a greater understanding of the problem, and might ultimately allow more of Scotland's babies to survive this crucial period of their young lives.

I, too, congratulate Christina McKelvie on bringing this members' business debate to the Scottish Parliament and on bringing the rightful recognition to the men who are in the book. Their families, descendants and many friends must feel pride in seeing such a wonderful record now in print. We do not see the word "valour" very much these days, but the simple words "For Valour" on the Victoria Cross tell us that something special occurred in the life of the person who proudly wore it or was awarded it. Those acts of bravery and heroic courage could not have been predicted and certainly not expected of ordinary men in such circumstances. However, they occurred time and again, and that is why "My Hero, My Soldier Laddie" is important. When I first saw Mr Brown's book, I was struck by the beautiful artwork that accompanies the testimonials that make up that fine piece of work. It is very readable and I like the way that the reader can easily dip in and out to pick the stories that they want to read. Scotland's schoolchildren would certainly do well to take a look at it. I was intrigued to read how Mr Brown started on his journey of finding out about Scotland's 172 Victoria Cross awards and the incredible 14 that were awarded to men in Lanarkshire alone. This is how he describes his encounter with Private David MacKay, who was among the first to be awarded the VC: "Suddenly, there he was. In bold capitals. PRIVATE DAVID MACKAY, LUCKNOW, 1857. I stared at his name over and over. He does exist! What must I do now? My mind was racing. I dare say an experienced family researcher would have reached this stage quicker than I, but David Mackay seemed to be waiting just for me. And no one can ever take that from me now." What a wonderful description of the moment that led to the fine book that we are discussing. We can tell that Mr Brown was immediately drawn to the story of David MacKay, who was a mere 23 years old when he stood with his Highland comrades in the thin red line at Balaclava in 1854. Those were dark days in Scotland, with the cholera epidemic claiming thousands of lives and the scandal of the clearances still going on in the Highlands. As Mr Brown says, they were turbulent times, but when was it ever anything else? Our connection in modern times with our armed forces personnel is mostly through remembrance day in November each year when we, as elected members, have the privilege of laying wreaths on behalf of our communities for our fallen heroes. I have had the honour of doing that for some years as the constituency member for Kilmarnock and  Loudoun, but I have been a regular at Kilmarnock cenotaph since I was a boy. I was taken there by my father in my childhood to remember the Scots who gave their lives in the ultimate sacrifice. When one reads about the men in "My Hero, My Soldier Laddie", one after the other, putting their lives on the line for their friends, comrades and their country—as our serving personnel are still doing now as we have the debate—one cannot help but feel a sense of humility along with a feeling of pride and admiration for their bravery. Surely we cannot reasonably expect them to demonstrate such heroism and determination in the face of so many dangers, but they do it time and again. No one could possibly tell what the future would hold for Private David MacKay in the 1850s or what the future will hold for a young constituent of mine, Robert James Miller Scott, who only yesterday set out on his journey to be a Scottish soldier. Of this I am sure: all the serving Scots who put their lives on the line for us deserve our respect and much more than our thanks. The present times in Scotland might also be fairly turbulent, in different ways of course but, as Mr Brown says in his book, when was it ever anything else?

To ask the Scottish Government what assessment it has made of the financial impact that the change of United Kingdom Government might have on taxpayers in Scotland. (S3O-10608)

I know that the cabinet secretary agrees that the council tax is a discredited tax based on property valuations that are frozen at 1991 levels. He will also know that the new Government in London has agreed to review local government finance for England and Wales. The majority in this Parliament favours replacing the council tax with a more progressive form of taxation, so will the cabinet secretary seek assurances from the UK Government that its respect agenda will end Labour's threat to withhold £400 million that is paid out to Scotland through the present council tax benefit system?

I congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing the debate. I also recognise the significant contribution that a former friend and colleague of mine, Mr Martin Jack from Think Different Events, has made to EDGE. He has worked closely with the EDGE programme over the past few years. I know Ms Baillie has been a supporter of the EDGE programme, which started in Dunbartonshire with just one Scottish and one American university, participating with local schools. The rationale behind EDGE was to  "generate business improvement and to focus on the needs of companies".  The programme has grown significantly and received positive evaluations on a number of occasions. I was very pleased to see the programme extended to Ayrshire in 2008. Since then, I have acted as host for the parliamentary visit that has been a key part of the cultural programme for participants. During each of those visits I was hugely impressed by the enthusiasm of the young people who participated—there have been up to 160 participants. Taking questions from so many on business-related issues as they affect Scotland and our place in the world was quite daunting but very rewarding. Last summer, they were very keen to try to understand the business decision Diageo reached when it decided to close the Johnnie Walker plant in Kilmarnock. That was a particularly difficult question; I still do not understand the decision myself. The EDGE students were very interested and concerned about that news. I was copied in on an e-mail that one of my constituents, Elizabeth Young from Newmiln, who took part in the programme in 2005, sent to the minister. I would like to extract a couple of sentences from Elizabeth's e-mail, which emphasise the point about double benefit for students and employers. She wrote: "I strongly believe that university students are a key group to target to promote entrepreneurialism. They are at a good point to be able to build on the skills gained at EDGE and at university to turn these into something productive." She continued: "It soon became apparent that the companies all valued what we offered and more importantly, we were working on projects that the companies were desperate to complete but either did not have time to do or could not afford the normal consultancy fees." The EDGE programme appears to offer a real win-win: the young people and businesses involved and Scottish Enterprise achieve real benefits. We are slowly emerging from the worst recession that our country has faced for many years. Apart from its short-term effects, the recession has thrown up huge questions about the future direction of Scotland's economy. We have been experiencing a rundown in our manufacturing base for as long as I can remember. More and more of our companies are branch plants or subsidiaries of multinational companies. That makes us dependent on decisions that are taken elsewhere, over which we have little influence. To address that, we need to reconnect our young people to the world of business and particularly to the world of making things, of scientific and technical innovation, and of new business start-ups. One of the most encouraging aspects of the EDGE programme is that it is not exclusively  aimed at students who are already studying business. Two of the participating Scottish universities open the course to all their undergraduates, while the University of Strathclyde targets it at students in just one department—electronic and electrical engineering. The wide student base offers the possibility that participants in the programme emerge with exactly the mix of skills they need, a technical and product-oriented education and, crucially, an appreciation of how business works. The most recent evaluation identified some issues about how the programme operates that could perhaps be improved. That is inevitable as we develop our ideas about how to shape our business future. I have received assurances that Scottish Enterprise has not cancelled the programme entirely but has postponed this year's event, perhaps, as the minister might be able to confirm later, to allow some reconfiguration to take place. If that is the case, I look forward to the early commencement of work towards a further round of the EDGE programme in 2011. I am, of course, willing to be grilled in front of another live audience in the Scottish Parliament should that be a desirable component of any future programme.

To ask the Scottish Government what implications the publication of "Ginealach Ùr na Gàidhlig: An Action Plan to increase the numbers of Gaelic speakers" will have for Gaelic education in Kilmarnock and Loudoun. (S3O-10228)

I was particularly interested in the potential of having home visitors to encourage parents to enrol their children in Gaelic-medium education. I agree that that will be vital if the language is to grow in the years ahead. Can the minister outline how that proposal is to be taken forward and what opportunity there will be for families in Kilmarnock and Loudon to participate?

Will the First Minister join me in expressing condolences to the family of the workman who died this week while working on Stewarton viaduct in my constituency? He will recall that consideration is being given to the proposal for the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Office to have powers over all fatal accidents in Scotland, including those related to rail services. Will he ask the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to raise the issue with the UK Government and request that this fatality and others related to rail services are brought within the scope of fatal accident inquiry legislation?

I, too, congratulate Cathy Jamieson on securing the debate. I am not sure whether Bob Dylan has ever been mentioned in a Scottish Parliament debate, but I will refer to him later. The ICA's report says: "The old model of economic growth, based on ever-rising personal and corporate debt and the expansion of the financial services sector, is surely bankrupt." That is quite a statement and it has been coming for a long time. The bubble well and truly burst with the near-collapse of the banks and the level of personal debt to sustain economic growth is measured in trillions of pounds. That the ICA advocates re-establishing our manufacturing roots will be welcomed by many communities that continue to be blighted by long-term unemployment and which the boom bypassed and brought little direct benefit to. The UK national debt of about £845 billion, which is 60 per cent of gross domestic product, and personal consumer debt of about £1.5 trillion—a trillion is a million million—are hardly a firm basis for economic recovery. Long after we leave this place, our successors might well ask why that was allowed to become the economic order of the era in which we live. The ICA's report is a breath of fresh air. It concerns itself—naturally—with some specific initiatives, but it also makes welcome comments about supporting older as well as younger workers and about retaining skills that remain but which are not being deployed. The report mentions the importance of economic regeneration and the priority of creating new jobs. That is not too surprising, but the emphasis is welcome and must encourage communities that hope again for a brighter future . One major challenge is that the number of companies that are headquartered and which conduct research and development in Scotland is reducing. They are a vital resource to create the new industries that will produce jobs in our communities. All the advice that we are receiving is that we need to develop an industrial strategy to improve Scotland's competitiveness in today's and tomorrow's key industry sectors. We must be clear about the fact that we lead the field in some of those sectors. In addition to pure service industries, which include finance and tourism, we need to look for new developments in the creative industries, energy, food and drink and the life sciences. We can rebuild jobs for the 21st century in those industries. Recent announcements of  progress in renewable energy are particularly welcome. We should not forget the increasing importance of co-operatives, which offer a trusted, solid and sustainable model for economic growth. I said that I would mention Bob Dylan. The co-operative movement has adopted in support of its principles one of his iconic songs, which contains the lyrics: "How many times must a man look up Before he can see the sky? ... how many ears must one man have Before he can hear people cry?" Those are fitting words in the context of communities crying out for help from the despondency of unemployment. I have previously highlighted the important role that science can play in generating new jobs. Scotland still has an impressive presence in all aspects of science, but scientific advance is usually turned into jobs after the advance has been patented. I was amazed to read recent evidence of the UK as a source of patentable ideas. Based on gross domestic product, the UK has fallen behind countries such as Denmark, Finland and New Zealand in terms of the number of international patents. That is surprising, although it may say more about the dynamism of smaller economies. I would be interested to see the evidence on Scotland's position. The emphasis on that in the report is welcome. We have to encourage communities that seek to move in that direction. In its report, the ICA focuses on the important role of local authorities in economic development. I agree entirely with that and welcome the Scottish Government's decision to empower local authorities in terms of regeneration. Discussions have taken place between local authorities and Scottish Enterprise on the subject, and I look forward to positive news for East Ayrshire Council in that regard in the near future. Those who were able to attend this week's jobs summit, as Cathy Jamieson and I did, heard of the need for Government to act smarter in supporting local areas. It does not make a lot of sense for local authorities to invest in getting people back into work if the complexity of the benefits system acts as a disincentive. The matter was raised at the summit. I look forward to hearing what steps the Government may take in response. Two of my colleagues mentioned the Johnnie Walker and Diageo situation. A company in the modern era might take jobs away from our communities, but it can never really take the identification of a product such as Johnnie Walker away from Kilmarnock.

To ask the Scottish Government what its  position is on the progress being made regarding the introduction of the electronic bus service registration system. (S3O-9834)

I draw the minister's attention to the failure of Strathclyde partnership for transport to implement EBSR properly. I have passed to the minister correspondence that was generated by EBSR on 18 December 2009, concerning the withdrawal of a vital bus service in my constituency. As the area's transport authority, SPT failed to notify East Ayrshire Council of the service withdrawal. Its failure to implement EBSR continued up to this week. Will the minister do what he can to re-establish SPT as a credible transport authority, instead of being a mouthpiece for Glasgow city Labour Party? If that cannot be done, will he consider abolishing SPT and allowing local authorities to establish a useful organisation in its place?

I, too, congratulate Sandra White on securing this important debate. I know that she is deeply committed to developing Scotland's contribution to the international community and I commend the work that has been done by her and her colleagues in the Scottish Parliament branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. I want to focus on the theme of the day, which is science, technology and society. Perhaps in a typical Miss Marple style, I want to approach the theme from two angles, both of which are firmly rooted in my experience. The first comes from looking around my constituency, where there are a number of communities that have a place in the history of scientific and technological innovation. I will give just three examples. First, the village of Darvel was the birthplace of Alexander Fleming, whom Sandra White mentioned and whose discovery of penicillin revolutionised medicine around the world. Secondly, Galston was home to the Rev Robert Stirling, who invented the Stirling engine—an early rival to the steam engine that is attracting new interest in this age of green technology. Thirdly, Kilmarnock was home to the world's first commercial bicycle factory in the premises of Thomas McCall. Those examples and others in the fields of engineering, materials sciences and food production helped to shape the economy and communities of Kilmarnock and Loudon, but today, even an area with such a strong track record struggles to hold its place in those fields. Local industries with strong scientific and technological traditions passed into the ownership of multinationals. Many have since closed, their intellectual capital stripped out by companies that perhaps owe their allegiance not to local communities but to shareholders. I will shortly pull together a science summit to examine how Ayrshire's communities can stay connected to developments in the fields of science, technology and engineering. The lesson that I draw is that the Commonwealth is right to focus on how we can strengthen science and technology in communities, especially in developing countries. I am sure that communities around the world contain the same human and intellectual capital that Kilmarnock and Loudon have demonstrated  over many years, but they need the opportunity to develop and retain that capital. That means providing access to scientific and technological education at every level, and respecting local knowledge and initiative. We have to challenge the practice whereby multinational companies register patents on knowledge that was derived from developing countries with little or no benefit going to the source community. The pattern of patent filings shows just how divided the world is becoming. In 2009, just three countries—the USA, Japan and Germany—accounted for a staggering 59 per cent of international patent applications. Although developing countries make up more than 78 per cent of the countries that are signed up to the patent co-operation treaty, they accounted for only 14 per cent of total applications, with China and the Republic of Korea accounting for two thirds of that figure. The concentration of scientific and technological innovation in such few hands is not sustainable and can only fuel a backlash throughout the countries that are left behind by the dash to control the world's intellectual property. I will touch briefly on the second issue. As convener of the cross-party group on digital participation, I make a plea for special attention to be paid to the role that digital technology can play as a driver of economic growth and as a tool for education and development. The digital mobile phone is already having an impact in developing countries; Africa is a notable example. As it involves much lower infrastructure costs than cable-based communications, digital mobile phones are achieving unprecedented levels of penetration. Local companies have emerged as major players and there are huge numbers of small-scale and micro businesses. The technology is helping to deliver secure and cheap money transfers, even across national boundaries. In some areas, specialist services are being developed to allow access to the internet by mobile, which has the potential to allow local companies to achieve global penetration for limited cost. Digital technology and its implications for developing countries may be of interest to the cross-party group on international development. The Commonwealth provides an opportunity for countries at all stages of development to come together. The selection of the theme of science and technology for Commonwealth day 2010 shows the Commonwealth's continuing relevance, and demonstrates that it can help its members to address the key challenges that face communities around the globe.

I am sure that the First Minister will share my concern about the evidence that is emerging from the fatal accident inquiry into the tragic death of my constituent, Alison Hume, in Galston. Will he ensure that the Scottish Government will review the health and safety guidance that the emergency services operate so that saving lives is always the priority and that that is reflected clearly in any revised guidelines?

To ask the Scottish Government what implications the Lisbon treaty will have for the Scottish Government's input into United Kingdom Government European policy. (S3O-9411)

With Europe's growing impact in the area of freedom, security and justice, is the minister confident that current arrangements recognise the unique nature of Scots law? Has consultation take place on what will happen if Holyrood wants to opt into new European legislation from which Westminster wants to opt out?

The First Minister no doubt shares my concern at the Rail Accident Investigation Branch's report into the rail crash last year in Stewarton, in my constituency. A catalogue of errors and missed opportunities over 20 years has put lives at risk. It was astonishing to learn that, although a maintenance train that went over the bridge three days before it collapsed detected clear signs of movement, nothing was done to address the corrosion of the girders in the bridge. Will the First Minister ask the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change to take the matter up with Network Rail and the United Kingdom Government and to seek assurances that the recommendations in the report will be actioned as speedily as possible, in the interests of public safety?

To ask the Scottish Government whether an assessment has been carried out of the number of sites in need of remediation resulting from industrial plants that closed during the recession. (S3O-9226)

As the minister knows, in many areas communities have been scarred by vacant industrial sites, too many of which have languished for years in a derelict state. Is the minister confident that any kind of framework can be put in place to prevent the owners of sites that fall vacant during the recession from leaving them derelict to the detriment of local communities? If not, will she consider introducing such proposals to strengthen the powers of local authorities to  secure remediation and possible reuse of the sites?

I, too, congratulate my colleague Angela Constance on securing this debate on the Bausch & Lomb plant in her constituency. To say that there are parallels with the situation in Kilmarnock with Johnnie Walker and Diageo would be an understatement. We are talking about a company that is operating profitably in a global recession with increasing demand but which has chosen to downsize and shed hundreds of loyal workers. However, as I understand it, unlike the Johnnie Walker case, there are no real job gains elsewhere at the Bausch & Lomb plants in Ireland or the USA. Manufacturing systems are simply being transferred to Waterford in Ireland with no increase in staffing expected, and there are perhaps only a handful of new jobs in the USA. So what is going on? I am reminded of the speech that Ross Finnie gave during my members' business debate on the Johnnie Walker situation. He talked about the movement of employment around the world in the blink of an eye and with no thought for the effects on the communities that give companies the vast profits that they enjoy. Before I entered the Parliament, that was the kind of speech that I hoped to hear in it. He homed in on problems that we face but which Governments of all kinds do not yet seem able to do much about. Every Government will try to lure big employers to their country with tax breaks and incentives of one kind or another. That is to be expected of them—it is their duty to do so. However, what does that mean for the communities that are left behind when a corporate crunches a few numbers on an Excel spreadsheet and comes up with a closure plan? For the corporate, it is simply sound  business. The numbers all add up, the cost base is reduced and, ultimately, the company might grow and develop. However, for the communities that are left behind in the wake of such decisions, it spells disaster: loss of a main earner's wages in a family, which leads to the potential loss of a family house and the consequences of that. As my colleague Angela Constance pointed out, why did it make sound business sense only a few years ago in 1996 to acquire this Scottish company—an award-winning operation? Why does it make sound business sense now to close it down while it is still healthy? The reasons can perhaps be seen if we examine how the corporates acquire businesses around the world by buying up potential opposition only to consolidate a few years later by downsizing their operations. They lose nothing, but we in Kilmarnock and Livingston are to lose everything. How can that be right? How can it be the correct approach to developing businesses for a successful future that will sustain all our communities? If truth be told, the corporates—while claiming that they have a corporate social responsibility—rarely act to support the communities that give them their profits. Yes, they might offer enhanced severance or perhaps work with us to help to retrain and reskill those who are to lose their jobs, but when the dust settles, they are off in pursuit of the next acquisition when the time is right. Surely that is short-termism—reacting to today's circumstances, rather than planning for a solid future. My hope for the workers at Bausch & Lomb and the workers at Johnnie Walker's—and others who will surely follow—is that debates such as this will force national Governments, which have the powers, to open their eyes to the huge problems that are being handed over to them by corporates that simply want to move around the world to make a fast buck no matter the human cost. When we open our eyes to those problems and begin to tackle them seriously, perhaps people in Kilmarnock, Livingston and around the world who are needed one day and on the scrapheap the next, will in future be able to work for companies that care not just about their profit and loss accounts but about the people who work for them. I am delighted to support the motion lodged by my friend and colleague Angela Constance.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it has discussed with the United Kingdom Government the impact on Scotland's older disabled people of changes proposed to attendance allowance. (S3O-8726)

Does the minister agree that the decision to exclude Scotland's older disabled people from the consultation on this issue represents a real slap in the face by a Labour Government that is increasingly out of touch with the lives of ordinary Scots? Will she raise that point with the responsible minister at Westminster and secure a commitment to consult those affected in Scotland on any proposals to change UK-wide benefits?

To ask the Scottish Government what role Scotland's traditional arts play in the country's economy. (S3O-8610)

This weekend in Kilmarnock, a feast of traditional music and other activities will mark the end of the year of homecoming. As the minister knows well, the Gaelic language is a vital part of Scotland's heritage and its development offers real opportunities for young people throughout Scotland. Will the minister consider what more the Scottish Government could do to support East Ayrshire Council and Kilmarnock College to secure and enhance Gaelic learning in Kilmarnock and Loudon?

I welcome the opportunity to make a brief contribution to the debate on the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill, although, as I am one of the last members to speak, it will be a challenge to offer a new contribution. I will offer a few observations from my experience of 25 years in education and my involvement in local government as far back as 1992. I will pick out some of the key elements of the bill that are helpful in improving current practice. Any of us will acknowledge that we become attached to the schools that we attend, and those of us who are parents become attached to the schools that our kids attend. It is an emotional attachment and many of us will have experienced at first hand the pain or the joy of a school being closed or saved. The bill helps by setting out the detail of what is required of the local authority in making its case: the list of those to be consulted has been expanded and includes both pupils and staff; the educational benefits of any changes proposed must be detailed; and, in the case of rural schools, the impact on the local community and the alternative travel arrangements that may be required must be assessed. I note that any person can make a representation to the minister to request a call-in and that the minister must take that into account before deciding whether to call in a proposal. I hope that those measures will help local communities that find themselves in a consultation situation to feel a bit more confident that the level of detail that they would expect from their local authority will be forthcoming. It might be fair to note that local communities have often found themselves preparing much more detailed cases for the retention of a school than the authority has done in proposing to close it. Such work could even take the form of detailed alternative assessments of the condition and fabric of buildings, with financial assessments, or independent assessments of future population movements. That was all very impressive, but one wondered why that burden fell on local people.  Quite correctly, the burden and obligation to make a detailed case must lie with the local authority and local people should be confident that the detail that is presented to them will be sufficient to allow them to challenge any assumptions that they might think it appropriate to challenge. I am particularly pleased about two aspects of the bill: the requirement to consult the children and the requirement to assess the impact on the wider community of proposals that relate to rural schools, which will be so important in helping authorities to come to a fully considered position. In the past we have perhaps not thought it appropriate to ask the kids what their thoughts and ideas are. I have visited school kids in my constituency for many years and I have complete confidence in their ability to share their views about their school and their hopes for the future. They are not afraid to be honest about their views and they will tell us straight if they think that their school is fantastic or if they would prefer to move elsewhere for a new experience and environment. Of course, sometimes it can be much harder to persuade the parents of the merits of moving to a new location. I also like the emphasis on assessing the impact on the wider community of any proposals that relate to rural schools. As several members have said, we often find that community activities in rural areas are much more dependent on there being small schools in those areas than is the case in urban settings. Formal consultation will be welcomed throughout Scotland. Providing as full a picture as possible of how a local authority is thinking about any school consultation can surely only be helpful in allowing everyone to arrive at the best possible outcome, in order to achieve the best educational possibilities for our children. I hope that members throughout the chamber have found a number of positive proposals in the bill and that they will give it their full support at decision time.

I thank the Parliamentary Bureau and my colleagues for giving me the opportunity to bring this matter before the Parliament. As background to today's debate, I note that Lord Cullen has published his report on the review of fatal accident inquiry legislation. I do not know whether the impending debate hastened the report's completion, but it is helpful that the report has emerged while attention is focused on the issue, following the most recent deaths at Halkirk level crossing, which I am sure will feature in the debate. My focus on the issue was prompted by the death in January this year of local teenager Boab Milloy at the Gatehead level crossing in my constituency. That level crossing has half barriers that block vehicular traffic from proceeding across the crossing but do not fully cover the road and footpaths. Before moving on to the general topic, I advise members that the procurator fiscal has advised me that Mr Milloy's death is not to be the subject of a fatal accident inquiry. As Lord Cullen's report makes clear, current practice in such cases is not to provide written reasons for decisions; those inquiring about the outcome are simply advised that, in arriving at the decision, all evidence was carefully considered. I am pleased that Lord Cullen recommends an end to that practice and that relatives and other parties with an interest in the matter will be advised of the  reason for the Lord Advocate's decision not to apply for a fatal accident inquiry. When I learned of Mr Milloy's death, I asked to be kept informed of the outcome of any inquiry that was conducted. That proved to be very difficult, mainly due to the number of agencies dealing with the matter. Members will see how difficult it must be for the public to know whom to pursue for such information. I was, of course, aware of the fatal accident inquiry system and of its good reputation for drawing valuable lessons from sudden deaths in a wide variety of circumstances. I therefore submitted questions on previous inquiries into the deaths of pedestrians at level crossings. Having received confirmation of four pedestrian deaths at level crossings between 1999 and 2007, I was disappointed to receive this follow-up comment: "Procurator Fiscal records are not structured in a manner that makes it possible to confirm if any of these four pedestrian deaths were followed up by a fatal accident inquiry." When I then asked the local procurator fiscal whether an inquiry had ever been held into a death at a level crossing similar to the one at Gatehead, I was advised that the type of information requested "is not recorded in a way which would permit it to be readily identifiable". Members might begin to see the problems that we are facing on the issue. However, I am pleased to see that Lord Cullen has recommended that, in future, FAI determinations should be available on the Scottish Court Service website. That will provide access to a body of information that will be of value to many people. Although Lord Cullen's report has just become available, having reviewed it in preparation for this debate I believe that it addresses a number of deficiencies in the FAI system and I am sure that it will be widely welcomed. One point in particular—it may surprise members that this is not done already—is that, in future, recommendations from FAls will be monitored to ensure that they are implemented. However, I must say that, specifically in relation to deaths on the rail system, I found the report very disappointing. The report rehearses, in one paragraph, the complexity of the arrangements around the rail system, in which the FAI system has an interface with rail safety arrangements, which are a reserved matter. If anyone has waded through the memorandum of understanding between the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and the rail safety agencies, they will appreciate the complexity of the arrangements. In light of that, I was disappointed to see how little  evidence was submitted to Lord Cullen's inquiry by bodies responsible for safety in the rail industry. Although the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland made a submission, it did not offer any comments on rail safety issues. The British Transport Police did not make a submission and the rail accident investigation branch made a single-paragraph submission, which focused solely on managing conflicting recommendations from one of its investigations and a fatal accident inquiry. I was also very disappointed to note that the Office of Rail Regulation made no submission to Lord Cullen's inquiry. I asked whether it had made representations by other means and was advised that it had not. Given the importance of the FAI system, the minister or cabinet secretary may wish to take up with the Office of Rail Regulation its failure to submit a response. I note also that, although it is its rail network that is the subject of this complex system of regulation and inquiry, Network Rail made no submission to Lord Cullen. The lack of input from the multitude of agencies that have a responsibility for rail safety may explain why the report makes no recommendations that bear directly on it. I think that that is a weakness in the report that would benefit from further consideration, either by Lord Cullen or by the relevant committee of this Parliament. In order to provide the clearest possible system it should be clear that, whichever agency is investigating the cause of death, any sudden death in Scotland is subject to decision by the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. All the arrangements entered into between agencies should reflect that. The improvements in the FAI process should help us better assess whether level crossings in Scotland are currently as safe as they could be, but we are not helped by the fact that too many agencies are involved. Ultimately, there must be a clearer path to improving safety, which will reduce the numbers of deaths occurring at level crossings. I am not yet satisfied that crossings such as Gatehead in my constituency are as safe as they could be. "Working properly" might be an acceptable assessment of safety by the industry, but people are still losing their lives. We need reassurance that every effort is being made to prevent further loss of life.

This is an appropriate debate at an appropriate time, given the events in my constituency, particularly in the past few months. The loss of the 700 jobs at Johnnie Walker's in Kilmarnock brings into sharp focus all the issues and possible solutions to aid economic recovery. Our local Kilmarnock College is currently playing a key part in that and it will hopefully play a greater part in the coming months and years. Not to put too fine a point on it, the college can be pivotal, not only through the courses that it offers and its well-established business links, but in its location, too; it can play a major part in helping to revive the town and helping the local economy to recover. I acknowledge the support that this Government has already given the long-awaited renewal and relocation plans for the college, which will play a crucial part in rebuilding confidence in the town and its business community. A useful figure from the previous Administration's review of Scottish colleges suggested that, for every pound invested, we get £3.20 back in benefit to the economy. The Scottish Government's support for the colleges in the new draft budget stands at £693 million for current funding and capital grants. We can easily see the major impact that that will have in assisting our economic recovery, given that it will amount to more than £2 billion of benefit overall. There are a host of other measures, which I am sure that my colleagues throughout the chamber will highlight in their contributions, but the magnitude of the investment is clear. I want to highlight some research that was carried out by the Hunter centre for entrepreneurship at the University of Strathclyde, funded by Sir Tom Hunter, which focuses on the importance of training. Scotland's rate of business growth has historically been quite low. From the perspective of Ayrshire, which has 10 per cent of Scotland's population but only 6 per cent of  business start-ups, the problem is particularly acute. If our economy is to grow in a more sustainable way, we need to increase the rate at which we convert knowledge and expertise into real business activity. The Hunter centre provides evidence that there can be real benefits from colleges adding training in entrepreneurship to their programmes. Although delivering such training at school level helps to develop a positive attitude to business development, the evidence suggests that that is too early to influence the later rate of business start-ups. Our objective is to stimulate business start-ups. The research suggests that it makes sense to deliver that training at the same time as the skills on which the business will be built. That points to potential benefits to encouraging a renewed focus on such training in colleges and universities. In that way, we might perhaps uncover the next Tom Hunter. The Hunter Foundation highlights the positive impact of close relationships between colleges and local businesses, not least in allowing the students to benefit from experience of the world of work. In the past year, Kilmarnock College has been working with more than 50 employers and is currently working with 36 organisations to support economic recovery. Earlier today, at question time, I highlighted the work that the college is doing to connect students and the wider community with science and the employment prospects that can flow from scientific training. The college produces biomedical students, not just from among the high-performing students but from among those who performed less well at school and who need more support. That demanding course has enjoyed a 100 per cent retention and achievement rate at higher national diploma level, which is testament to the good work being carried out at the college. The fact that many students go on to university and find employment even before they graduate demonstrates what a good investment that is, not just for the individuals but for the whole community. Let us not forget that our colleges have a wider contribution to make to the economic and social wellbeing of Scotland by supporting young people on the margins of our society, particularly disabled youngsters. Much has been done to make our college campuses more accessible, and every year more young people with a range of disabilities and support needs successfully complete college placements in mainstream settings, but we can always do more. Donaldson's college supports young deaf learners to make the transition from school into further education, but its own monitoring shows us that fewer than 10 per cent of those learners complete their original choice of college course.  In the 2008 survey of provision for learners with profound and complex needs, colleges acknowledged that they lacked space to provide adequate support. Staff sometimes lack the skills and knowledge that are required to teach and support such youngsters. The cabinet secretary and a few other members mentioned transition planning, which is vital to bridging the gaps. I know that ministers are aware of the issue and are supporting the for Scotland's disabled children coalition, which is exploring ways of making transitions more effective. We cannot afford to lose some of our most academically gifted but disabled youngsters due to a lack of support to enable them to participate fully. The challenges facing our colleges are very demanding. Our expectations of them may be even higher, if we are asking them to deliver for our young people, those with special learning support needs and members of our adult population who find themselves cast aside by corporate downsizing. However, I know that Scotland's colleges are up to the challenge. They have the full backing of the Scottish Government, and I am confident that they will deliver and play a decisive part in Scotland's economic recovery.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to make science more accessible to the public in Kilmarnock and Loudoun. (S3O-7980)

In the recent correspondence to which the cabinet secretary referred, I was advised that none of the £650,000 allocated this year was spent on widening access to science in Ayrshire because there were no bids, as she said. She will be pleased to hear that Kilmarnock College is working to widen access to science using its own resources. The college principal has endorsed my suggestion that a local summit to improve access to science be held in Ayrshire. Will the cabinet secretary support such an initiative to reconnect innovative Ayrshire to the world of science?

Will the member give way?

I stand here again to speak in support of  the 700 Johnnie Walker workers in Kilmarnock and Hurlford who are demoralised, but not defeated. The events since Diageo's announcement on 1 July, which was ratified on 9 September, that it intends to sever all links between Kilmarnock and Johnnie Walker have been a devastating blow to the town that gave birth to the famous striding man. It is little wonder that a mass campaign was mobilised to support the cause, to articulate an alternative and to persuade the company's leaders that a huge injustice was about to be done. Of course there has been anger, but we must not forget that people are simply trying their best to protect their livelihoods and an iconic product that they hold dear—a product that is so much a part of the town of Kilmarnock. Make no mistake: the Diageo proposal will rip the heart from a community that has served the company well in its short tenure in charge of Johnnie Walker. The loss of 700 jobs in the town will make it the worst unemployment black spot in Scotland and will carry serious social and economic consequences. However, I will not give up the fight to persuade Diageo bosses that this is a huge mistake, unrivalled in the corporate world. That a successful and respected company reporting very healthy profits amidst a recession should cast aside all its 700 workers in the town that gave life to the famous Johnnie Walker red label is truly beyond belief. That is why in my letter to the company's chief officer, Paul Walsh, I asked him to look beyond the figures, visit the Kilmarnock plant—for the first time, I understand—justify his case personally, listen to the workers and reassess the situation for himself. I can guarantee that he will be met with courtesy and respect from a workforce that has demonstrated with passion and, indeed, great dignity in the most depressing circumstances. Someone once said that a weak man has doubts before making a decision, whereas a strong man has them afterwards. I am convinced that if Mr Walsh comes to Kilmarnock to hear his workers talk passionately about Johnnie Walker he, too, will begin to doubt the wisdom of walking away and leaving us empty-handed. How else is he to measure such commitment, and what value might he attach to it? Should we fail in our task, it is still vital that the chief officer personally demonstrates his company's commitment to honour its social responsibilities to the employees and the town and to help us begin a new journey without Johnnie Walker. The company must make a substantial commitment and leave a substantial legacy to help the community to build that new future. Surely, after 189 years of the community making such a contribution, we can expect the company to do  that. The local task force in East Ayrshire Council will certainly be working flat out to map out that new future. The campaign in Kilmarnock was not based on a beauty contest between communities in Scotland. I have said before—and repeat this morning—that the case for closure fell apart when the £2.6 billion profits were announced. Surely we could all reasonably expect a secure future with a company that has reported such profits. If such massive downsizing is required in a time of plenty, God help the business in a time of poverty. The task force proposal was—and still is—strong. Backed by the Scottish Government and East Ayrshire Council and supported by the workers and trade unions at Johnnie Walker, it offers a fully serviced greenfield site and whisky heritage centre with immediate access to the motorway network, a fully redeveloped site in the town and, crucially, the safe-keeping and continuation of the Johnnie Walker brand identity in Kilmarnock. That is a good deal and would not threaten the future of key investments being made elsewhere. Last week, I had the pleasure of meeting Mrs Betty Heath, John Walker's great-granddaughter. For me, she epitomised the campaign and reinforced my belief that Diageo has got this badly wrong. She spoke with great emotion and passion about her family's connection with the town and the Johnnie Walker brand, and felt that the legacy had been entrusted to the company for safe-keeping. It was not to be discarded and simply thrown into the bin, and to say that she felt let down by the company is a monumental understatement. What does the future hold for Scotch whisky, Scotland's most iconic industry? As the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has said, I have asked the Parliament's Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee to examine current strategy and direction and to invite all stakeholders to make an input into such an inquiry. We owe it to ourselves and future generations to preserve and develop this fine industry. Thanking all those who walked with us in Kilmarnock on 26 July can never be enough. The politicians who chose to join us, the unions, the local football club and the churches all stood up and were counted. The workers and people of Kilmarnock remain determined and cannot accept the loss of our famous son, Johnnie Walker. He is in our hearts and our blood, and we will fight to keep him. No less a person than Abraham Lincoln said that the possibility of failure should not stop us supporting a cause that we believe to be just. The  workers at Johnnie Walker in Kilmarnock and Hurlford will embrace such noble sentiments. They can expect my full support.

Does the cabinet secretary share my anger at Diageo's rushed decision to reject the proposal that was developed by the cross-party task force? Does he agree that that shows that Diageo has no soul and no regard for its loyal workforce or its heritage? Will he impress on Diageo that, if it walks out on Kilmarnock, it must make a substantial contribution to the regeneration effort to repair the damage that it will have done to a town that has served it so well?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. "Wha could withstaun this haimmer blow!? Nine hunner joabs at Diageo, This day we're gaithert tae say 'No!' This isnae fair! Wha wis it helped yer business grow, Twa hunner year?" Those are the opening lines of a poem by Rab Wilson, read on an epic day on 26 July, when 20,000 people marched in support of the campaign to keep Johnnie Walker in Kilmarnock and to save the plants at Hurlford and Port Dundas. Led by the First Minister, we marched together: workers; MSPs; MPs; councillors from all parties; the chairman, management and players of Kilmarnock Football Club; trade unions; churches and local traders. This afternoon, I welcome to the Scottish Parliament many of those who marched that day. The scenes that I witnessed at the Johnnie Walker plant on 1 July will always be with me. What do you do when you hear that 189 years of history are to be consigned to the dustbin? What do you do when you are confronted by women and men too upset and shaken to talk after such a body blow? Well, you stand up, dust yourself down and set out to persuade those who made such a decision that they got it wrong. Since 1 July, one question has never left my mind: what have our folk done to deserve this? Loyalty and dedication are easy words to throw  around, but they are in abundance within the Johnnie Walker workers. Surely this is no way to treat such people. With support from the unions and the community, the cross-party team, led by Councillor Dougie Reid, who cannot be with us today, and Councillors McKay and Cook, has been tireless in its efforts. Des Browne MP has also made a great contribution. Our petition to Diageo contains thousands of signatures from Kilmarnock and all across the globe. I remind Diageo that Johnnie Walker was a real person, not some corporate gimmick. In 1820, he set up his shop in Kilmarnock and started blending whiskies. These were the forerunners of red label and, of course, the famous striding man, who, with his able assistants, graces us with his presence today. Johnnie Walker quickly became a world-class product, and the fact that its Kilmarnock roots are still there for all to see is a source of pride for many. In the hands of a company concerned about product integrity, heritage and tradition, such roots should be regarded as a major strength, but Diageo would have us believe that no one cares where things come from. The only way is to make things cheaper and wherever we can. According to Diageo's description of the problem, there are 38 lines when only 28 are needed, and three plants where two would do. Oh—and it tells us that it contributes £30 every second to the UK balance of trade. In the briefing that Diageo circulated yesterday, I counted about 25 figures in support of its case. However, one figure that it missed out was the small matter of its £2.5 billion profit. How on earth could that have escaped its notice? Did it not think MSPs would know that its profits amount to £80 per second? Oscar Wilde once said: "Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, it is always from the noblest motives". There might be shades of that in the proposals that Mr Walsh has endorsed. The more Diageo states its case, the more ridiculous it sounds, set against the backdrop of such profits. Last week was the defining moment in the campaign to keep Johnnie Walker in Kilmarnock. I congratulated the company on its results, and Mr Walsh was right to say that he would not apologise for running a profitable company. However, when we set Diageo's profits against the social and economic consequences of its closure plan, we are entitled to ask the chief officer to reconsider the damaging proposals. Diageo's latest public relations moves attempt to drive a wedge between communities—between Kilmarnock, Hurlford and  Port Dundas on the one hand and Shieldhall and Leven on the other. The case for the closures fell apart with the profits announcement. For such a profitable company, there is surely more than one way forward. We need to hear why Diageo thinks that it is right to put 700 loyal Kilmarnock workers on the street and to ditch 189 years of history and heritage without blinking an eye. Diageo has made it clear that the closure plan is not a response to current economic conditions but part of a long-term strategy. From beyond Kilmarnock, concerns have been raised about Diageo's strategy and the future direction of the Scotch whisky industry. The Parliament must understand where that vital industry is going. I have asked the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee to conduct an inquiry on that, and I look forward to receiving support for that request. Johnnie Walker grew and prospered for 177 years before Diageo, and Diageo is simply the present custodian. Properly managed, Johnnie Walker will survive after even Diageo has gone. I say to Mr Walsh that he should not let Diageo become another corporate entity that knows the price of everything but the value of nothing. I ask him to look beyond the numbers to see the damage that will be done to Kilmarnock, to Johnnie Walker and to Diageo. When the going was tough for your company, Mr Walsh, your workers did not walk out on you. I am asking you now not to walk out on them. I started with Rab Wilson's poem, so perhaps it is appropriate to end with a clip from Robert Burns, who wrote: "O wad some Pow'r the giftie gie us  To see oursels as others see us!  It wad frae monie a blunder free us". If Diageo pays heed to the campaign and the debate, I believe that we can help it to avoid a spectacular blunder. Johnnie Walker is bigger than Diageo and its Kilmarnock history cannot be erased. Diageo—don't walk out on Killie.

Does the cabinet secretary share the horror that was felt by the workers in Kilmarnock and Hurlford on 1 July when Diageo announced its closure plans, putting 700 people in my constituency out of work? Can he reassure the workers that the Scottish Government is taking every possible step, and quickly, to persuade Diageo, in the light of its £2.5 billion profit announcement, that there is no justification for its proposal, which will have devastating social and economic consequences?

To ask the Scottish Government what consideration is being given to increasing the commercial exploitation of recycled waste products. (S3O-7195)

I was pleased to join the cabinet secretary on a recent visit to Kilmarnock to open a major new composting unit that can divert 10,000 tonnes of organic waste from landfill each year. However, I have heard concerns that centralised purchasing arrangements can sometimes discriminate against local organic producers. Will the cabinet secretary raise that issue in future discussions with our major retailers?

To ask the Scottish Government what the  most improved areas of treatment and survivability rates are for cancer in Scotland. (S3O-7152)

Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating all those involved in the breast way round motorcycle group who spent last weekend fundraising for Macmillan Cancer Relief? As she knows, the early detection of breast cancer and the faster treatment that is being delivered by the Government can increase survival rates. With that in mind, and in the 21 st anniversary year of the Scottish breast screening programme, will she confirm that she places a high priority on increasing the uptake of screening, particularly among women in deprived communities?

To ask the Scottish Government when it last met the United Kingdom Government to discuss the protection of jobs in Scotland. (S3O-6942)

The cabinet secretary will recall that I highlighted previously the problems that face the manufacturing sector in my constituency. As he knows, even companies with a strong asset base and good products are facing serious cash-flow difficulties. Would the cabinet secretary consider discussing with the UK Government how manufacturers might be helped to convert their land and property assets into the cash that they need to get them through the recession?

Will the minister join me in calling on the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Alistair Darling, to use his budget to boost jobs by introducing a trade-in scheme to boost new car sales, cutting VAT on home improvements, and ending the alcohol duty discrimination against Scotch whisky, which is putting jobs at risk in my constituency?

I am sure that the cabinet secretary is well aware of the benefits for tackling reoffending of maintaining, as far as possible, the community links between families and offenders. Will he outline any plans the Scottish Government may have to make further progress on that, and to allow more offenders to serve their sentences locally?

The minister might be aware that the new Burns monument centre opened in Kilmarnock on Monday. It adds significantly to the Burns  attractions throughout Ayrshire and provides state-of-the-art family history and local history research facilities. Does he agree that that type of facility can play a vital part in attracting tourists to Ayrshire? Will he ensure that the Scottish Government and its agencies play a full part in developing the potential of the new centre?

Will the cabinet secretary join me in welcoming the news that Kilmarnock College has provided child care support for all eligible students who require it? Will she confirm that the system of allocating child care support that she inherited is deeply flawed and causes major problems for students and colleges? Has progress been made in persuading the United Kingdom Government to reverse its ill-conceived benefit reforms that place even more pressure on this flawed system?

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the impact on Scotland's manufacturing sector of the United Kingdom Government's announcement of £2.3 billion in loan guarantees for the car industry. (S3O-6136)

Is the minister aware of the concern of the manufacturing sector in my constituency about the lack of progress with Westminster's scheme and the desperate prospects for employment as a result? Is he also aware that, in Germany, as he just mentioned, domestic car sales are on the increase due to the introduction of a subsidy to scrap old cars and purchase new ones? Will the minister draw that contrast to the attention of Scotland's Council of Economic Advisers and ask the Westminster Government to get a move on with its loan guarantee plan and to consider introducing a scheme that is similar to the one that is working in Germany?

I am so envious of my colleagues who can stand here and deliver a speech in Gaelic as either their first or second language. I ask for your sympathy, Presiding Officer, as I deliver this speech in my second language—English—my first being closer to Ayrshire Scots, which is similar to the language that was spoken in Ayrshire around the time of Robert Burns. I welcome the opportunity to speak in support of the Scottish Government producing its Gaelic language plan, as required under the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005. It is worth recalling the words of Peter Peacock, who spoke immediately before me, and who introduced the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill. During the stage 1 debate, he said: "It is the first time in recent history that a Government-sponsored bill that seeks to strengthen Gaelic and not to do it down has been brought before a Parliament."— [ Official Report , 2 February 2005; c 14089.]  As Mr Peacock reminded us then, using the strength of Government in relation to Gaelic is nothing new. The difference now is that, following nearly 400 years of suppression, the force of law and the power of Government have been turned to its support. The passing of the 2005 act and the publication of the Gaelic language plan that is before us and those of other public bodies allow us to see clearly how the Gaelic language will be supported in the years ahead. Like many people, I have an interest not just in the development of Gaelic but in seeing Gaelic enjoy its rightful place alongside English, Scots and other languages in a country that is comfortable with linguistic diversity. Through a shared history and experience, is ann leinne a tha Gàidhlig—or, in English, Gaelic belongs to all of us, not just the communities who speak it, as the minister pointed out in her opening speech. It is worth recalling, in this special year, that Robert Burns, although not a Gael, was familiar with the language, and he would have regarded hearing it spoken and sung as a regular feature of his community life and cultural experience. At least one of Burns's friends, Mary Campbell, or Highland Mary, was a Gael. Members of the Crochallan Fencibles, with whom Burns socialised while in Edinburgh, were regular users of the language, too. In more recent times, the crossover between Gaelic and Scots has been demonstrated by Hugh MacDiarmid. A leading writer in Scots, MacDiarmid also had a high regard for Gaelic culture, and he translated the poetry of Gaelic bards into Scots.  As the history of language shows, the power of language as a cultural tool is no protection against its decline. If the language is to be strengthened, it must be present in all areas of life—used in the home, experienced in the community and used as a medium of education. If the language is to sustain an economic base, it is critical that it is present in the workplace, too. I look forward to reviewing the plan that the Government has produced to see how it will address the development of the language in all the areas that we have discussed. The Scottish Government's plan builds on the foundations of the national plan for Gaelic. In drawing up the national plan, Bòrd na Gàidhlig drew on the experience of Wales and Ireland. Both those countries, with their sister languages to Scots Gaelic, have more experience of strongly promoting their ancient languages than does Scotland. They demonstrated that the vision underlying our national plan is achievable. Sustained effort in support of a language can lead to an increase in the number of speakers and learners, and can broaden participation in activities in which the language is used. Here in Scotland, fewer than 2 per cent of the population now acknowledge any familiarity with the Gaelic language. In Ireland, by contrast, more than 40 per cent of the population regard themselves as competent Gaelic speakers, and a third of them use the language every day. In Wales, about 20 per cent of the population speak Welsh. The depth of commitment to the language in some communities is demonstrated by the very high proportion of Welsh speakers who use the language every day. At more than 60 per cent, that is almost twice the rate of daily usage of Gaelic in Ireland. In Scotland, we are taking small but significant steps forward in supporting Gaelic. Valuable work is being carried out even in Kilmarnock, in my constituency. Gaelic-medium education at Onthank primary school is now celebrating its 11 th year. Having established that base, the Gaelic unit at Onthank is able to extend its work to support the development of Gaelic across East Ayrshire. Earlier this week, the unit extended the Gaelic-Scots crossover by holding a Gaelic Burns supper—I commend my colleague Dave Thompson, who is going to attend such a supper in Skye, but the weans of Kilmarnock have beaten him to it. I look forward to seeing a DVD of the event in the near future. Perhaps I should bring the event to the attention of BBC Alba—I suspect that I have just done so. In addition to putting plans in place, we need to encourage agencies to be creative in their approach to embedding Gaelic in their activities. High-profile signage, which a few members have mentioned, regular Gaelic-based activities and  continued development of Gaelic-medium education all have a part to play. The establishment of BBC Alba will provide a welcome boost to the language, as Pauline McNeill's amendment says. I look forward to the channel becoming available to a wider audience. I very much welcome the publication of the Scottish Government's draft Gaelic language plan, which reflects the commitment of the Government and the Parliament to the language and to righting an historic wrong.

To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government has had with Scottish Enterprise about the impact of the recession on the manufacturing sector. (S3F-1401)

I will take the First Minister's message of support back to the workforce at Vesuvius when I next meet them. He may be aware that manufacturing jobs in Kilmarnock and Loudoun plummeted from almost 6,000 in 1999 to fewer than 4,000 in 2006. When the First Minister next meets the Council of Economic Advisers, will he ask it to carry out further work on how Scotland's manufacturing sector can best be supported through and beyond the recession?

I am pleased to support the cabinet secretary on the occasion of this, his second budget presentation. The debate might not have the same historic significance as last year's debate had, but it represents a milestone for us—not just for the cabinet secretary and the SNP Government, but for the Parliament. Big political events such as the SNP's first budget get publicity but, as members know, it is the daily, weekly, routine work of the Parliament that provides the effective governance that Scotland needs in these difficult times. When the cabinet secretary introduced his first budget in January 2008, the economic signs were already ominous, but that was still a month before the announcement of the nationalisation of Northern Rock. Since then, the economic crisis has continued to unfold. The UK chancellor, the Prime Minister, the President of the European Commission and the governor of the Bank of England have all described the period as exceptional, as have members of the Parliament today. In such times, the pressure is on our still-young Parliament to rise to the challenge. External events—over which the Parliament has too little control—will make our task more difficult, but our challenge is to help Scotland steer a course through those events. I was entertained by my colleague Kenny Gibson—who is no longer in the chamber—when he described the by-election candidate's leaflet. I was reminded of the song "My Lovely Horse" from "Father Ted". I also enjoyed the speech by Derek Brownlee—he has also left the chamber—who is always entertaining. I should also mention John Park, whose speeches I always enjoy, too. He always makes a case for investment in skills and training, and I like to listen to what he has to say on those matters. Members are sometimes tempted to argue by anecdote, selectively picking service delivery issues and local budget pressures as if they never arose under previous Administrations. The Parliament must rise above that if we are to meet our communities' needs as they view the economic carnage that surrounds them. With some notable exceptions, there has been a great deal of consensus around budget priorities. There is a big difference between this year's debate and last year's. We need to do more to provide housing for our communities, not only because that would be a good policy decision but because it would provide much-needed jobs for the construction industry. The budget allows for accelerated spend on affordable housing. In another first for devolution, the Scottish Government will make effective use of  all potential developers, including local authorities, and I am sure that many members will welcome that approach. Although there is much agreement, the debate on training and skills development risks becoming a new form of demarcation dispute. The cabinet secretary has made it clear that the Government will continue to increase provision, focusing on key areas of the economy. I welcome that commitment, and I welcome the Government's decision to avoid being overprescriptive about how provision will be delivered. Like many other members who have an interest in the issue, I have doubts about the benefits of rigid central targets for particular forms of training. Education, training and skills development should meet not arbitrary targets but the needs of individuals and the economy. In last month's debate on the local government settlement, members made pleas for more resources and spending. However, we must use the financial cards that Scotland has been dealt. We would all do more if we had more resources. I am pleased, for example, that the Scottish Government has addressed the £40 million gap in funding for free personal care, which is a problem that the Government was handed. However, underfunding of children's social work services, which has been a problem for years and has not been addressed by successive Governments, requires attention. The cabinet secretary has committed to a review of the local government distribution formula—Sir Humphrey might describe his decision as "brave". Such a review is needed. I understand that the current arrangements have been in place since the 1980s, although they have been tinkered with. Some members who complain that their council is comparatively underfunded should perhaps explain to their electorate why the issue was not addressed when their party was in government. The issue could have been addressed much earlier.

I agree that it is a difficult job, but it is commonly acknowledged that the issue must be addressed. I look forward to progress being made. In my local authority, East Ayrshire Council, the removal of ring fencing has released £1 million for deployment in different ways. I look forward to hearing the council's plans for addressing the local  community's needs. That is the nature of the agreement that we struck with local authorities, to which they were happy to sign up. The Government has made important decisions that benefit my constituents, which are reflected in the budget. Resources for housing have been increased, threatened accident and emergency services have been saved, dental services have been improved and so on. In addition, the council tax freeze and the business rates reduction, which have been built into the budget, will help hard-pressed families in my constituency. I regret that the devolution settlement does not provide the Parliament with the flexibility that independence, which is the best way forward for Scotland, would bring. However, the cabinet secretary's plans are informed by the SNP's vision of a better, more successful and more stable Scotland, which can build on its strengths. I commend the motion in the cabinet secretary's name.

It is a pleasure to speak in the debate on what will be an important year for Scotland. Homecoming 2009 will not only promote our country and all that it has to offer but bring Robert Burns to an international audience, many of whom will make his acquaintance for the first time. As members have said, the events are many and varied and will be a perfect showcase for the beauty of our country and the talents of our people. There will be music, dance, singing, theatre, golf, clan gatherings, arts and crafts and family events, and, of course, the homecoming Scottish cup, which Cathy Jamieson mentioned. I am quite happy to nail my colours to the mast and say, "Killie for the cup!" From scenes like these old Scotia's grandeur springs, That makes her lov'd at home, rever'd abroad. The homecoming will offer something for everyone at home in Scotland and, we hope, will provide a wonderful experience for millions of visitors. The current poor economic climate in the UK brings an opportunity to attract more visitors to Scotland, particularly from the euro countries and the United States. Nearly 2 million visitors from the European Union nations came to Scotland in 2007, the highest number of which—300,000—came from Ireland. What a wonderful gesture of friendship and fraternity it would be—it would also make sound business sense—if Scotland's shops, hotels, pubs and visitor attractions welcomed those visitors with open arms and accepted their euros directly. That would no doubt be welcomed, too, by the many other tourists who come into the euro zone from further afield, who might opt to visit Scotland for a homecoming event. Exciting times lie ahead, and many people are making a huge effort to make the year of the homecoming a great success but, as usual, there are some gloom merchants who have to have their say. I cannot let pass without comment an article by Ross Lydall in yesterday's Scotsman , in which he attacked my home town of Kilmarnock and the efforts that are being made to revive it, which include making the new Robert Burns centre the  centrepiece of a restored Kay park. Mr Lydall saw the remnants—and, we hope, the beginning of the end—of the neglect of many years, but he missed the enthusiasm and the determined efforts that are being made to turn things around. Although Kilmarnock may not have the riches and trappings of civic London, it has a richness and generosity of spirit that will endure such criticism. Shame on Mr Lydall for writing about us so negatively. A year long festival of events will no doubt spring a few surprises along the way. By St Andrew's day, we will have a good indication of whether the homecoming has been a success and will be able to assess whether the momentum can be maintained to deliver the sustainable economic growth that we all seek. The legacy of the homecoming year should be judged not just from the point of view of the economic benefits that it brings to Scotland, important as those are, but in the context of the opportunity that it provides to celebrate and share our culture with our many friends throughout the world. When was the last time anyone had a party and invited the whole world? The homecoming is a glowing testament to the talent and power of Robert Burns, who, like Scotland, was loved at home and revered abroad. The American and French revolutions occurred in his lifetime, in 1776 and 1789 respectively. The compulsion to write about and interpret world events as he saw them, often at great personal risk, was too strong. Burns might have left us at the tragically young age of 37, but his legacy of work on themes such as love, liberty, humanity, compassion, social justice and equality is relevant to us today. Man's inhumanity to man may well feature in the next debate. The homecoming will be with us shortly, so let us who are fortunate to be members of the Scottish Parliament open our arms and welcome our friends, old and new. Let the celebrations begin.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will bring forward proposals to revise the procedures for registering a non domino dispositions of property. (S3O-5209)

I invite the minister to understand my amazement at finding that someone can register a claim for ownership of a property or land that is owned by someone else without the true owner being aware of the claim. Does he agree that in cases in which title may be unclear, the system is open to abuse? As part of the Scottish Law Commission's review, will the Government support the requirement for compulsory advertising of such claims, so that bogus claims can be challenged without the need for expensive court action?

I am pleased to speak in the debate and congratulate my colleague Alasdair Allan on securing it. I will make a brief speech, not as a speaker of Gaelic but as a supporter. There are supporters of the language in some perhaps unlikely places. Gaelic plays an important part in the history, culture and life of Scotland, as we have just heard. Too often, debates around the language centre on whether this or that area was part of the Gàidhealtachd, as if Gaelic used to occupy some well-enclosed space and was heard nowhere else. Of course, that is not true. Whether or not Gaelic was the dominant language in an area, it was part of the common experience of people all over Scotland, as Gaels and other Scots conducted trade and commerce. My home county of Ayrshire is identified, quite rightly, as Robert Burns country. We are proud of that, but it is not our only inheritance. Just 20 miles from Burns's birthplace in Alloway is the village of Barr, which has been identified as possibly the last Gaelic-speaking community in the Lowlands. Even today, Ayrshire is home to Gaels, with Anne Lorne Gillies, who will be known to most members, prominent among them. In recognising that twin inheritance, I am pleased to highlight the work that East Ayrshire Council is doing to re-establish Gaelic as part of the common experience throughout Scotland. The council provides Gaelic-medium education for pre-school and primary pupils at Onthank primary school in my beloved Kilmarnock. Given that the area has no recent tradition of Gaelic, that is remarkable. It is even more remarkable when we consider that it is an area of long-standing multiple deprivation. East Ayrshire Council should be congratulated on that remarkable achievement. The Gaelic language is also offered to pupils in six other primary schools in the authority's area. Gaelic-medium education is available at the Grange academy, which also hosts a Gaelic-medium youth club. The growth in Gaelic-medium education at pre-school and primary levels is a real building block for the future. Those years of education are an exciting challenge for children as they learn to read, write and count. An important part of their formative years is that children in Gaelic-medium  classes experience those challenges while using Gaelic. If Gaelic is to be a truly community language, it must be experienced outside the classroom and the theatre. It needs to be a language in which we can conduct business and everyday conversation. The Gaelic plans that are being produced by the Parliament and the Government, which are to be rolled out across public agencies, are important signposts for the future. They must not only demonstrate a commitment to the language but spell out how agencies will reinforce the use of the language on a daily basis.

I certainly agree. Development in that area in recent years has been a revelation to me. If Gaelic is to develop, it must be allowed to come in from the cold and the sidelines of Scottish society. In some pockets of the country, an unhealthy attitude is still taken to the language and its importance. That can be overcome by raising awareness of the language, which must be not only heard but seen. It is crucial that people see the language in its written form, particularly in communities that do not speak Gaelic. I hope that that will be emphasised as Gaelic language plans develop. I look forward to hearing the minister's speech, which will add to earlier comments. I am delighted to support Alasdair Allan's motion. Mòran taing.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to provide value-for-money media and communication services for hospital in-patients. (S3O-4734)

The cabinet secretary might be aware that customers of the Patientline service were paying up to 49p per minute to receive a phone call, and at the rate of £98 per month to watch television while in hospital. Will she take steps to ensure that hospital in-patients will, in the future, be able to speak to relatives and access TV and media services at reasonable cost and with reliability of service?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will reply to the responses submitted to the consultation on the second national planning framework. (S3O-4535)

The minister will be aware that Ayrshire has experienced population and economic decline over recent years. Therefore, it is not surprising that responses to the draft framework called for greater recognition of the area's strategic importance to Scotland. Will he ensure that the revised framework sets out how improvements to Ayrshire's transport links can act as a catalyst for economic growth within the region, rather than simply provide a faster commute to Glasgow and beyond?

Will the First Minister join me in welcoming Heather Dunk to her post as the new principal of Kilmarnock College, which was the subject of inaccurate and misleading statements in the press at the weekend? Does he agree that those who use Kilmarnock College and its students for personal publicity succeed only in damaging its reputation and should be rebuked by the college and the Parliament?

I congratulate Nigel Don on securing this evening's debate on an important and in many cases heartbreaking subject. If there are no problems with child contact, why are representations continually made by distraught families? Many of the people who contact me are dads and grandparents who are losing contact with kids. On the other side, I see mothers who are struggling to do what they see as right by their children. At first sight, the law appears to cover all the angles and the guiding principle of making decisions in the best interests of the child is correct, but real problems that require the Parliament's attention remain. Some of us in the chamber will have experienced at first hand the pain that is caused when a parent suddenly and apparently without justification prevents further contact between a child and others in the wider family. I am certain that when there is a justifiable cause for that, such as violence or alleged violence, the law must protect the mother and the children from any risk, but what happens when there is no such cause and contact is prevented simply because of a disagreement between the families? In some cases, the child is used as a weapon in a dispute  between the parents, or even a dispute between generations. We need to pay closer attention to such cases. To date, my advice has been that the courts are there to resolve matters, but most parents and grandparents do not have the means to raise expensive court actions, so broken relationships deteriorate even further and, worst of all, the children suffer. Mediation helps, but both parties have to be willing to attend and to build bridges. If one party simply refuses to attend, we are no further forward. Do we have a problem, or are such cases easily dealt with by the system that we have? Given my experience of cases that have come to me from parents and grandparents alike, and given the interest that is being shown by members and those in the public gallery tonight, I suggest that we do indeed have a problem to address. What is the answer? I stress again that my comments relate to cases in which a parent prevents contact with a child for no apparent and justifiable reason. Surely we could have a mechanism whereby a complaint could be made, perhaps to a mediation service, that would at least trigger an interview or discussion. If necessary and if requested, the two sides of the argument could be presented separately so that an assessment and some recommendations could be made. That would help us to identify the type of cases that I am talking about and help to resolve disputes before they escalate. Such a triggering interview would give people an opportunity to put their complaint on the record and it would mean that a case for preventing contact would also have to be stated and placed on the record. The recommendations that would be made would surely encourage both sides to focus on the best interests of the child and move away from the destructive path of continued dispute. The approach would offer a useful step—and one that is not in place at present—to help us recognise and deal with such cases. The issue is too important to remain unaddressed. I hope—and am confident—that the cabinet secretary will consider it.

I am pleased to welcome the cabinet secretary's speech and the report by the McLeish commission, which brought together a wide range of backgrounds and perspectives. The commission uses a powerful device to open our eyes to the long-range alternatives that face Parliament. By simply describing two possible futures, the commission alerts us to the significance of the choice that we will make in response to its report.  The trends of the past 10 years are clear and have been debated during this parliamentary session and many times before. Our prisons are ever more overcrowded. The number of admissions has increased relentlessly—from 15,000 in 1996 to 20,000 in 2006—and no evidence supports the notion that the numbers are rising because the level of crime is rising. In fact, the commission's report shows us that even when crime rates fell, prison numbers rose. Short-term prisoners clog our prison system. Thousands are admitted for fine default and have an average stay of less than two weeks.

If Bill Aitken listens to the rest of my speech, it might explain the situation more clearly for him. The average fine that is involved is £275, but the average cost of imprisonment is £1,200. There appears to be no agreement on which offenders should be imprisoned and which might be better dealt with by community disposal.

I am sorry to contradict Mr Aitken, but the evidence speaks for itself—thousands of admissions for less than two weeks are made for fine defaults. The figures are there and speak for themselves.

Please let me make progress. Prisoners are ejected from prison halfway through their sentences and no arrangements are made for onward supervision. Our prisons draw most of their population from a very small group of deprived communities. In those communities, the problems of poverty, ill health and addiction flow from one generation to the next. [ Interruption. ] Deprivation is not an excuse for criminality, but the relationship is so strong as to demand our attention. When they enter the prison system, most prisoners demonstrate poor literacy and numeracy skills—[ Interruption. ]

I do not think that my phone was responsible for the interference, but I have removed it anyway.  When they enter the prison system, most prisoners demonstrate poor literacy and numeracy skills, entrenched drug and/or alcohol addiction and an astonishingly high rate of mental health problems, therefore many of us have asked what our prisons are doing to address those issues. The commission has turned that question back on Parliament and asks whether prison is best placed to tackle such matters or is simply the service of last resort when all others have failed. Unless we tackle those issues head on, we will continue as a society to fail to meet our responsibilities. One justification for ever-increasing use of prison is that it offers respite to communities whose peace is ruined by persistent offenders. That relief is greatly welcome in places such as my community in Kilmarnock and Loudoun, but is it enough? If Parliament and the Scottish Government are to show leadership in tackling crime, we must do more than run to stand still. The evidence is increasing that short stays in prison act simply as immersion courses in criminality. Many who emerge from a first custodial sentence revert immediately to their criminal behaviour, possibly with new-found friends of like mind. Thereafter, the prison system becomes a revolving door for individuals who are increasingly difficult to reform. The commission offers us the opportunity to reconsider prison's role in the criminal justice system. We can repeat the pattern of the past 15 years and tinker at the edges, or we can aspire to the positive vision that is described in the commission's challenging report. The basis for the choice is clear: it is to rebuild confidence in the sentencing options that are available to Scotland's judges. The last time we debated this issue, it was claimed that all those who are in prison are there because a court thought that prison was the best available option. That statement captures the real failure of criminal justice policy in the last 10 years, and the McLeish report stresses that. Evidence from the community justice authority in my area of south-west Scotland showed that re-offending rates were 75 per cent for those who had already been in prison, but that only 39 per cent of those who received community penalties re-offended. We must have well-functioning prisons for those who are a threat to the community, or who have been found guilty of offences that are so serious that depriving them of their liberty is necessary to protect law-abiding citizens. However, those who are admitted to prison should be there long enough for an assessment to be made of what needs to be done to change their behaviour, and for a start to be made in achieving that change.  I congratulate the commission's members for the job that they have done in a tight timescale. In no way were they either nationalist place holders or a gang of soft-on-crime do-gooders. Therefore, it is disappointing to see their report immediately misrepresented as some kind of soft-touch charter for muggers, thieves and drug dealers. That is an insult to the commission. The vision that is offered in the McLeish report describes two futures. One is a future in which Scotland's prisons hold fewer but more serious prisoners and in which there is a well-respected community-based sentence system that is demonstrated by low reconviction rates. The other future is one in which there is more overcrowding and where petty offenders are immersed into developing their criminality alongside long-term offenders. Scotland has to consider and make a bold choice, free from the hysteria that surrounds the current debate. I hope that we will make the right choice.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to improve the recording and reporting at a local level of outcomes achieved by the restructured enterprise network. (S3O-4131)

I thank the minister for his answer, but can he give me a further assurance that all levels of the restructured enterprise network will be able to demonstrate and report on how they are helping to deliver a wealthier and fairer Kilmarnock and Loudoun, for example?

In a debate such as this, it is important to start on a positive note and, before we address the very real problem of youth offending, to commend Scotland's young people on their achievements. In my constituency, there are numerous examples of the positive contribution that is being made by our youngsters, day in, day out. From their involvement in youth arts, theatre and music to wider sports and recreation, our youngsters are making a difference and becoming responsible citizens; we all hope that that will sustain them into their adulthood. Only this week, children from Dunlop primary school won a local sports and athletics competition involving 500 primary school children from  throughout East Ayrshire. All those children now have a taste for sport—perhaps that will encourage some of them to try for a Commonwealth games place in 2014. Mike Pringle made a similar comment. Other youngsters from several schools in the area contributed greatly to a recent exhibition of their local heroes in Kilmarnock. The kids' enthusiasm was incredible. They decided who was in—and who was out—and gathered pictures and illustrations of their heroes. The students from St Joseph's academy put together a production relating to Kilmarnock's railway heritage—including a contribution by Andrew Barclay—which was performed in full costume during a recent visit by the First Minister to Barclay house. The achievements of those youngsters, and of similar young students throughout Scotland, do not find their way into statistical reports of the kind that we are hearing extracts from today, but it is important to recognise and celebrate the great things that our young people do. There are common threads through those examples, such as positive intervention at an early age; engagement with relevant and exciting topics, in which young people can make a real contribution; and the sense of purpose and achievement that is gained by recognition of a job well done. Those are positive forces in delivering our shared agenda for responsible citizenship in our society. From those bright and hopeful beginnings, where and when do things start to go wrong for the minority of youngsters? How can we step in and prevent that? How can we reverse negative behaviour when it occurs? There is surely no doubt that the big three Ds in our society—drink, drugs and deprivation—play a huge part in pulling some of those youngsters towards a life of offending and serious crime. Current figures show that 84 per cent of 15-year-olds have admitted to having drunk alcohol and that 88 per cent of all criminal damage offences were committed when the offender was under the influence of alcohol. Similarly, more than 1,400 children in Scotland were referred to the children's reporter in 2005-06 on the ground of alcohol or drugs misuse and 20 per cent of Scotland's children live in households where the income is less than 60 per cent of the United Kingdom median. To that cocktail of despair, we must surely add the demoralising effect on our youngsters who live in families where parents are substance abusers or offenders of one kind or another. In Scotland, we have wonderful young kids with great potential who sadly, unless we can intervene positively, will follow a path of offending and a future life of crime at huge personal cost to them and huge financial cost to society.

I am certainly not. Of course we want our youngsters and people in general to take responsibility for their behaviour, but the Government has a duty and obligation to try to address the issues by the kind of intervention measures that are proposed in the strategy. What is to be done? Should we focus our efforts on the consequences of offending, find new and more ways of punishing the offenders and issue more unacceptable behaviour notices, acceptable behaviour contracts and ASBOs to youngsters; or should we focus more on the root causes and try to prevent problems from developing in the first place? In my constituency, there are some youngsters under 16 who have been given large numbers of ABCs—34 in one case and 33 in another—but have not been given ASBOs and are, instead, under social work supervision orders. Members might be forgiven for asking what kind of supervision those orders provide when a youngster can go on to commit 34 crimes. Having been a local councillor for many years, I can say with confidence that our community wardens—who I do not think have been mentioned so far in the debate—have played a significant part in reducing offending within my community. I do not have any figures to prove it, but I can see the difference and so can local people. In addition to reporting to the police and the local authority when necessary, the wardens focus on engagement, intervention and diversion, which are all benefits. The Government is taking some bold steps in the fight to tackle youth disorder and crime. It is reassessing the antisocial behaviour strategy; tackling the problem of young people drinking alcohol; investing money in alcohol treatment and support services; deploying the test purchasing schemes that were mentioned earlier; investing money to tackle the drugs issue; and introducing the cashback for communities scheme, under which nearly £7 million that is taken from criminals will go back to our communities. Those are all positive measures that will, I am sure, give all  Scotland's children the chance of a brighter future. I am happy to support the Government's motion.

If bus travellers today were asked what they want from their bus services, not many would come up with "effective implementation of regulatory arrangements", although I am willing to give that a wee try tonight by asking a few passengers on the bus home from Glasgow to Kilmarnock. If anything is needed in the industry, it must surely be stability in costs to operators and improved quality service at an affordable price to the public, which would allow them comfortably to switch from their cars to buses and trains. The improvements that have been made in bus services in Ayrshire over the past few years have been very impressive, and passenger numbers are on the up. The quality of the buses is first class, and service frequency is responsive to passenger demands. Service improvements are encouraging people on to the buses, so we must try to build on the successes that have been achieved. One of the biggest threats to the industry is the rise in fuel prices. As has been mentioned, Lothian Buses has estimated that its fuel costs are 83 per cent higher than they were a year ago. We must not forget the rising utility bills that are also faced by the industry. Stagecoach in Ayrshire estimates that its utility bills have risen by 40 per cent year on year. To its credit, Stagecoach has pegged back its price increases to date, but it expects that increases will be required in August, which is when it has its annual fares review. If fuel prices continue to rise, Stagecoach will inevitably have to think about further fare rises during the course of the year. Those are the real factors that are influencing what is happening, and they present significant challenges to Government as it tries to respond effectively. They are the real threats to the gains that have been made over the past few years. The fuel duty regulator, which has been mentioned by my colleague, is a practical response to the currently increasing fuel prices. The proposal would see extra taxes from higher pump prices being used to cut fuel duties. Why should the Westminster Government rake in £4 billion in additional North Sea oil revenues yet do little to alleviate the damaging effects on the bus industry and the wider transport industry in Scotland? I turn to some of the points that are made in the motion and the amendments to it. The SNP  Government has invested about £260 million a year in buses and has increased the bus service operator grant by £4 million. Local authority budgets will increase by 13 per cent over the next three years. All those measures will help to drive down costs, encourage new routes and offer the travelling public a real choice. The congratulations that have been offered to Lothian Buses, First Group and Stagecoach are well made and certainly merited, as are congratulations for the Stagecoach bio-bus in my constituency, which was mentioned by Alison McInnes. The Labour Party excluded from the concessionary fares scheme people who are on the low-grade disability living allowance. I hope—as do many members—that something can be done in the forthcoming review of the scheme to address that to ensure that people who deserve concessionary travel receive it. We are living in a time when serious choices have to be made. Those choices are about how we go about our daily business and, in the context of this debate, how we get to work and back. The daily commute that sees hundreds of thousands of motorists heading in one direction in the morning and then in the opposite direction at night every working day is a crazy situation that is not sustainable in the long term. Perhaps we should reflect on new ideas to encourage motorists out of their cars and onto buses and trains. We have to keep improving the services with more park-and-ride opportunities to make the switch easier for people to make. Perhaps new incentives are required, too. I made the journey from car to bus and train a few years ago and it was a great decision—no more endless traffic jams and frustrations about being late for appointments. Instead, I could look forward to the calm and relaxing atmosphere of the buses and trains, the opportunity to work and to relax and the chance to meet people going about their business. That is the real challenge behind the debate. I have great pleasure in supporting the Government's amendment.

We try to impress upon supermarkets the need to support local produce. I draw to the member's attention the fact that the biggest supermarket in Scotland, Tesco, does not shelve the world's number 1 selling whisky, Johnnie Walker red label. It is important to highlight that fact in support of the member's motion.

As a local councillor and public servant for many years, I am pleased to participate in the debate. How we deliver effective public services is one of the key issues—perhaps the key issue—facing Parliament and inherited by the Scottish National Party Government. The Government has been clear in its approach to public services and its agenda for change, as exemplified by the agreement with Scotland's local authorities. The amendments offered by the Liberal Democrats and Labour suggest that they have been surprised by the pace of change in the past year. Far from being superficial, the changes being introduced are both wide-ranging and  fundamental. The de-cluttering process that was referred to earlier has been widely welcomed and delivers on a promise that was not delivered by the previous Executive. Instead of just talking about reductions in waste, bureaucracy and duplication, the Government is already acting by bringing in-house much of Communities Scotland, the Scottish Agricultural Science Agency, and the Building Standards Agency; revising and aligning the Scottish Enterprise and VisitScotland networks; and strengthening Skills Development Scotland. Proposals for reducing the number of public agencies have been published. Who in Scotland will lament the demise of the Fisheries (Electricity) Committee? The agreement with local authorities opens up the prospect of a fundamental change in the delivery of public services. This, combined with the sweeping away of the micromanagement of local authorities, has been welcomed. For the first time in decades, local authorities will have real control over how to deliver for their communities. There are regular attempts in the chamber to talk up a sense of cuts and crisis in local government. However, local authority leaders of all parties have embraced the settlement with the Government. That is by far a more reliable indicator of the views of those who really matter—our local authorities themselves. The delivery of public services is not an end in itself. The services should be focused on delivering real and tangible outcomes for local communities. For too long, significant resources have been invested in poorly designed services that fail to deliver for communities. Today, Audit Scotland again drew attention to the increase in overcrowding in Scotland's jails. Although the Auditor General may be too diplomatic to say so, it is clear that this reflects the failure of previous policy. The result of the failure is communities blighted by a high level of re-offending. For too many, life in prison has become preparation for a life in crime. Last month, Audit Scotland highlighted declining participation in sport in Scotland—just as we are gearing up for the Commonwealth games in 2014. The key message in the report to the Audit Committee was clear and damning: "There is no clear link between the national strategy for sport and councils' investment of money in facilities and services across Scotland." Significant amounts of national funding have been targeted at increasing participation in sport, but targets for participation by young people are not being met and adult participation is actually declining. Clearly, as with the prisons, the previous approach to sport did not work.  The Government has made clear its long-term ambition and its strategy for Scotland's public services and for Scotland.

In order to define the outcomes we want to achieve, we will have to engage far more closely with the public. As someone who has been involved in local government for a long time, I accept that many outcomes are hard to measure. A lot of it is perception based. A way to overcome that to a great degree is to ask the public what they think of the service delivery. That is often a better indicator than specifically asking people whether we meet direct targets. The strategic objectives underpinning the Government's activities are spelled out and are being used to drive forward policy and delivery. The efficient Government programme for 2008 to 2011 spells out how this will be achieved. Already, that has been translated into the efficiency delivery plan. Those documents provide the detail on where efficiency gains will be made and how they are to be used. What is important for service users is that the Government is clear that service levels must be maintained or improved. It is crucial that effectiveness is not overlooked in the drive for efficiency. People in Scotland are interested in the positive outcomes that are achieved—not just the programmes that are delivered or how much money gets spent. The Government is reshaping Scotland's public services so as to make them more flexible, responsive and effective. The resources freed up by cutting bureaucracy and duplication can be used more productively to innovate and improve service delivery to communities throughout Scotland. The evidence from polls is that that approach is driving a growing confidence in the Government among the business community and beyond. In a recent poll of businessmen and women, over half of those contacted thought that the Government was doing a good or excellent job—hardly the message of doom and gloom that is being peddled around the chamber. The Government will achieve its ambitions if Scotland's public services deliver their full value. The evidence from the Government's first year in office is that its approach is widely welcomed. It has engaged with local authorities, business and the wider community in delivering a step change in Scotland's performance. I am delighted to support the motion.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps are being taken to improve centrally available information on the number of patients diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder. (S3O-3076)

"The same as you? A review of services for people with learning disabilities", which was published by the Scottish Executive in 2000, concluded that we have no detailed information about the number of people in Scotland with learning disabilities. As the minister will be aware, eight years after the report's publication, there is still widespread frustration about the issue, and research indicates that more than half of all adults in Scotland with ASD do not receive enough support to meet their needs. Is she confident that the Government's steps will help to close the information gap locally and nationally and ensure that any future service delivery planning is well informed?

The year is 1761; Robert Burns is a two-year-old living in Alloway; and, just up the road, the Fenwick Weavers Society, the world's first recorded co-operative, is born. I am very pleased to open this debate on the Fenwick Weavers Society, its place in the history of the co-operative movement and the movement's continuing importance to Scotland and the wider world. I welcome to the Parliament members and supporters of the society, particularly the two Johns—Smith and McFadzean—who have done a tremendous job in researching and publicising the society's history and working towards establishing a heritage centre in Fenwick. I thank the members who have stayed behind for the debate and the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, Jim Mather, for being present to respond. There will be an opportunity to meet over refreshments in committee room 5. Those who have had the opportunity to speak to members of the society will be aware of the high regard in which they hold the original founders, who were a group of self-employed hand-loom weavers. In the middle of the huge social and economic changes that were taking place in 18 th century Scotland, that group decided that their best hope for prosperity lay in working together in  a properly constituted society. Those were dangerous times, when a charge of sedition could follow any attempt to organise for one's rights; nevertheless, the society was born on 14 March 1761. The 250 th anniversary of that event will take place in 2011, and I hope that members agree that we should mark that milestone in the history of not only Scotland, but the co-operative movement. In preparing for the debate, I was struck by the lack of a cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on co-operatives, and I will circulate an invitation to all members in order to gauge support for such a group. I certainly hope that it will find support. Increasingly, historians of the co-operative movement recognise the Fenwick Weavers Society as the first incorporated co-operative society. It is certainly the oldest society for which there is a physical record of incorporation—the document in question is held in the National Library of Scotland. Members might be interested to note that, in 1968, Andrew Faulds MP presented the society's earliest minute book to the National Library of Scotland. As some members might know, Mr Faulds was the great grandson of another notable Fenwick figure, the centenarian weaver Matthew Fowlds. Through that remarkable suite of documents, knowledge of the society has been kept alive. It now serves as inspiration for a new generation, not just because of its academic interest, but by offering a means of reinvigorating the village and providing a basis for action by local people. Over the years, the society demonstrated one of the key strengths of the co-operative model—a clear focus on the needs of its members and the local community. In response to those needs, the society moved on from supporting the work of the hand-loom weavers. It opened a shop and made bulk purchases of essential goods, which it resold to members and their families. It also loaned money to members at preferential rates. I was interested to note that, according to one of the account records from 1764, a shilling was loaned to a Margaret Mitchel of Fenwick. If that was an ancestor of Margaret Mitchell MSP, who is in the chamber, I hope that the shilling was paid back. Since then, through the work of retail co-operatives and credit unions, such activities have become key features of co-operative action. The society appears to have paid a dividend to members when its activities generated a surplus and, in 1808, it opened a subscription library. Although recognition of the Rochdale pioneers has overtaken recognition of the Fenwick Weavers Society in the chronicles of co-operatives, the principles that were set down in Rochdale are well reflected in the much earlier work of the Fenwick society. By building on those principles, the co- operative model has become an important part of the social and economic fabric of Scotland and beyond. For example, the European Union has an estimated 132,000 co-operative enterprises, which have 83 million members and more than 2 million employees. One of Europe's leading co-operatives, which is based in Mondragón in the Basque Country, was recognised by the United Nations as one of the 50 best social economic innovations in the world. The Mondragón Cooperative Corporation, which is almost 50 years old and has more than 100 companies and tens of thousands of worker owners, is an illustration of co-operation in action. Along with other examples, it shows that the co-operative model has made a tremendous impact on our society. Co-operatives can help Scotland to tackle the social and economic challenges that it faces and to take advantage of the opportunities that lie ahead. I understand that Ian Hughes, who is the chief executive of Co-operative Development Scotland, and Ivan Broussine, who is chair of its advisory board, are in the public gallery. Research that has been carried out on behalf of CDS estimates the turnover of co-operatives in Scotland to be roughly £4 billion, which amounts to more than 4 per cent of gross domestic product. Although that is significant, there is every expectation that, with the right support from the Parliament, the Scottish Government and Westminster, the co-operative sector can grow in the years ahead. The Fenwick weavers committed to be "honest and faithful to one another ... and to make good and sufficient work and exact neither higher nor lower prices than are accustomed". That is a fitting objective, which has underpinned the work of co-operatives down through the years. It would be fitting recognition indeed of the role of Fenwick in the development of the co-operative movement if tonight's debate were to encourage the Parliament to step up its support for the work of that vital sector. I commend the motion to Parliament and invite members to follow the example of the Fenwick weavers in working to build a wealthier, fairer and more co-operative Scotland in the years ahead.

I start with a declaration of interest. Like many in the chamber, as a member of a local authority I have been involved in planning issues for a number of years. I am sure that my colleagues in East Ayrshire Council will warmly welcome the opportunity to bid for some of the £8 million from the extended conservation area regeneration scheme announced by the minister. My views are informed by my experience of dealing with local planning matters and by the views I hear expressed by colleagues, council officers and local communities. Some members have mentioned that on occasion Historic Scotland gets a bad press. It is sometimes portrayed as a barrier to development, especially by prospective developers. It is seen as too slow to respond and lacking in the detailed local knowledge needed to make the decisions that are asked of it. On the other hand, those with a specific interest in the historic environment often portray local authorities as lacking in vision, being too focused on current pressures and lacking the specialist knowledge needed to manage the historic environment. The result of those competing stereotypes is that local authorities and Historic Scotland have been tasked with dual responsibility for scrutinising developments. That is often wasteful of resources, slows the development process down and compounds the lack of clarity about responsibilities. The stereotypes, however, do not stand up to scrutiny. While preparing my speech, I was struck by the positive side to the relationship between Historic Scotland and East Ayrshire Council. Specifically, Historic Scotland has been supportive of the authority's approach to conservation areas. At the recent Scottish awards for quality in planning, the overall award went to East Ayrshire Council for its maintenance manual, which was produced for the John Finnie street conservation area in Kilmarnock, a project that received support and considerable funding from Historic Scotland. It has also been supportive of our council's action to serve listed buildings repair notices on the former ABC cinema in Kilmarnock. Nevertheless, we might wish to strengthen our powers when, for example, rogue owners strip a building of its internal fabric, which may be of historical and architectural value. I hope that the extended delegated powers that the minister announced might assist us in that regard. Recent changes in Historic Scotland's approach have been warmly welcomed. It has become more proactive, it is engaging more directly on service delivery and it is consulting and sharing expertise. Such partnership working should be developed  and replicated across Scotland. I am pleased that the minister encouraged that approach. I am also encouraged by the minister's remarks about the planning responsibilities of local authorities. The planning process should be the critical link between local authorities and Historic Scotland. It is within that process, led by local authorities, that the balance is struck between protecting the historic environment and the local community's changing needs and aspirations. The national planning framework and the changing relationship between the Scottish Government and local authorities are important developments. All the partners will have to meet new challenges and must be equipped to respond to them. I fully support the HEACS recommendations for an audit of local authority capacity and for a rebalancing of the relationship between local authorities and Historic Scotland. Whatever the outcome of the audit, it should not be used as an excuse to halt the momentum for change. A return to the era of a command and control relationship between the Government and local authorities is not an option. We can see the failure of that approach in cities, towns and villages throughout Scotland over many years. Whole tracts of successful, long-established urban environments were decimated in the name of progress, or modernism, as it might have been called in those days, with no strategic goals and little community involvement or approval for many of the schemes. We are learning to our cost that, when we make big mistakes in the fabric of our urban areas, we live with the consequences for many years. Communities recognise that, as I am sure do the members in the chamber. We must therefore give our communities a pivotal role in the development of their local environment. The historic environment provides a sense of place for our communities. It distinguishes one community from another in a way that too many recent developments have not done. It can also provide a strong base on which to build new economic development, either by remaining in active use or as a strong component in attracting tourists to view unique parts of our heritage. Historic Scotland has for many years played a key role in protecting the historic environment, but Scotland needs to change and the way in which we manage our historic environment needs to change with it. Scotland's local authorities should exercise more power locally and therefore be more accountable to their electorate. We need to set out clearly our national vision and the outcomes that we want to achieve, and we must identify the resources required to deliver them. It should be possible to set new standards  while encouraging local flexibility. Challenging times lie ahead. The development of Scotland's cities, towns and villages can successfully embrace the past while looking ahead and planning for an exciting future. I am delighted to support the Government's motion.

I congratulate staff throughout the rail network in Scotland on meeting and exceeding targets. We would probably not have reached this stage were it not for their efforts during the past few years.  My constituents in Kilmarnock and Loudon will warmly welcome the benefits that have been announced, including the enhanced services from Kilmarnock and the opportunity to bid for some of the additional £1 million to which the minister referred, which is targeted at making better use of empty station buildings. Following a meeting that I had with the STUC and rail union officials, will the minister make it clear that the £70 million that is gained will be reinvested in rail services? Can he assure us that the operational requirements for the delivery of new services can be fully met?

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it has taken with the NHS to review the relationship between the £208 million that NHS boards declared in 2006-07 as provisions and contingent liabilities against claims for medical negligence and the payment that year of £23 million in respect of such claims. (S3O-2779)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her answer, but does she nevertheless agree that the gap between the amount set aside and the amount paid out appears to be excessive and that at least a portion of the unspent money could be reinvested in front-line care?

I am sorry to see the Labour Party wasting Parliament's time on a debate that is built on false premises and misrepresentation. I have long been involved in education, so I am interested in seeing real improvements in Scottish education. Therefore, when I read reports about the ending of the schools of ambition programme, I was concerned about how it had been sprung on us with no prior warning from the Government. I do not, however, remember people rushing to the polls last May to vote for parties proposing an extension of the schools of ambition programme. Scotland voted for new choices and new thinking: that is what we are getting from our Government. Of course, I discovered that the programme has not been scrapped. Not only will it run for the full duration that was planned by the previous Administration, but the SNP Government will spend more money on it than Labour and the Liberal Democrats planned to. However, the falsely reported demise of the programme is not the only falsehood. The motion refers to "positive comments" about the programme by HMIE. However, a look at the inspectorate's report on schools of ambition reveals that the inspectors made no such  comments. The report on St Ninian's high school in Kirkintilloch said: "In many departments, staff engaged in high quality debate about the curriculum and approaches to learning and teaching, arising partly from the school's involvement in the School of Ambition initiative." To turn a compliment about the motivation of staff into a ringing endorsement of the whole programme is typical Labour spin.

I have only four minutes. The member can press his button if he wants to make a speech.

He could have made a contribution on that point, but he chose not to do so. Doon academy entered the schools of ambition programme following two inspections in 2002 and 2004. It had been making progress that had been hampered by the serious condition of the building—hardly an ideal mechanism by which to enter such a scheme. Of course, the school needed support to recover from that disruption, as would any school. However, local authorities should not have to justify that to officials and ministers in Edinburgh. With the removal of a great deal of ring fencing, local authorities will have more flexibility to respond to such events. At its heart, the motion is simply another repetition of Labour's dreary old song about ring fencing. The schools for ambition programme appears to have no real criteria beyond a school's having performance difficulties and wanting to improve. There are no generic outcomes defined for the programme and, therefore, no way of assessing its effectiveness. As with all ring-fenced programmes, the existence of unique resources skews thinking in some quarters. Some schools measure their success by their ability to gain school of ambition status. Scotland was and is full of schools of ambition: the problem was that we did not have a Government with ambition. Yesterday, I witnessed some incredible scenes at East Ayrshire Council, as the SNP-led council saved from closure three ambitious rural schools that had received little or no investment from Labour via its SOA scheme or its selective PFI schemes. Crossroads primary school in my constituency had the princely sum of £18,000 spent on it over the previous 12 years under Labour. Sorn and Littlemill schools also suffered. They were all in danger because of the condition of the school buildings. That is a disgrace, from a party that now pretends that it is the friend of rural schools.  The sight of parents weeping with joy as the SNP council took the decision to save their schools will live with me for many years. Those schools are the real schools of ambition, but that is not thanks to the previous Labour Executive or the previous Labour council. Tom Hunter's words are still appropriate in Scotland: every child deserves the opportunity to succeed and to be all they can be. A scheme that excluded 88 per cent of secondary school children in Scotland hardly delivers on that noble ambition. Our Government has that ambition for all Scotland's schoolchildren rather than only the few, as was the case under Labour's failed scheme.

Let us be clear about the importance of the subject that we are debating. We are discussing not the advantages and shortcomings of service models, but a Scottish Government proposal that major changes to existing health services should be subject to independent external scrutiny. It is an important proposal that all members should understand would open up political decision making to unprecedented scrutiny. A mechanism would be put in place to ensure that when major changes to health services were planned, the public would have access to clear independent assessment of the basis for those changes. It has been difficult in the past months—and perhaps it is even now—to work out whether some  members of the previous Administration think that the proposal is good. It is even difficult to know whether a cautious welcome has been offered today—I do not think that even that has been given. As she actioned for Monklands and Ayr, Nicola Sturgeon proposes as a feature of decision making for Scotland's health services basing such decisions on robust evidence—that term has been used quite a few times today—and making them subject to clear independent scrutiny before they are implemented. That would ensure that the outcome of a change could be justified as being in NHS patients' interests. From watching the mishandling over a long time of accident and emergency services in Ayrshire, I have a particular view of such events. I recall various presentations by Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board to East Ayrshire Council meetings at which the entire council opposed the board's plan to close Ayr's accident and emergency unit. The board did not estimate the number of people who would bypass Ayr hospital in an ambulance in an emergency or take any consideration of the concerns of relatives who faced travelling four hours or more to visit family members if they turned out to be in Crosshouse hospital near Kilmarnock. Such widespread public concern that a health board was ignoring would be very much in the mind of an independent scrutiny panel. The Ayrshire A and E services provide a case study of how the previous Administration conducted its business. As early as 1999, questions were being asked about the future of the A and E service at Ayr hospital. The then minister said that the health board had no plans to close the service, but events over the life of the previous Administration show the failure to keep the A and E service at Ayr up to date. That failure to invest was used as an excuse for closing the service, hugely against the local population's wishes. As the independent scrutiny report on the Ayrshire A and E proposals makes clear, the health board has pursued solutions based on selective reading of international—and in some cases old—evidence of the impact of particular service models. The national framework for service change contained fine words about developing options with people, not for them. As the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing said, it is important to stress the partnership role of all users of the health service rather than only the direct recipients of the service. The scrutiny panel found little evidence that that had been done. Those of us who experienced at first hand the anger of the people of Ayrshire at the way the change process was being handled could have told the scrutiny panel that, had we had the opportunity to do so.  Setting up independent scrutiny panels is a positive step for decision making in the NHS. The terms of reference for the panel that was set up to look into Ayrshire and Lanarkshire A and E services has been attacked. The panel was asked to ensure that services are safe, sustainable, evidence based and represent value for money. It was also charged to ensure that services are robust, patient centred, and consistent with best practice and national policy. An important part of its remit was to ensure that service planners take account of local circumstances and the views of individuals and communities. Those strike me as appropriate tests to apply to new services. Perhaps most important, in the light of the experience of the Ayrshire A and E review, the public should be confident that all viable service options have been considered, including those that start from a basis of recognising the strengths of local services and community links. The outcome of the independent scrutiny process has been warmly welcomed, not least by Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board, which now sees a clear way forward in developing services for its community. I am confident that the Government's proposals will be warmly welcomed by NHS professionals, patients and the wider community.

It is important to understand the background against which the East Ayrshire consultation arose. Like many other local authorities in Scotland, East Ayrshire Council has faced falling school rolls for many years. The frightening reality is that East Ayrshire has 15,000 desks but just over 9,000 pupils. Despite that, the Labour administration under Councillor Tommy Farrell ordered a new school, much larger than necessary, to be built at Galston. Clearly, Labour's intention was to close nearby Crossroads primary school in order to fill up the new Galston primary. On top of all that, the condition of our schools in East Ayrshire was allowed to deteriorate over many years. We now understand that the estimated cost of bringing the schools up to an acceptable standard is £100 million. When we consider the hopes for and expectations of the curriculum for excellence, and the challenge of delivering a modern learning and teaching environment for our children, it is incumbent on any new council administration to examine the hand that it has been dealt and to consult parents and communities on the best way forward. That does not warrant an attack on the council or personal attacks on officers who are charged with the duty of trying to present and explain all the options to the public. The new council and the officers should be commended for facing up to the difficult challenges left behind by the previous administration. What is remarkably different about this consultation is the decision by the SNP to include the status quo as an outcome and to allow reasoned argument in favour of that option to be developed and presented. That is not something that parents got from Labour in the past. Only last week in this chamber, we were reminded by a former Labour education minister that people felt that previous school consultations were fixed, that decisions had already been made and that the consultation process was a sham. That was the reality under Labour, and its track record of allowing 32 schools to close the length and breadth of Scotland from 2001 to 2003 is  testament to that. Where was Labour's commitment to rural schools then?

No. Cathy Jamieson has had seven minutes, and I have only four. Is it not amazing what an election defeat can do—especially when it presents an opening for blatant political opportunism? I understand that more than 2,000 submissions have been made during the consultation process. The council has agreed to extend the timescale to 19 March, which will allow more time for detailed examination of the various cases being made. Again, that is an indication that East Ayrshire Council takes seriously the material being presented and that this consultation is no sham exercise.

No. Rhona Brankin's party has had seven minutes. I have only four. Sorry.

For the first time ever, parents will be able to state their case in front of the decision makers. Many members of the parents groups are in the public gallery, and I welcome them to the Scottish Parliament. I have been impressed with the cases that have been presented to me, which contained detailed analysis that addressed all the issues and was thorough and considered. The ultimate question that elected members face is whether new schools, with their modern learning and teaching environments, offer better opportunities for young children to develop into the confident and successful learners that we all hope they will become. Perhaps, as the parents strongly argue, the current schools still have the edge over anything else on offer. The new administration in East Ayrshire has a difficult task on its hands, but members can rest assured that it has the best interests of the kids in mind. I am confident that, taking into account all of the pressures that it faces, it will make the right decisions when the time comes.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to ensure that Scotland's food supplies are safe, secure and sustainable. (S3O-2375)

I ask the minister to join me in congratulating Alyn Smith MEP and his Irish counterparts in particular on their successful campaign for a Europe-wide ban on the import of Brazilian beef. Does he agree that Scottish farmers are rightly concerned by the unfair competition from Brazil, which has been criticised for its lax animal health and traceability regime? Is the decision on the ban another example of how Scotland can be more successful when it works directly with other European states to achieve common goals?

Members have mentioned that the prison population in Scotland, at more than 8,000, is the highest that has ever been recorded here. In percentage terms, our prison population is among the highest in Europe. Is that the hallmark of a safer society or an indication of failure in our system? Prison population rates in the United States of America and Russia are around five times higher than those in Scotland, but the rates in countries such as Norway and Japan are around half of those in Scotland. Which of those societies are safer to live in? Two thirds of all those who go to prison in Scotland reoffend within two years, and our female prison population has almost doubled in the past 10 years. That suggests that we are getting something badly wrong. The available data suggest that we are dumping people in prison who could be dealt with by other means. Last year, for example, we sent 6,000 people to prison for defaulting on fines. Most of those people were in prison for less than a fortnight. There must also be  concern about the large numbers of women who end up in prison, particularly from the south-west of Scotland. Recent figures that have been made available to me suggest that 14 per cent of the entire female prison population come from that area. In her recent report, Scotland's Commissioner for Children and Young People, Kathleen Marshall, suggested that women may not be able to get access to community sentencing because of the lack of child care. Tackling that problem is not being soft on crime or criminals. We must deal appropriately with women with child care responsibilities who come into contact with the criminal justice system. As we have heard, a person who goes to prison is more likely to return to prison than not to do so. Evidence from the south west Scotland community justice authority shows that reoffending rates for those who have been imprisoned run at 75 per cent, but those for people who have received community penalties are around 39 per cent. I think that that was mentioned.

Such a comparison certainly gives us cause for concern. We must consider and analyse the figures rather than ignore or run away from them. Mr McLeish will probably consider that aspect of the matter in his review. Some people have claimed that it is virtually impossible to get the jail in Scotland, but it appears that a high number of people who are not otherwise deemed to be dangerous end up in Scotland's jails. The existence of overcrowded prisons means that we may not be able to focus on serious offenders. The commission that is being chaired by Henry McLeish is considering the use of custody. It will be interesting to find out the commission's recommendations in the spring. The community justice authorities are considering how we could increase community disposals to reduce the high number of short-term sentences. To deliver that, we must re-examine the use and quality of social inquiry reports, which may better inform and assist our sheriffs in considering sentences. Such measures represent a mature and practical approach to the problems that we face with our rising prison population. On whether prisons should be publicly or privately run, the Government has made it clear that responsibility for the future development of the  prison estate lies with the public sector, as responsibility lies with that sector when people are deprived of their liberty. That said, I am sure that prison officers in both public and private prisons deliver a high-quality professional service within the constraints of the resources at their disposal. Their dedication and commitment are first class and must be recognised. Surely the challenge for us in Scotland is to tackle reoffending and the ensuing high prisoner numbers. We must recognise and act on the emerging trends if we are to have any realistic prospect of tackling the problems. I am pleased to support the Government's amendment.

In recent years, Scottish football clubs have not exactly been blessed with significant financial investment, and we sometimes look with envy at the obscene amounts of money that are poured into football south of the border by television companies. Without the welcome and essential sponsorship that our clubs receive from Clydesdale Bank, Irn Bru and Setanta, many of our clubs would be in dire straits. It must be with great concern that we observe the latest situation at Gretna Football Club. In supporting the motion tonight and having looked over some of the speeches that were made in previous debates, I believe that the emergence of Supporters Direct and football trusts was inevitable. We had better get used to the fact that the long-term survival of many of our clubs lies in the hands of their dedicated supporters. Some of our biggest clubs almost went out of business in recent years—James Kelly mentioned a few, and we could possibly add Motherwell to the list—perhaps because of too heavy a reliance on external funding from TV contracts. Wages rocketed on the back of the deals, and clubs faced closure as a result. We perhaps now have a more realistic and practical approach to the financing of our clubs, although many rely on the efforts of their supporter organisations to sustain them from season to season. Self-sustainability is the key these days. The kick-start funding that Supporters Direct received in 2002 was widely welcomed, and it enabled many supporters groups to establish themselves and become self-financing. Many have gone from strength to strength. The wish of football club supporters to have a say in the running of their clubs is not new, but the emergence of Supporters Direct and the trusts gave a clearer focus to the efforts, and we now see supporters represented on the boards of a number of our clubs. That can surely only be a positive step. For their own reasons, which are not always particularly sound, many football club boards have resisted welcoming supporters on to the board, preferring in some cases to invite people with no local connections, no investment to offer and no record of ever having attended a match of the club concerned. However, progress is being made.  It is perhaps appropriate that this debate is taking place when the football club of Barcelona is once again in Scotland to pit its wits against Celtic. As many members know, Barcelona, with well over 150,000 owners, is actually owned by its supporters. They all have a say, and they meet in their own assembly to deliberate on how to develop the club and to foster wider community initiatives in Catalonia. At the other end of the financial scale, the trust of the football club of Forfar Athletic has the honourable intention of keeping a watchful eye on and helping to reduce the club's overdraft. The common factor is that the supporters of both clubs love their football club and are committed to its continued existence and development. That spirit and dedication remain constant in football, no matter the location or size of the club, and that spirit must be welcomed and harnessed by the football clubs that have not yet invited supporter representatives on to their boards. From what I can see, many trusts in Scotland will fundraise to buy shares in the club—to get their voices heard at annual general meetings and so on. It seems to me that that is more of a barrier placed in front of them rather than an open invitation to have a say in the running of the club. It would be welcome to hear that more football club boards in Scotland were beginning to co-opt supporter representatives on to their boards to help them face the challenges of the future. The trust at my own club, Kilmarnock, has just announced that it will be making available £2,000 to the local community in the form of a community bursary. That will be connected not necessarily to football schemes but to community initiatives in general. There have been other initiatives, such as fifty for the future—a fundraising scheme to identify and support new players for the club—which has been very successful. Scottish football club trusts have proven over the years that they have the dedication and know-how to support their clubs. They have drive and imagination, and their fundraising efforts been first class. I have great pleasure in supporting the motion, and I look forward to the rest of the speeches.

Studying history should not be about staring aimlessly into the past, reliving the glories or lamenting the honourable defeats. It is as much about understanding where we have come from, making sense of where we are now and, more important, helping us to prepare for the future with confidence. When I was a schoolboy in Kilmarnock in the 1970s, the prospect of facing—in some cases, memorising—the next 10 pages on the Tudors came a close second to the attraction of a visit to the dentist to have a tooth pulled. It was dull, uninspiring and painful, and it had no relevance. It felt like a memory exercise to record and regurgitate facts, figures and dates and I quickly abandoned it as an academic interest. I knew little or nothing about my country and the contribution that local people had made to our development over the centuries. If someone had told me about the strong connections that Bruce and Wallace have to my part of Ayrshire and the huge part that they played in shaping Scotland; or that the Kilmarnock radicals such as John Kennedy, Thomas Baird and Alexander McLaren had the audacity to demand parliamentary reform in the 1820s and were imprisoned for their efforts; or that local men such as Andrew Barclay, John Fulton and Alexander Fleming made a significant contribution to engineering, science and medicine that benefited the world; perhaps then I would have been a worthy scholar like my friend and colleague Professor Harvie. Alas, history fell from my radar and I focused on science and technology, which had meaning and relevance and gave me the prospect of a job. It was an easy choice to make at the time. Thankfully, we have travelled a long way since then. An examination of history teaching and its place in the modern context of social studies within the curriculum for excellence shows an approach that is light years away from that taken in my schooldays. LTS's draft outcomes and experiences paper shows clearly the intention to allow teachers to "'raise the bar', permitting greater depth and challenging young people to be ambitious in their learning". For the first time, our children can learn about their communities and Scotland's development as a nation, and can begin to see the world around them from a Scottish perspective. That is a crucial change in the curriculum for excellence framework. The framework specifies clear outcomes relating to people, past events, and societies, and that  young people should be expected to develop a "wider sense" of their "heritage and identity as a British, European or global citizen", which rather neatly incorporates the Conservative amendment and should reassure us all that there can be no political interference, as mentioned in the Liberal Democrat amendment. The approach that is taken in the curriculum for excellence is consistent, whether it is applied to the social sciences or to literacy and numeracy. It proposes clarity in teaching, experiences that will enhance learning and meaningful outcomes for the children. The concerns and issues that are expressed in all three of the amendments are dealt with in the curriculum for excellence framework. Some of the material that is available to enrich the learning and teaching of history is quite incredible and is a testament to the great work that has been achieved and is continuing in Scotland. The power of technology to offer rich new learning environments to our youngsters is a huge benefit in helping us to deliver the outcomes of the curriculum for excellence. It would be remiss of me not to mention some of the projects and organisations that bring those ideas to life. The future museum project, involving the Ayrshire councils and Dumfries and Galloway Council is a fantastic online resource. It is full of materials that help youngsters to appreciate their local heritage, which might have been ignored for many years. LTS has developed and produced a wonderful variety of material to support learning and teaching and it currently offers a wide range of Scottish history titles that youngsters and adults can enjoy online. So, too, do many other organisations, such as the Scottish cultural resources access network and the Scottish interactive technology centre. If I may, I will pay tribute to an old friend, Tony van der Kuyl, who died last week. He was the director of SITC, and larger than life. The rich learning experience that many of our children enjoy is down to the vision and dedication of people like Tony van der Kuyl. We shall be forever in his debt. Scotland has nothing to fear and everything to gain from placing its own history at the heart of the curriculum. It is a move that has been born of a new and developing confidence that recognises the past, establishes a new context for Scotland in the present and offers our young people a glimpse of what the future might hold. The framework of the curriculum for excellence allows us to explore all those possibilities in a mature and critical fashion. The application of technology can unleash the potential of exciting new ways of learning and teaching. Studying Scottish history today is a far cry from  a visit to the dentist. Let us embrace the approach and support the Government's motion.

I, too, congratulate my colleague Christine Grahame on her persistence in raising awareness of the terrible events of 17 June 1940. The scale of losses in that engagement guaranteed that it would touch families and communities throughout Scotland, the United Kingdom and further afield. In the parliamentary debate in May 2005, Christine Grahame referred to her links with the tragedy through her father's friend, Jock Hunter, and her assistant's grandfather, Walter Hirst. I pay tribute to other survivors, among whom was a Mr Duncan Reid from Kilmarnock, who was the father of my friend and colleague Councillor Douglas Reid of East Ayrshire Council. Mr Reid senior, who died very recently, sailed as a 20-year-old Scots fusilier on the Lancastria. The number of contributors to the debate who can relate personally to the event emphasises the scale of the losses that occurred among the Scottish forces. As has been recorded elsewhere, the events of that day were kept from the public during the war and continue to be subject to considerable secrecy and confusion. Duncan Reid did not talk about his experiences at all. Many of his family found out about his part in the events only after his recent death. Mr Reid kept his side of the bargain even to his death. His family, who are now looking into the events, already question whether the full facts are available and, if they are, whether they match those that have already been placed in the public domain. Uncertainty about the number of victims seems to be matched by similar uncertainty about which regiments were present on the vessel when it went down and how many of their men perished. I commend to the Parliament the work of the Lancastria Association of Scotland. It is vital that  we increase public awareness of the sacrifices—not just those of the second world war but the continuing sacrifices beyond that—that have been made by our armed forces. It has often been said that truth is the first casualty of war. In the case of the Lancastria, not just truth but transparency suffered as a consequence. It is entirely understandable that, in the heat of battle, attempts were made to manage public awareness of the events—as Murdo Fraser rightly said—but the British Government's continuing failure to recognise the sacrifice that was made on 17 June 1940 is less understandable. The legitimate interest of the families and colleagues of those who served and died or survived should be acknowledged. I urge colleagues to support this important motion.

I extend a warm welcome to a couple of my colleagues in the public gallery—Councillor Jimmy Kelly and Councillor Barney Menzies from East Ayrshire Council—and I congratulate Cathy Jamieson on securing the debate. The history of Scottish mining and the Ayrshire coalfields plays a crucial part in Scotland's history as a whole. It is a history of struggle and adversity, but also of great achievement and resilience of the families who came to depend on the industry for their livelihoods. By the early 1900s, nearly 150,000 people were directly employed in our mining industry and we produced more than 40 million tons of coal each year. Scotland's miners were the powerhouse of our economy. Sadly, fatalities in the industry were a part of many families' lives. I believe that the first recorded deaths in the Ayrshire coalfield were in Kilmarnock in 1804. Close to my own heart, when two fatalities occurred at Windyedge pit near Crosshouse in 1927, my grandfather, Daniel Coffey, narrowly escaped with his life. The Scotsman reported at the time: "Mr Coffey sustained severe injuries and was removed to Kilmarnock Infirmary but there is good hope of his recovery." For obvious reasons, I am thankful that he recovered. As Cathy Jamieson said, we have just had the 50 th anniversary of the Kames disaster at Muirkirk, which claimed 17 men's lives and broke the hearts of many families down there. Many men, women and children lost their lives in the pits and many survivors have suffered a lifetime of ill health through silicosis and related conditions. It is right to recall those facts as part of our understanding of where we have come from. The history of struggle in the face of extreme danger to life and limb cannot go unnoticed and without recognition from the current generation. The industry has all but disappeared—no deep mines are left—and with that, the livelihoods of many families have disappeared over a relatively short time. That short narrative helps to explain why the Coalfields Regeneration Trust is around today and why it is essential. The shifting pattern of the economy means that businesses and industries  can shut down almost overnight and restart somewhere else, but communities cannot and should not be expected to do that. The legacy of mine closures in the past 20 years will probably affect communities for a generation or more and it is the task of the Government and local authorities to assist by whatever means they can. East Ayrshire depended almost totally on the mining industry. That goes a long way towards explaining why, after the mines went, significant assistance was required; it still is. The Coalfields Regeneration Trust was established around 1999, with the clear aims of leading the way in regenerating coalfield areas and restoring healthy, prosperous and sustainable communities. We have heard from Cathy Jamieson about the range of work that has been done over the past years and the many successes that have been achieved in helping people to retrain and reskill by giving them much-needed information and communications technology skills, improving lifestyles, supporting healthy living, enterprise and innovation, establishing new partnerships, creating opportunities and improving access to transport. There has been youth development work and successful projects have aimed to improve opportunities for women in the area. I am sure that colleagues will pay tribute to the trust for other work that has been done and is still to be done. Without the initiatives that I have described, I shudder to think where our mining communities might be today. No one said that the trust would be an overnight success—it will be a long hard struggle to get the communities back on their feet. Unemployment levels in this area of East Ayrshire are still higher than those in the rest of Scotland and overall population decline is still projected for the area over the next 10 to 15 years. That gives us an indication of the difficult challenges that lie ahead. As we plan for the future, we must always ask whether what we are doing is likely to help the community to again become sustainable in its own right, without the need for assistance, which is surely the ultimate goal.

If what we are doing is not likely to achieve that goal, the next generation may accuse us of administering medicine while failing to seek the cure. Scotland owes a debt of gratitude to its former mining communities. Members can rest assured that those communities, especially communities in Ayrshire, are up for the challenge. Adapting to change, focusing on strengths and identifying new opportunities are characteristics that will be required to deliver real sustainability in the future. I  have no doubt that the mining communities of East Ayrshire have those characteristics in abundance.

I am delighted to support tonight's motion.

As I represent the land-locked constituency of Kilmarnock and Loudoun, it might seem a bit  odd that I am speaking in the debate. However, as we know, fishing is a key industry from which all Scotland benefits and this is a great opportunity to demonstrate that members who do not come from a traditional fishing background whole-heartedly support the industry. The importance of the fishing industry to Scotland and the European Union cannot be overstated. The total value of the catch landed by the Scottish fleet stands at around £370 million, as Jamie Hepburn said earlier. The industry employs just under 20,000 people directly, and just under 50,000 when we include related employment. That is significant indeed. Scotland is one of the largest sea-fishing nations in Europe. A quarter of all European fishing waters lie off Scotland and the Scottish fleet catches about 70 per cent of all cod caught in the waters off Scotland. Although the industry contributes so much to the economy and is strategically important in the European context, we have little influence and no direct voice to support our industry or to promote much of the good practice and responsible management that has been evident in recent years. Over the years, my impression has been that the industry is always teetering on the brink. It seems to lurch from overfishing to no fishing, and the consequent damage that those approaches have caused to stock and to local communities has been devastating. Despite that, our industry—and its significant Scottish interest—continues to be represented by UK ministers, whose record of achievement has not exactly been notable. About 25 years ago there was a song about the ills facing Scotland, and the fishing industry featured even then: "In our northern waters our fishermen are hunting fishing for their lives in the cruellest sea returning home with little caught as foreign boats just scoop the lot fish for all our comrades but none for you and me." That, of course, refers to the nonsensical arrangement that saw non-Scottish boats taking fish from our waters while our fleet was tied up and banned from fishing those waters. That is still going on, to some degree, as Tavish Scott told us earlier in his remarks on the Polish fleet. The lunacy of throwing fish back into the sea was shown on television just the other night. Common sense must come from somewhere to return some sanity to the way in which Europe manages the industry. The industry in Scotland has learned some hard lessons over the years, and it is playing a leading role in developing new ideas for fish stock management. There are already sensible ideas in place, such as the voluntary real-time closure  scheme, which basically identifies areas that lie within the fishing zones where juvenile stocks are located and, by agreement, closes those areas to allow the stocks to recover. Technology can also play a vital part in fish stock management and Scottish companies are already at the forefront of such development, which makes a real contribution to the preservation of stocks while allowing the industry to continue and develop. Electronic logging can help skippers to identify juvenile hot spots; that should be seen as a major tool in migration prediction. Technology can also reward skippers with extra days at sea if they can verify that the amount of cod that they have caught is less than 5 per cent of their catch. That is particularly important to the prawn and haddock boats, as I understand it. Sound management and responsible fishing, allied to technological innovation, are strengths that Scotland offers in managing the crucial and sustainable resource that we are blessed to have been given. Our colleagues at Westminster should trust our minister and invite him to lead the negotiations on behalf of the UK. It should not be a question of our having to demand and Westminster refusing; we should have been asked to lead. ICES is more encouraging in its latest report than it has been for a number of years, as it suggests that cod stocks in the North Sea are recovering. Surely that is evidence that conservation efforts are working and that a case can be made for increasing quotas. No one is suggesting that there should be a mad dash to plunder the stock and return us to the chaos of recent years; a sensible and balanced approach can work. If not, the danger of quotas remaining pegged and stock increasing will mean more scenes on TV of fish having to be discarded. The Parliament should support our Government in its argument that our ministers should lead the negotiations in December. Our ministers are experienced, trusted, and have been in close contact with the industry for many years. That is no slight on anyone else. In a game of cards, we do not refuse to play a winning hand when we have it. In many ways, Scotland's fishermen are still "fishing for their lives in the cruellest sea". Parliament needs to send them a clear message that we are right behind them and will support the industry now and in the future. The industry already trusts its elected members and we, in turn, should do the same, no matter which party we represent. Scotland has a great natural resource to share with our European partners, and we have a lot to offer in experience  and expertise. We have led by example and shown how the industry can conserve and develop. I ask the Parliament to place its trust in our Government and help it to deliver a better deal for Scotland's fishermen.

As this is my first speech to the Parliament, I want to start by paying tribute to my predecessor Margaret Jamieson. Margaret served her constituents over eight years with great diligence and commitment, and I wish her well for the future. Although I come here with a sense of delight and honour in being elected to serve Kilmarnock and Loudoun, I also come with great sadness and heartbreak. My brother, Councillor Danny Coffey, died suddenly only a few short weeks after being selected to contest the seat. The honour that I feel in standing here among you all—despite the earlier exchanges—is a tribute to Danny's life and work for our beloved Scotland. Many of my local party colleagues will be forever in his debt.  As a local councillor, I have many years' experience in dealing with housing matters. In my view, many of the housing problems that we face today fall broadly into three main areas: the lack of affordable housing and the consequent huge waiting lists; the requirement for capital programme investment to maintain and improve the remaining stock; and the overall standards of service that people receive, including services in repairs and estate management. Housing services are at a crossroads. Although investment in capital programmes has been good in my authority area in East Ayrshire, there remain many concerns about the lack of supply and the overall standards of service. Those concerns will have to be addressed. The challenges faced by my authority are probably no different from the challenges faced by other housing authorities across Scotland. Annual stock losses due to sales are around 350 a year; more than 5,000 applicants are on our waiting list, but we manage to make only an average of 1,200 allocations a year; and the impact of trying to meet homelessness targets through the general needs waiting lists is causing us serious problems. Furthermore, there are problems of dissatisfaction with repairs and in dealing with antisocial behaviour. All those points indicate the scale of our problems. However, it is not all gloom and doom. I was pleased to hear that the minister has committed to examining the supply issue—at least via the task force—and I also welcome his plans for consultation on the overall future direction for housing. I hope that I will be able to influence his thinking a little and that I might ask him to consider at least a few of the following points over the coming months. We should certainly plan to build communities, not just houses, as Mary Scanlon mentioned. We should encourage local authorities to promote vigorously their rented housing stock and spell out the advantages of renting as opposed to buying. We should also consider providing incentives for those with long-standing tenancies. Other businesses seem be innovative in doing that, so why can we not do it in the housing sector? We should be more flexible about offering upgrades that tenants want, rather than giving them what the housing authorities decide that they should have. We have to work constantly on customer satisfaction and on making improvements if people are to stay with the social rented sector. We have to get smarter about working with our partners to deal with those who make life a misery for the residents of many of our housing estates. I am delighted to support the minister in his address to the Parliament on the future of housing in Scotland. If we make good progress on that, we  will have taken vital steps towards delivering housing services that are fit for 21 st century Scotland.