I thank Stuart McMillan for securing this debate but, like everyone else, I regret that we are even having to talk about the issue. This is really not where we should be in 2014 in Scotland. Although I do not want to rehearse the figures that other members have mentioned—they are on the record, so there is no need to do that—if two thirds of those who report to food banks are citing benefit issues as their main concern, it is important that the UK Government understands that and looks at the systems. The systems should work; we should not be in position whereby we do not give people enough money. I also note that fewer than 5 per cent of food bank clients are homeless. Therefore, we have a structural problem because those who have a roof over their head and may well be working are nonetheless living in poverty. That is not, I suspect, where historically we would have thought our communities would need help; we have tended to believe that it was the down-and-outs who were the problem. Instead, we are talking about ordinary people who just do not have enough money. That is a slightly different situation to be in from what we might have thought would be the case. Members have mentioned the fact that recent food price increases have been disproportionate. I am grateful to Kezia Dugdale for her comments on the nutritional effect of not being able to cook food. However, a person in that position would not even be able to heat, let alone cook food. Furthermore, the absence of heating cannot possibly do any good to the human body. The Scottish Government report that looked at the issue recently—I think that it reported in the past two or three months—noted that the Trussell Trust statistics were probably quite representative of what is happening in Scotland. That is helpful—I am looking at the Minister for Housing and Welfare when I say this—because it looks as though the data is being collected and that we will have a sensible handle on what is going on, even if we would rather not have the problem at all. I have visited Angus food bank, particularly the food bank in Brechin where I stay. I pay tribute to those who work and volunteer there—and those who train the volunteers—as well as those who manage the food banks across the country. That is enormously important work. I also note that this is not a problem that will go away. However much we want to blame the UK Government for the situation and even though a lot of it does land at its door, part of it is, I guess, just a consequence of the international downturn that we have seen, although a lot depends on how you respond to that situation. The issue will not go away any time soon. We will continue to need volunteers in our communities; we will continue to need donations. Jamie Hepburn mentioned that supermarkets can play a part in that, but our communities—we, as members of our local community—will have to donate food and encourage others to do so because in Scotland we are going to have to look after our own. I hesitate to point this out, but I like to think that if we had the powers of an independent country, we would be able to deal with some of the situation. However, for the moment, we will have to do so with the resources that we have. That, Presiding Officer, includes you and me.

I am conscious that the lady did more chemistry than I did, but I know where she did it because I did it at the same place. Surely one of the realities of organic chemistry is that no product is pure; they all come with other bits of functionality that will be there in some proportion. It is not physically possible to get purity in these substances.

I would like to speak briefly on amendment 26. First, for the avoidance of doubt, I agree that it is unnecessary—indeed, that is presumed within the words—but we must acknowledge that, as we have all seen from our mailboxes, there is widespread concern about the matter. Why is it relevant here? Why is it not discriminatory in its context? Quite simply because it relates to a bill that changes the more than 2,000-year-old definition of marriage. That is precisely why this is the right place for it. It is not discriminatory in its context, although, of course, it would be if it were anywhere else. Right where it is, it seems to provide reassurance, if not protection.

I start by turning to the very front of the bill, which says: “An Act of the Scottish Parliament to make provision for the marriage of persons of the same sex”. That is why I, as a Christian, found it very difficult at stage 1 to accept that that was the right way forward. I did not want to redefine a word that has a meaning in literature and liturgy and which has a significance to Christians, which I felt should not be ignored. Others have agreed with that. At stage 1 we did not have a choice about an alternative route. The bill did not say, “An Act to eliminate discrimination against those of the same sex who might wish to form some legal relationship other than civil partnerships”; it said on its face that we were going to redefine marriage. At that point, I took exception to it and I argued and voted against it. I felt that the Government could have brought forward something that was based on civil partnerships. In fact, so did the Government; the paperwork says that it did consider that, but it also notes that it had not consulted on it, so it did not do so. We have moved on. That stage 1 debate is behind us. This Parliament decided by a very substantial majority that the bill is the way forward. At this point I say not that Parliament decided that this is the way forward, but that we decided that this is the way forward. We have decided that we are going to redefine marriage; I am now left to address the practical consequences of that. I am now looking at a bill that moves to eliminate discrimination against couples of the same sex. I support that, as I always did. If we are going to change the definition of the word, so be it. I will, accordingly, support the bill tonight.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what recent talks it has had with the United Kingdom Government on cross-border parental abduction. (S4O-02808)

The minister will be aware of a case in which the English courts mistakenly believe that they have jurisdiction. I am not inviting her to discuss that case, of course. However, is she aware of anything that is being done in the English jurisdiction to bring the question of Scottish jurisdiction in such cases to the courts, so that the same mistakes are not made again? Does she believe that if we were independent, the national jurisdictions would be realigned in such a way that abduction cases could be dealt with very differently?

As convener of the Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee, I thank the minister for his comments and for lodging the amendment. That reflects the good working between our committee and the Government, which I hope will continue. Amendment 4 agreed to. Section 40—Marine licence applications, etc: proceedings to question validity of decisions

I welcome the announcement of a commissioner, which I think is a step in the right direction. The minister suggests that the commissioner would oversee the provisions for veterans and explore where the gaps are and why they are there. That is an extremely good idea, despite the fact that we seem to have an extremely joined-up landscape at the moment. The minister suggested that he will consult on the commissioner’s remit, which is extraordinarily sensible, because it means that some of the questions that have reasonably been asked about what the commissioner will do can be dealt with in the remit that he or she is given when the time comes. Clearly, some people find the transition out of the armed forces extraordinarily difficult. We can understand why that might be the case and we should see that beforehand. Every time someone moves into a new job, it should be obvious that at some point they will move out of it. I find it extraordinary that the armed forces did not work out a long time ago that they need to find ways of transitioning their members into civilian life. The Government’s commitments document, which was published fairly recently, has a threefold approach that involves providing support for servicemen, engaging with the community and providing personal services. In passing, I note that the independence white paper makes a few observations about what we would do if we were in charge of absolutely everything. There is the idea that there should be no compulsory redundancies. The idea of someone getting their P45 on the battlefield does not appeal to me, and I do not think that it appeals to any member. There is also the idea that we might review pensions, in recognition that, for one reason or another, Scots do not seem to live quite as long as others. That undoubtedly applies to those who have been in the armed services, so we could reasonably look at that issue. Another important issue is access to housing, which has been mentioned only briefly. I want to highlight an opportunity in Carnoustie in Angus. I have with me not so much a dodgy dossier as a dodgy picture of the minister, who appears to be in charge of an extremely large piece of equipment, which I think had just demolished some houses—I hope that he was not about to demolish them. Those houses are to be replaced by new housing, some of which is specifically for veterans. Appropriate accommodation is absolutely essential and is undoubtedly an extremely good idea for those who have been injured. Rushing swiftly on, I want to pick up on the issue of mental health, which some members have mentioned. I am grateful to Mark Griffin for a new phrase. He mentioned that members of the armed forces come out into a “community of strangers”. That is a new phrase to me and one that I will remember. Christina McKelvie asked whether we understand, and the answer to that very obvious question is no. We also need to understand the “Just get on with it” attitude in the military. We know where it comes from, but it means that those who leave perhaps think that they just need to get on with the difficulties in life when, actually, they should not need to. I have some quite alarming MOD statistics from the Falklands war. I am conscious that the minister had some involvement in that war. There were just under 26,000 UK armed forces personnel there. Some 237 sadly died during the campaign and, at the time of the report, 1,335 had died since 1982. More importantly for my point, 95 of those deaths were attributable to suicide or were open verdicts. That is the sharp end of the health issues, and the issue will not go away. Many charities, including Combat Stress, are already working on it, and I suspect that we are still seeing only the tip of an iceberg. A great number of the cases will come later in life as other traumatic events affect those veterans. That is, perhaps, an issue to which we will have to return.

I hardly need to point out in the early part of 2014 that climate change is with us. We have clearly reached the point where it does not matter why it is happening; individuals’ views on global warning are now irrelevant. The difficulty that we now have is thinking ahead. If we are going to tell members of our society that they must think ahead, we must ensure that we do it ourselves, and we must be careful that we think as far ahead as we possibly can. That does not necessarily mean that we have a written plan that goes as far as some people would like, but we must recognise that whatever we are doing now must be developed as it goes along and must be longer sighted as we go along, because this is a long-term problem. If I heard the minister right, I am absolutely delighted to pick up on the news that the flood risk maps are coming out tomorrow. Is that right? Paul Wheelhouse indicated agreement. Yes; that is long overdue. We cannot do things with land without maps, so I am delighted to hear that we have got that far. I must take issue with what has been said—if not with what has been meant—about targets and measurement, because it seems to me that we need to distinguish between them. If you will forgive me, Presiding Officer, I am going to go on a journey. As most of us will know, getting around our constituency means that we have to drive a car. There is no alternative in practice for most of us. I have never had a very modern car, but if one has a relatively modern car, it has at the front a miles per gallon display showing the current miles per gallon—which does not tell us very much, apart from the obvious—and the average miles per gallon for the trip. If that is anything like accurate and reproducible, that is an extraordinarily useful number. I shall put on my factory engineer’s hat and tell the chamber once more that what gets measured gets done. People have in front of them a number that tells them on average the fuel efficiency of their driving. Remarkably, it is still in miles per gallon, which I do not think are metric units, but never mind. If I knew what best practice was for a specific journey, I could set a target, but no target is any use if it is not relevant to what I am currently trying to do. If I am doing something for the first time, a target is totally meaningless. However, that measurement is crucial because, no matter what figure we start from, every single one of us instinctively will look at the miles per gallon figure and think about what we can do to get it to be bigger. We need to be careful not to come up with arbitrary targets, which are not helpful, and we need to be sure that what we measure and reproduce is accurate, because then targets will set themselves. I am conscious of time, so I will move quickly on. Last year, the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on construction had a presentation from Retrofit Scotland, which is an ad hoc organisation of professionals who are trying to put together case studies and examples of how we in Scotland should adapt our buildings for the future. That has climate change very much in mind, because we have to get fuel efficiency up for all the reasons that we now understand. I tell the minister that the group would very much welcome Government support and interest. It is a professional group of bodies that have come together entirely off their own bat and at their own expense. It would be very much appreciated if the Government would interact with that group. Finally, I will mention flooding, because I just have to. I thank the minister for signing off the scheme in my home city of Brechin. As I understand it, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities now has to come up with the money, so we will twist as many arms as we possibly can. I also thank Aberdeenshire Council for coming up with a scheme in Stonehaven, which I know the minister supports. I encourage the minister to proceed with that as fast as is conceivably possible for the good of my constituents.

The cabinet secretary will, sadly, be well aware of the recent poisoning of a golden eagle in the Angus glens, in my constituency. Will he update me on whether the introduction of vicarious liability, whereby managers and owners of estates are made responsible for their employees’ criminal actions, has made a difference to the incidence of poisoning in the rural community?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on how the United Kingdom Government’s proposed energy market reforms will impact on the Scottish economy. (S4O-02740)

What impact will energy market reform have on the security of supply?

To go back to basic principles, I think that we are clear that we need to get these Scottish folk back into economic society. Those who have finished up by not being able to pay their debts should regard bankruptcy as a last resort that is designed to provide rehabilitation and to enable them to make a fresh start. Those who have serious and unmanageable debts need to be relieved of them in such a way that they can get back into life. I like the idea of a financial health service, which is why I will begin by reflecting on what we teach in our schools. Do we teach our children at home and at school to look after themselves, their bodies and their minds? I think that we do, because it reduces the demands on the national health service later on. Undoubtedly we should, in our schools and our homes, encourage our youngsters to understand how to manage money in such a way that they will do so safely later in life. Those who do not manage their money carefully and therefore finish up in a financial mess, should, as debtors, be forced to rethink their financial activities and to repay what they reasonably can. They should then be discharged, which is what bankruptcy is all about. I do not have the answer to every question that has been raised in the debate so far—I will leave that to the minister—but some members have referred to payday loans and credit unions. Perhaps we should consider whether those are actually business suppliers. Let me put it this way: they are suppliers of credit to businesses that are going bankrupt. It seems that most people in business who go bankrupt do so once they have squeezed their suppliers’ credit as far as it can go. I am not convinced that payday loans or credit unions have much to do with that entrepreneurial problem. They undoubtedly have much to do with individual people finishing up bankrupt, but I doubt that that has much to do with entrepreneurship, so I ask members to consider that in their further discussions. I noted Mike MacKenzie’s comment that most people who go bankrupt do so due to events that are totally outside their control. That suggests that one of the things that we need to teach, and not just at Harvard business school, is that people have to be able not only to add up the pounds, shillings and pence on each side of the balance sheet—I am betraying my age there—but to understand that prudence is a pretty useful thing and that if their business has one big debtor, they are considerably at risk. I will pick up one or two issues that other members have not addressed. I like the idea of a common financial tool, as consistency has a lot of a merit, and I note the minister’s suggestion that it is more sustainable, which seems to fit the basic purpose. I note the proposal that money should be deductible from wages, which seems pretty reasonable. There were objections to that from members who pointed out that some folk would lose their jobs in those circumstances. I express a lot of sympathy for that position, but if someone puts themselves in such circumstances, they have to live with the consequences. Generally, if someone does not keep up with payments, the idea of deducting them from their wages seems to have some merit.

Only in circumstances in which it is claimed that the individual is employed, could be paying the sums and has failed to make the agreed payments on two successive occasions. That is where we are. I will leave it there. The question has been asked. We propose to replace the low income, low assets scheme with a minimal asset process. The minister has already answered most of the questions about that proposal that were raised at the committee. The restrictions on the LILA scheme are clearly not adequate because people have been trying to get into it when that would be inappropriate. I get the impression that only 75 per cent of those who are currently trying to get into the LILA scheme may be in the right place. The minister is to be commended for his approach. I will briefly address the further changes that have been proposed so that the courts will no longer have to consider a case when someone goes to the Accountant in Bankruptcy. Reducing the load on our courts is a good thing—full stop. It reduces the total costs left, right and centre. I would expect sheriffs and lawyers not to think that the proposal was a good idea and, in their shoes, I would say the same thing. I ask that, as we go through stage 2, everybody reflects on where the balance might sensibly lie. If there is a genuine conflict of interest, it might—and probably would—be appropriate to go to the court. If it is necessary to value contingent debts, the courts might well be better placed to do that, although I suggest that there might be others who are also well placed to value contingent debts. A little bit more thought might need to be given to some of the details in the bill. It is clearly heading in the right direction, but I would commend our giving a little bit more thought as to how some people finish up in the situations that it addresses.

I have recently written to Angus Council and Aberdeenshire Council, which are responsible for the section of road, to ask them what they are doing to improve safety on what we know is an extremely dangerous stretch. Is the Government able to do anything to help in that process, given that the road in question adjoins a trunk road? The best brains need to be applied not only to the problem of the Laurencekirk junction, which I know the minister is working on, but to the stretch down to Hillside.

1. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body how it allocates room resources between MSP events and SPCB events. (S4O-02655)

I thank Liam McArthur for those helpful comments. His answer makes the point that the SPCB tries to keep out of the way of MSPs, but that is not how it feels. When we go looking for a room many months in advance, it is not unusual to be told that the SPCB has booked it for some reason or other. I am conscious that Christine Grahame will also ask a question about rooms, but we seem to have had a number of substantial events—I do not want to criticise them—that seem to have taken place during term time when perhaps they could just as well have been held for the public’s benefit during holiday time, if I can put it that way. I wonder whether we might just reallocate our time.

12. To ask the Scottish Government what the impact on the economy is of university graduates seeking employment outside Scotland. (S4O-02633)

I recently had a presentation from Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen, which has hooked up with the oil and gas industry—naturally, as that industry is based around it—and is obviously doing an excellent job. Are there other opportunities for individual universities and perhaps departments to hook up with industries or individual firms to ensure that it is easier for graduates to move into employment in Scotland?

I am grateful to the Equal Opportunities Committee for its careful consideration of the bill and the report that it has produced. Of course, for those who are not on the committee in question, it is only when we get to see the stage 1 report that we get a sense of the issues that have generated discussion and the areas of detail that need to be addressed. The committee heard a great deal of evidence that same-sex couples feel that they are discriminated against; indeed, the same point has been very well and movingly articulated by members this evening. That view has to be respected—and I do respect it. However, I ask members to bear with me while I take a slightly different tack from what has come before and see where it takes us. It seems to me that what is being proposed is not very different from a civil partnership. The present differences between civil partnerships and marriages are helpfully outlined in paragraph 214 of the report and essentially relate to pension rights and international recognition. However, revising the law on marriage is not the only way of dealing with such issues. Of course, pension rights are reserved and can be worked through only in co-operation with the Westminster Government, and it is clear that a significant amount of work needs to be done to resolve the matter. International recognition is important, but I simply point out that a couple in a civil partnership who wish to move abroad ought to be in a position to marry there, if that is desirable, and I am not convinced that it is our duty to accommodate every nuance of other jurisdictions’ law in our own.

The member must forgive me if I make some progress. I will come back to him if I can. Having been around for millennia, the traditional view of marriage has worked rather well as the basis of family relationships in societies around the world. In the Christian faith, it is not just a practical policy but also hugely symbolic—and I want members to understand that. Jesus’ death and resurrection are central to the Almighty’s redemptive purpose for his people, while the church—that is, his people—is described as the bride of Christ many times in the Bible. The differences between the two parties could hardly be clearer; equally, their complementarity is evident from the fact that it is those very people—the Christian church—who demonstrate the outworking of Christ’s love to each generation. That is why the so-called traditional view of marriage actually matters to the Christian church. Some will say that marriage is only a word—and they would be right. However, words have meaning and I am in no hurry to change the meaning of a word in our law when so much has been attached to it in our literature and liturgy. Much of the evidence given to the committee relates to protections for those who do not want to have to celebrate same-sex marriages. I hope members will understand from what I have said that such views can be held without any feelings of homophobia; indeed, concern has also been expressed about the position of teachers. I note first of all the general belief among witnesses that the proposed protections are strong but, secondly, the doubts that remain about the robustness of those protections, particularly in the context of European law and how that might develop over time. What is clear is that if the bill is enacted substantially as drafted the meaning of marriage will have been radically altered. The cabinet secretary says that he will not regard his marriage as having been diminished by what is proposed. I understand his view and, indeed, hold a similar view about my own relationship with my wife. However, I remind members that a set is not defined by its present population but by its boundaries. What is being proposed will change marriage as an institution—and that will alter the context for everyone in the future. As Mr Spock would have put it, “It’s marriage, Jim, but not as we know it.”

I would prefer to acknowledge that it distinguishes, because heterosexual and homosexual relationships are dealt with differently. It seems to me—I had hoped that the member would have picked this up—that those differences are what we should address. Those issues of pension rights and international recognition should be dealt with. My concern is that we are focusing on this one word, and I hope that, from what I have said previously—I encourage members to read it in the Official Report—members recognise that there are reasons for being concerned simply about that word.

I will give way to Patrick Harvie.

I am absolutely clear that they can, and I think that they will. I am asking members to understand that there are reasons why, within a biblical theology, people in the Christian church feel that that word has another meaning—that is all. That is the historical position.

Gosh! My speech is going to have to be shortened. The future of civil partnerships is already under review. I wonder why we are in such a hurry to change the meaning of marriage at the moment, when many of the issues—some of which were picked up in the Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee—could have been much more easily dealt with had we rationalised civil partnerships across same-sex and opposite-sex relationships. I encourage the minister to consider whether it might be better to do that before we implement the bill because, had that been done, it might have reduced some of the problems.

I would like to start by taking a step back in history, although not, I fear, as far as my good friend Mr Stevenson has stepped back and probably will step back again. I want to take us back to the report by Sir Oliver Franks in 1957, which was the result of the Crichel Down affair, as some may remember. It said: “Since the war”— that was the second world war, of course— “the British electorate has chosen Governments which accepted general responsibilities for the provision of extended social services and for the broad management of the economy. It has consequently become desirable to consider afresh the procedures by which the rights of individual citizens can be harmonised with wider public interests.” At the bottom of that page, it says: “But over most of the field of public administration no formal procedure is provided for objecting or deciding on objections. For example, when foreign currency or a scarce commodity such as petrol or coal is rationed or allocated”— those are signs of the times— “there is no other body to which an individual applicant can appeal if the responsible administrative authority decides to allow him less than he has requested. Of course the aggrieved individual can always complain to the appropriate administrative authority, to his Member of Parliament, to a representative organisation or to the press. But there is no formal procedure on which he can insist.” We can note that, within the lifetimes of most of us, I suspect, the world has moved on and that, by and large, formal procedure exists. As the minister has previously pointed out, each part of that procedure has been set up by its own act of Parliament, and, of course, came with its own set of rules, caveats and ideas at the time. In his next chapter, Sir Oliver Franks made it quite clear that the aims of tribunals are pretty clear, and I would like to dwell on that point. First, he pointed out that Parliament must have required good administration. That is what they are there for. Secondly, he noted that they must embody “Openness, fairness and impartiality”. As someone who was not on the committee, I want to step back and look at tribunals from the point of view of the individual who will appeal to them. What that individual wants is pretty simple: a tribunal that works. He or she wants to be treated with respect, and they definitely do not want to be overwhelmed by the other parties. I have to concur with Christine Grahame’s earlier comments about education appeals, with which I had to deal in my time as a councillor. There seemed to be complete inequality between the two sides, with the council being seriously overrepresented. The individual wants to be heard, of course, but they need to be listened to, and they want the issues to be considered. The individual wants all that to happen pretty soon—that is important. The individual also wants the correct law to be applied, and the decision to be issued swiftly and actioned accordingly. All of that is pretty much straightforward stuff, and I do not expect it to be remotely contentious. If we remember that that is what the tribunal should deliver, we will also note that the individual is, by and large, not concerned about titles. He or she really does not mind whether the person is a judge in description or whether that judge wants to be called a judge. That is of no concern. Indeed, the whole process is of no concern, provided that it is fair. The individual most certainly wants to avoid costs, delays, uncertainty and error. That, of course, is precisely what the system is supposed to provide. What do tribunal members want? What do those who take part in the process and bring expertise to bear want? They want a process that can provide them with all the evidence, so they want it to be properly organised. They want the relevant parties to be there, so they certainly want the process to appear to be a legal one that people turn up for—people should not just decide whether or not they will bother to turn up. Tribunal members want somewhere appropriate to meet, of course, and they would like the occasional cup of coffee. Some will need to do site visits. Those who are seriously engaged in land issues may need to go and look at the ditch that is being complained about. They also want—this is important—a proper exposition of the law. That is why they want a legally qualified representative, at the very least. I suggest that they also want an opportunity to deliver their judgment quickly. They want good leadership for the whole process, which is why I concur with those who feel that having the Lord President ultimately in charge is an extremely good thing—judicial oversight seems right. Of course, they want an organisation, and it is with that organisation that the bill is really involved. Plainly, each tribunal can operate separately—they have done so—but in so doing they miss economies of scale and cross-fertilisation, and they all have their own way of doing things, which can sometimes be unhelpful. Our experience is that sensible rules of life are not complicated. I cannot help but feel that anybody who has ever convened a meeting in the Parliament knows perfectly well that we have a set of rules of procedure but, actually, if we just get on with it in the normal sensible way that human beings do and respect the chair, everything will more or less work. I note Margaret Mitchell’s concerns about rules, but I seriously suggest that we can get overly taxed by rules. I think that we have far too many and that we believe that everything needs to be written down. The basic rules of administrative law, which I am afraid come in Latin—the nemo judex rule and the audi alteram partem rule—are simple descriptions of what we have to do to do things fairly. I feel that a substantial rulebook on how a tribunal will work needs to be justified, and probably is not. Some feel that the newly set up Scottish Civil Justice Council should produce the rules for tribunals. Perhaps it should, but I wonder whether the council should produce the same set of rules for tribunals and all our courts, because I have a sneaking feeling that most of the rules are precisely the same regardless of where someone is in the system.

I would like to take one step back if colleagues will allow me. We need to ask ourselves why we have this problem in the first place. Why we need to produce carbon dioxide is a question that ought to be addressed at least once on the record. The major renewable energy technologies—wind, wave, tidal and photovoltaic—can take movement or sunlight and turn it into electricity and, incidentally, a bit of heat without us having to burn anything. That is what makes those technologies so attractive and distinguishes them from the fossil fuels—gas, oil, coal or wood—that we have heretofore burned in order to get heat. Of course, we have produced carbon dioxide in the process. Why do we need heat, apart from the low-grade heat that keeps us warm? If we want to move something like a car with an engine, the higher the temperature that the car engine gets to, the more efficient it is. The higher the temperature we can reach in a conventional power station, the more efficient it is. We want hot heat, which means burning fossil fuels. Until we can produce everything else that we need from renewables, we are going to have to use some fossil fuel to generate hot heat—to generate the electricity that we need. We do not have any options; that really is the size of it. What we can do in any thermodynamic process is described by the laws of thermodynamics. I am not going to worry about them now, but I want to pick up on a point that Patrick Harvie first articulated and which I think others might need to address: do we know whether the process of carbon capture and storage is energy efficient? Is it capable of storing this waste without expending as much energy in the process? Although I have not seen the sums, the answer must be yes, because my chemical engineering colleagues and others will have done them. They can be done. It is perfectly straightforward: all the numbers will be known. What the laws of thermodynamics enable us to do is work out what is possible, because they are very good at telling us what is not possible. I am quite confident—even without seeing the numbers—that the process could be made to work. We need to be very careful. We have to remember that, in all these process, we do not get 100 per cent. An example of that is breathing. I am breathing in oxygen, which is about 20 per cent of the atmosphere, and breathing out carbon dioxide. I do not breathe out all the carbon dioxide that is in my blood—I cannot; a little bit of it has to stay for the next passage through. We have to be aware that any process of trying to get carbon dioxide out of flue gas will not achieve 100 per cent. It might achieve 90 or 95 per cent, but it will never achieve 100 per cent. People might just want to reflect that there is a difference between gas and coal. Forgive me for the schoolboy chemistry, but coal is roughly CH2, which means that when we burn it we get one molecule of carbon dioxide and one molecule of water, while natural gas is CH4, which means that when we burn it we get one molecule of carbon dioxide and two molecules of water. The carbon dioxide is thereby inevitably more dilute. That makes the point, which I think Stewart Stevenson made, that one thing that we have not done on a large scale is carbon capture with the flue gas from a gas plant, which is materially different, even if it also just involves carbon dioxide and water. That is one of the extremely good reasons why Peterhead should be the next opportunity that is taken. I want to pick up on a couple of other things that I know are going on. Comment has already been made about Scottish Carbon Capture and Storage and Professor Stuart Haszeldine. Some enormously important things need to be done when we are looking at any process. I never worked in the energy industry, but even detergents have their interesting bits and I know that it is only by building something at scale that we discover how it really works. Only by building it at scale can we make it cheaper. There are limits to what we can model. That is why it is hugely important that we recognise that we need large schemes. The first scheme is the most expensive. The second one might well be 25, 30 or conceivably even 50 per cent cheaper, just because we would have discovered how to do it first time round. Members should not underestimate the absolute urgent need to build the first one, recognising that it almost certainly needs to be subsidised because it will be nothing like as cost effective as it could be. Even when we get the first one built, there will still be a lot of work to do to improve and optimise it. Chemistry was perfectly straightforward when we had to write it down at school on bits of paper, but there are things that we learn only when we actually have molecules moving around through bits of equipment. We have to do that; otherwise we will not be able to develop the technology and turn it into an economic product. A huge number of things need to be done to work out the legal framework, the licensing framework and the environmental and economic frameworks. I am glad to report that, as others have mentioned, a lot of that work is being done in Scotland. We should be proud of it and we should continue to support it; I know that the Government will do so. We need to ensure that, somehow, that work is done in parallel with our ensuring that, somehow or other, a big plant is built in Scotland, so that we do the research and we gain the advantage of having done so. It would be an extremely good idea for such a scheme to come to Peterhead because fitting it on to a gas plant is one of the crucial steps for the planet.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what economic measures the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth can introduce to help improve towns. (S4O-02478)

What can our local communities do to access that fund ahead of subsequent reports? What help does the Government think the fund will be able to provide for the economies of our towns?

Energy Action Scotland started life 30 years ago as Scottish Neighbourhood Energy Action. It was set up as an independent agency with charitable status, and it is interesting that its aim at the time was to create jobs to make Scotland warmer. Perhaps that tells us something about the politics of the time. Now, I think, we would simply say that it was there to make Scotland warmer. After 30 years, Energy Action Scotland is still at it. It still provides advice on energy saving in households, but it also campaigns for a recognition of fuel poverty, which was always needed, seeks funds for demonstration projects, provides training—a useful and important function—and provides research and consultancy. I welcome staff and members of the board to the chamber. It would be invidious to run through them by name, but I notice that the irrepressible Norrie Kerr is here. He has drawn together a team of people who work incredibly hard. The board—of which I am, I think, theoretically a member and Jackie Baillie is the other vice-president from the Parliament—is drawn from organisations that have an interest in this very subject. The board members provide considerable expertise and direction to what is going on. Fuel poverty is not one of those things that we need to just talk about. There are some definitions that I draw to members’ attention: the definition of fuel poverty is that a household needs to spend 10 per cent or more of its income on its fuel bills. That is quite arbitrary, but very workable. Where 20 per cent or more of a household’s income is required, it is described as being in extreme fuel poverty. That at least gives us comparative numbers. When we consider the people who find themselves in fuel poverty, it is no surprise to anybody to discover that those with a small income—the poor, put simply—are much more likely to be in fuel poverty. That means that they are more likely to be old and to live in old houses. Those old houses are likely to be both cold and damp; however, members may note that they are not necessarily small, because elderly folk have often inherited, or just carry on living in, older houses. The house may be large for their family, but that is where they remain. If we consider our energy inefficient buildings, there are some characteristics that are no surprise. Old buildings were built to different standards. One might argue that if one goes back far enough, there were no standards whatsoever. Energy inefficient buildings are more likely to be rented and to be rural; indeed 5 per cent of private rented dwellings fail even to reach the tolerable standard. These 14,000 homes account for 20 per cent of the total below tolerable standard housing stock. Tolerable standard means a property that is essentially condemned. It is below the standard that the Scottish Government regards as acceptable. One other characteristic that is significant in the context of what Energy Action Scotland tries to do is that 71 per cent of dwellings in an urban setting have a good energy rating but only 32 per cent of those in rural areas do. We find more of these dwellings in places where it is difficult to deal with them. I shall return to that subject. I note in passing that those who live in rural communities are more likely to be off gas and therefore to spend more on heat. There is a problem with energy performance certificates, because they indicate how much heat the property will lose but they use the heat that it will lose under normal circumstances as a surrogate for what that cost will be. If the property is in a rural place, where people’s money is spent on oil rather than on gas, their heating costs are proportionately greater. What kind of solutions do folk have? Insulation is an obvious one; I think that people know their way around insulation. Can we provide a better boiler? We need to be careful, because provided that the heat stays in the building it does not matter quite what kind of boiler there is. The waste from the boiler is the waste that goes up the flue stack. As long as the flue is as cold as it sensibly can be, and whatever possible is done to condense water vapour, any boiler is as efficient as any other, if those numbers are the same. However, the Scottish housing condition survey 2011 tells me that although some £2 billion was spent in the three years between 2009 and 2011 on 732,000 dwellings in private tenure, the average quality and condition of those houses did not improve at all. That demonstrates that we have to spend quite a lot of money just to stand still. There are many other issues that I could address—I am sure that other members will do that—but in the last moments I would like to consider how we are trying to deal with the real problems and whether we perhaps need to be a little more radical. The major difficulty that we have in addressing poorly insulated, thermally working houses is that we deal with them one at a time in the rural context. That is extraordinarily inefficient—not in thermal terms, but in terms of getting somebody there to look at the house and assess what needs to be done; and then getting one person to do one job and somebody else to come and do something else. As a piece of engineering, that is incredibly inefficient. It is altogether very likely that Government money needs to be spent in a slightly different direction. Given that that process is so inefficient in organisational terms, I wonder whether we need to insist that Government money or public money is spent one terrace, one road or one town at a time, or—at the very least—one stairwell at a time. In that way, we get the efficiencies of having staff, thinkers and engineers there, doing one job in a substantial number of properties, rather than diverting their efforts over a huge number of different places, which they will inevitably deal with very inefficiently. I am sure that other members, too, might wish to discuss those things. Time prevents me from carrying on with the many other issues that we might comment on. Once again, I welcome the members of EAS staff who have come to the public gallery. I am sure that my colleague Jackie Baillie will wish to say something about the reception that will follow the debate. In finishing—which I am sure the Presiding Officer wants me to do—I note that the problem has not gone away. I am sure that, 30 years ago, everybody hoped that we would have cracked the problem in 30 years’ time. It is fair to say that, technically, we probably have. As for how we actually deal with the issue, there is a very long way yet to go.

I will start by looking at the Scottish Government’s objectives in the CAP process. As the cabinet secretary has already alluded to, those are to continue to support active and productive agriculture so that we can continue to produce food, which I think we would all sign up for, and to meet our environmental obligations, which I think we would also regard as the absolute minimum. The more we can do to improve our environment, surely the better things will be for all of us who live here and, in particular, for those who live in rural environments and those involved in tourism and the other industries that depend on it. As the cabinet secretary has already alluded to, the negotiating stance has been to get flexibility, so that Scotland can provide a fairer distribution of the money that comes here, to end slipper farming, to allow new entrants to get money earlier and, as far as possible, to protect coupled support for livestock, for the reasons already given. What would also have been nice would have been to negotiate a fair share of the European pot for Scotland. I want to tackle this head on, hopefully in terms that will not raise too many hackles. Early in the debate, Alex Fergusson rightly pointed out that we really should be talking about what we can do with flexibility and how we can use it wisely. I have no doubt that the cabinet secretary and his staff will endeavour to do so and I have no doubt that the consultation that they will be going through will enable them to get the view of those who are involved and that they will implement things as best they can. What I would like to reflect on is the process that we have just been through and on what might have been slightly different. Of course the distribution of what we now have matters, but so does the total. The total amount of money that comes into the Scottish economy is, one way or another, money in the Scottish economy. Let me go back to the political environment in which we are operating. As a region of the UK we have six MEPs. Were we an independent member state, such as Denmark, which is of comparable size, we might have 13 MEPs. Does that matter? Yes it does, because they would be on committees and they would be able to talk to people; they would actually exercise some influence, as MEPs do. We would be in a better place. As members are very well aware, we would of course have a seat at the council table and we would periodically have the opportunity to have the presidency, which means that we would be setting the agenda. It seems to me that that is very important. Let me compare that with the United Kingdom’s stated objectives. When the Rt Hon Owen Paterson MP came to talk to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee he said, as well as the other things that have already been quoted, that his objectives were “to grow the rural economy and to improve the environment”. That is exactly the same kind of idea that the Scottish Government has. We do not fall out at that point. As Graeme Dey and perhaps others have said, Owen Paterson is not so keen on pillar 1 direct payments. On pillar 2 payments, Owen Paterson said: “I am an enthusiast for the benefits that our pillar 2 schemes bring. I think that we can look the British taxpayer in the eye and say that we are bringing them environmental benefits that would not normally be provided through a market mechanism and which have real value.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 12 June 2013; c 2639 and 2386.] All of us—Tory or otherwise—can say aye to that. Even in Owen Paterson’s economy, pillar 2 payments have a clear benefit. There is a clear benefit from money going into the rural economy. Given that, why did Owen Paterson not join 16 other countries in getting an uplift of the pillar 2 payment? I do not know. In paragraph 72 of EUCO 37/13, which was produced in Brussels on 8 February, I find big nations among the 16 countries—the cabinet secretary referred to some of them and I will not name them all, although that is tempting. I find France negotiating €1 billion, Italy €1.5 billion and Spain €500 million. There is certainly no difficulty in being a big country when negotiating, but the UK appears not to have thought that it was a good idea to bring more money into the UK, never mind Scotland. That is astonishing. To echo Angus MacDonald, all I can say is that if that is the UK’s approach, the faster we are independent, the better. The point has been made that, as a member state, Scotland would—like any other member state—get an uplift to €196 per hectare in direct payments by 2020. We have heard that that would be worth about £1 billion over the period between 2015 and 2020. If we assume that my mathematics is half decent, that would be about £140 million per year. I leave members with a statistic. Current figures suggest that about 68,000 people work in the Scottish agricultural sector—that is not the number of farms but the number of people. If I round that up to 70,000, and if the other figure is rounded to £140 million, elementary arithmetic tells me that that would be worth £2,000 for every person in the industry in Scotland every year. We do not seem to have got that money, but we should have had it. Claire Baker and Jayne Baxter talked about uncertainties in relation to the European Union. I make the point to them that they and I are European citizens. That European citizenship will not go away because of constitutional change in the UK. It is clear that negotiation will have to go on, but we will not be new entrants to the European Union. That is a complete myth and the sooner people stop peddling it, the better.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what it considers the benefits are of the performance of Scottish universities in recent polls for students domiciled in Scotland. (S4O-02444)

One consequence of the high standing of Scottish universities is that they attract the best foreign students. The recent “Richer for it” report commented on the number of international students who come here. The Scottish Council for Development and Industry recently warned that its biggest concern for the future of research in Scotland is the United Kingdom Government’s visa policy. Does the cabinet secretary share my concerns about that?

Graeme Dey and I have already been trying to get this wonderful creation to Angus. I am slightly concerned to hear the cabinet secretary suggest that it might be broken up and that various bits of it will be in different places. Is there any prospect that we can get the whole of it to the Reid hall in Forfar?

I want to get from aircraft carriers without aircraft to the short walk from my house that takes me to the home of a couple of constituents. Their house is old and cold, and for reasons that really do not matter they are unable to work and are on benefits. There are many such people, and they are in every constituency and region that we represent. Why are they cold? The Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government have tried to address energy poverty. There are three elements to energy poverty that I want to analyse. Members will not be surprised when I conclude that if we leave ourselves in the hands of Westminster we will be cold for a while. Whether a house is cold or can be decently heated depends on how it is built and its energy efficiency. It also depends on where it is. Members will have noticed that Scotland is generally rather colder than the rest of the United Kingdom and we need slightly different policies up here, just because the numbers are different. This Parliament can address energy efficiency, but we need a bit of help from Westminster. The green deal will eventually turn up, although it is certainly slow in coming and I fear that it will be ineffective. However, we have no control over price and very little control over income. Price is entirely reserved to Westminster. If someone happens to be off gas, as much of Scotland is, they must pay over the top. All our tariffs are regressive, with a fixed charge followed by the marginal. Someone who has a prepayment meter is in the worst possible position, because they have the worst possible charging rate. If family income is higher, the family is better placed to pay for the energy that it wants to use. However, as the First Minister and his ministerial colleagues never tire of telling us, most economic levers are reserved to Westminster. Other family income comes from welfare benefits. I am grateful to the Poverty Alliance, which notes that there has been no assessment of the impact of welfare reform on fuel poverty. The UK Government has said that a review will be carried out in 2015. It is clear that the combined impact of benefit reductions and changes will increase the number of people living on low incomes. However, how that translates to fuel poverty has not even been modelled. Are we in good hands, if we are in Westminster’s hands? At the moment the answer is no. Given that we live in a fuel-rich country—I do not need to quote the numbers—albeit that it is a cold country, we would surely be in a much better place if we looked after the matter ourselves. I am grateful to Ken Macintosh for his powerful story about letting the child flourish. Can we please let the country flourish, too? If we could control our own taxation and welfare systems, we could look after the folk down the road who live in the cold house. Mr Findlay said that he wants an effective taxation system—I think that he also meant that he wants an effective welfare system. I want those too, and history tells me that we will have to do it ourselves. It does not work if we leave matters elsewhere. What if the good folk down the road decide to do something about those conditions and try to get some work done on their house? There may be schemes to pay for it, but let us not worry about that for the moment. Let us consider the folk whom they might get in to do the work for them. Members may not realise that consumer protection is reserved to Westminster. We are responsible for consumer education, but everything to do with consumer protection and the law around it is reserved to Westminster, and despite the best efforts of our trading standards officers, who are members of local authority staff, the system does not work particularly well. The schemes that are designed to protect people and pick out the good tradesmen—TrustMark is one—do not work as well as they should and are not terribly well supported in Scotland. We have an alternative called the Construction Licensing Executive. I happen to be a director of it, but I derive no benefit from that. My point is that there are Scottish solutions to those problems. Every trading standards officer in the country would say that it would be much better if their area was one for us to worry about in Scotland and if we could deal with the issues ourselves for the benefit of the Scottish people. The Scottish Government’s paper “Consumer Protection and Representation in an Independent Scotland: Options” speaks of payday loans, delivery charges and nuisance calling—the kind of things that we want sorted and which we will have to sort ourselves because if we leave it to the UK Government that will not happen. My parting thought is that the Post Office will be privatised by the time that we get the opportunity to rectify the problems, so that any future Government will have to work out what we can do about delivery charges and postal services in the independent Scotland that I am sure the Scottish people will vote for because it is firmly in our interests to do so.

I am enormously grateful to Jackie Baillie for taking an intervention. I point out that some of us are quite good at hiding our disabilities. I have not yet learned to lip-read, but I might need to some day. A lot of people are dealing with becoming deaf.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to expand the network of cycle paths. (S4O-02373)

I welcome the extra funding that was announced yesterday. The minister will be well aware that there are notable old railway lines running from Montrose south towards Arbroath and north towards Inverbervie. There seems to be an excellent opportunity for family recreation routes accessible by railway. Is that something that the Government might be able to support? Might he be able to support access to European funding for that, if it were available.

I am grateful to Linda Fabiani for a comment that I was not expecting: her reference to the lady who said that in a house, people have to stand up to look out of the windows. That took me by surprise as much as it surprised anyone else, and what followed that comment was right. We do not have to understand; we just have to solve the problems. It might be that a lot of what the Government will try to do will involve trying to get the settled community—the vast majority of us—to understand Travellers when there is some inability to understand. Travellers are just different and we have to respect that difference, even if we do not understand it. It might be an important lesson for us to see that we do not necessarily have to understand everything to work through it. That does, however, bring me to the other point that colleagues have made all the way through the debate. We have instinctive prejudices in our attitudes as a society, and they are in all of us. We have our way of doing things and if someone else does it another way, we instinctively say, “Hang on. That’s not the way I’d do it. I’m not sure that I want you next door.” The crucial point that we all seem to understand is that it all comes down to accommodation. If Travellers do not have decent accommodation, we cannot solve their education and healthcare problems. It is just not going to happen. I suggest, therefore, that accommodation has turned out to be the centre of the issue. I have a site in my constituency in north Angus. I checked up on it this morning, and it seems to be very well run. It is more or less permanently full, and is quite close to a town, and I am delighted to say that it does not appear to give any particular problems. The children are integrated into the local school and are dealt with accordingly. Plainly, as a society, we can deal with that. However, we need to address the particular situation—which will often be the norm—of people who want to be able to travel but nonetheless need somewhere where they can stay for most of the time and fit in broadly with the society around them, even if they keep themselves as a separate group, as most of us do anyway. The problem that we face in getting more of those sites, and particularly in getting transit sites—or halting sites, as I think they have been described today—is that, as councillors, we do not want to make that happen. I am not the only ex-councillor in the chamber right now, and there are hundreds of councillors throughout the country. If I may state the blindingly obvious again, a local authority councillor does not really want to be championing a site of any kind that will be seen as a bad neighbour in their area. That is not the case only with people—it might concern an incinerator, for example; I make the comparison only in planning terms. If councillors know that their constituents are naturally prejudiced against what they are proposing, it is very difficult for them to suggest that it will be a good idea in their community. I do not much enjoy stating the obvious, but I must say to the minister, who is in front of me right now, that she has an incredibly difficult job in that regard. We know that local councillors are the people whose job it is to solve the problem of accommodation, but they do not really want to do so because it will very rarely be seen as being in their interests. Solving the problem will require skills that are well beyond those that are needed for running the Commonwealth games. Running the Commonwealth games will be seen as an absolute walk in the park—

I do not think that it matters what the half of it is. The point is that, when we are dealing with natural human prejudices, it is incredibly difficult to get councillors to do what they need to do. The Government must work with councils to make them put sites in place—not just with stick-and-carrot stuff—because without those sites we are going nowhere. Once that problem is solved, there will be a way forward. I will pick up briefly on a couple of Murdo Fraser’s points. I recognise entirely the plight of the private landowner from my experience in Stonehaven, although I do not think the person involved in that case would want us to rehearse it on the record. However, although Gypsy Travellers might drop litter, I have only to walk half a mile from my home in Brechin—as I do frequently—to find the verges along the roads in and out of the centre strewn with litter that is thrown out of car windows by people leaving my city. Those are not Travellers, but people who happen to drive cars, who have litter and who throw it out of the window. We need to be extremely careful to acknowledge that although there are occasions on which we can blame littering on people who have been on an illegal site, littering is something that we as a society, generally speaking, seem to be able to do. We need to be careful not to point the finger at others when a large number of us seem to be responsible for that type of behaviour.

Presiding Officer, Da Vinci’s challenge we are told is clearly for the bright and bold; Not only must you read a map, you’ll need to be a thinking chap. Can the Cab Sec let me know which way he thinks the thing will go? Are we all in time to find our schools thus test each eager mind?

I begin, as my colleague Graeme Dey has done previously, by picking up on what Derek Flyn, from the Scottish Crofting Federation, told the committee. Derek Flyn started by saying: “The point is that owner-occupiers are not entitled to occupy their crofts”.—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 15 May 2013; c 2191-2.] I deliberately foreshorten his quotation, partly because of time and partly because it demonstrates to anyone who has come to the debate rather late and is reading the Official Report just how complicated the whole subject is. How can Derek Flyn’s statement conceivably be right? I think that I now understand why it is true, but I am not sure that I would want to explain it to anybody else. As I sat on the committee, Sir Crispin Agnew came along and immediately criticised this, that and the other. We received comments from Brian Inkster, which have been referred to already, including some received this weekend. What is abundantly clear to us—I happily put this on the record—is that even the experts cannot agree. I do not hold that against them; it simply tells me that this is an enormously complex area of law. We need to recognise that. Am I sure that we are doing absolutely the right thing this afternoon? No, I am not. However, I am sure that I have confidence that the Government is doing its level best to get the right answer. On that basis, I will be very happy to support the bill this afternoon. I want to reflect briefly on the timetable to which we have been working. We know that this is not a normal legislative timetable; the procedure has been expedited. The alternative would have been an emergency procedure. Many of us went through that procedure in the previous session. On that occasion, there was no time to lose. We had received a Supreme Court decision about criminal procedure and, quite frankly, we had to fix things more or less overnight if we were to be sure that our policemen could continue to arrest people and lock them up. With the benefit of seeing the evidence that has come before us over the past few weeks, it is now entirely clear to me that that would have been the wrong procedure. I confirm on the basis of the evidence that we have had that this expedited procedure seems to have been the right way to proceed. I say well done to those who made that decision. I offer our genuine thanks to all those experts who wrote to us and came and spoke to us, no doubt at fairly short notice and at some inconvenience. We really could not have done without that evidence, and it was very much appreciated—even if we did not understand everything that they said. Is this the end of the road in the debate about crofting law? Plainly not—I am only repeating what others have already said. I am very grateful that the minister has just said that we will have time to take stock—I am sure that that is the right answer. I am also grateful to Tavish Scott for his comments about what we should be talking about, which is the agriculture, the people and the communities. That is what the debate should really be about; it is what land law should always be about. The fact that we have to worry about the minutiae of how bits of legislation fit together merely confirms the complex position into which we have got ourselves—it is one from which it would be nice to extricate ourselves. I have only one other thought at this stage of proceedings, which is to note that we have retrospective application of the bill. That is something that we should always be very careful about. Generally, we should know what the law is going to be in advance, and we should not fiddle with it afterwards. We know fine well why we are doing so on this occasion. I repeat my hope that we have got it right, and that the bill provides some certainty for those who have been inconvenienced over the past months. Let us hope that that is what the bill will achieve.

When today’s debate came up, I thought that I had finally made it in Parliament. Having been a chemical engineer in a previous existence, I thought, “Hydro electricity—what could be more up my street?” Of course, I then realised that folk would talk about history, economics and feed-in tariffs, all of which have nothing to do with the laws of thermodynamics. I will not go much into the laws of thermodynamics—do not worry—but it occurs to me that there are a few structural and systematic issues that we ought to address. One issue is that, unlike in the days when Mary Scanlon’s monks disrupted the power supply with their organ playing, we now have a very large grid system. I suspect that there is continuous copper from here to pretty much everywhere bar New Zealand and Australia, although I stand to be corrected on that. There will be some switches in-between and some relatively small connections that rather mess the system, but one reason why the organ does not dim the lights now is that there is such huge capacitance that the load can change quite considerably and everything will keep working. In the future, we want to be able to ensure that that electromotive force is available with the minimum release of carbon dioxide. That is what greening the economy is all about. We want to maximise power security and we want to minimise the capital cost in making capacity available. To pick up on Stuart McMillan’s earlier point, fuel prices depend on how we choose to cut the cake. The best job for minimising fuel poverty is to have the power available at the cheapest price—or, rather, at the lowest cost. If the cost is as low as it can be, we have the best opportunity to eliminate fuel poverty. Renewable sources of energy cause us a problem because many of them are not continuous and, as others have said, storage is a difficulty. Wave power comes and goes, although a totally still day is pretty unlikely. Tidal power, which is potentially quite significant, is by definition cyclical and provides maximum power over a relatively short period. Wind power, as we all know fine well, is variable and can be absolutely magnificent one day but simply not be there the following day. Storage remains a conundrum. I suspect that batteries—this is what the industry is telling us—will be significant in the longer term. When our cars are all powered by batteries, they will be recharged when they are in the garage or on the forecourt. In addition, they will be recharged when the electricity is available and not just overnight. That will build a huge capacity as well as a bit of capacitance. Liquefied air, as I suspect has already been mentioned, is a way of storing electricity that involves the air being expanded through a turbine. The technology works but is nonetheless exceedingly expensive. Thermodynamically, liquefied air will not be terribly efficient so, although it may have its place, I suggest that it will never become a major way of storing electricity. National Grid tells us that much of the capacity within the system will be built by demand management. In future, for example, our washing machines will switch themselves on when there is electricity available. I will just load the machine and press the on button and, to ensure that electricity is used when it is available, the grid will decide when in the next 12 hours the machine will work. That will surely be a significant development. Hydro pump storage, as members have already mentioned, is an important part of what can be done. The technology is very efficient but is at its best when the pump storage is situated close to the intermittent generators, because that minimises the amount of copper that is required between the intermittent generator and the pump storage.

Indeed. If the member will forgive me, I do not want to explore that area this afternoon, as that would take us off the subject and there are other issues that I want to address. However, he makes an absolutely fair point that, if only the machines could talk to each other, we could do a lot of things already. Small-scale hydro schemes, which are sometimes called micro schemes, have been mentioned by other members. An interesting point is that what we call micro in this context might well produce several hundred kilowatts, but that is considered micro in the context of power stations. It would be remiss of me not to mention the Glen Clova hotel in north Angus, which has recently installed a very small—in this context—water wheel that takes water from the diverted Brandy Burn. The water wheel generates 220kW, according to the name-plate, and it provides not free but relatively cheap and continuous electricity to that part of Glen Clova. That means, at the very least, that there needs to be less investment in the rest of the infrastructure to ensure a continuous supply. I echo comments made by Claire Baker and Mike MacKenzie about the need for SEPA to ensure that it applies appropriate rules. If those rules need to be changed, maybe the Government should reflect on changing the guidance on those rules so that such schemes can be installed—obviously with due consideration to the environment, but with no unnecessary delay or complication. One of the important issues that has not yet been stressed is that hydro power is effectively base load. It is continuous, not intermittent. As Malcolm Chisholm pointed out, if it really does not rain very much at all then we will run short of water and the total installed capacity and generation may drop, but hydro power is not an intermittent electricity generation system, so it is extraordinarily important as part of the system. The economics of hydro power also bear consideration. As members have already mentioned, we have been doing it for a long time—my grandfather was installing some of the hydro schemes between the wars, when he worked for Balfour Beattie—so the technology is very old, well understood and well costed, which means that any project can be pretty accurately costed. The uncertainties now arise not from the project costs, as happens in many other areas of life, but from the feed-in tariffs—from what the income will be as a result of the investment. That is different from many other large capital investments, so it is important for those who are thinking about hydro schemes that the feed-in tarifffs are well understood, are known in advance and can be depended upon. Allow me to reflect on the future of hydro power. Independence or no, let us be absolutely clear that it will continue to rain in Scotland. Independence or no, let us be absolutely clear that there will be continuous copper wire from here to the ends of the earth. Actually, it is a classic case of interdependence. It is important that we in Scotland are able to make the appropriate decisions, and it is appropriate that the rest of the world makes its decisions, but electricity is not going to stop at Hadrian’s wall, and we have an awful lot of rainfall, which we should be turning into electricity for future generations.

Could Mr McGrigor remind me which party Winston Churchill was a member of at that time?

I hesitate to disagree, but I ask the member to recognise that there is a difference between intermittency, which is the coming and going of an energy source over hours or days, and variability over weeks and months, which undoubtedly applies to hydro. I respectfully suggest that that is a different problem from the intermittency that comes with tidal, wave and wind power.

Given that I am speaking 15th this afternoon, I have to register that there may not be much new to say. However, I shall try to find something and I shall succeed, I assure members. That is not to gainsay all the things that have been said before. I am entirely supportive of the documents and congratulate the Government and the minister on what they have achieved. Nevertheless, I will bring up perhaps half a dozen issues to which we should give some thought. I echo Sarah Boyack’s comments about combined heat and power, which I do not think that anybody else has picked up on. In Aberdeen, what is essentially an aircraft engine is attached to an alternator and the heat that is generated through that process warms the adjacent tower blocks. That is a standard bit of technology that has been around for my entire professional lifetime, but it is the kind of thing that we should be trying to put in areas of high-density housing. We know where they are, and I suggest to the minister that we must find ways of progressing that. I know that it is burning gas, but we will be burning quite a lot of gas for quite some time and it is an extraordinarily efficient way of generating electricity and using what would otherwise be waste heat to deliver low-grade heat into buildings. It is entirely the right way forward thermodynamically and I commend it to the Government. Rather nearer my constituency is the Aberdeen western peripheral route. I do not think that it has yet been pointed out in this debate that it has seemed to take for ever for that project to begin. I wonder whether the Government has given any thought to the timetabling of the work. I understand that it is going through the courts, but it is not entirely outwith the Parliament’s remit to consider how the courts deal with such things and whether, in the future, something like that should be allowed to take so long. I think that we need to address that, please. Becoming distinctly more parochial, I now focus on Montrose harbour, which appears in the documents. I ask members to register the thought that the throughput through Montrose harbour is less than 1 million tonnes a year. That appears to be a cut-off point for the map, but there is also a relevant cut-off point for the funding that the trans-European transport network generates. I have here a document from John Paterson of Montrose Port Authority, who explains that a threshold of 1.5 million tonnes of cargo applies to European funding. That appears to be a completely arbitrary level, but it means that a relatively small but quite substantial port such as Montrose does not have access to European funding, which is really quite important in the context of its development. I wonder whether the Government might give that some thought as well, please. I reflect on my days as a councillor in Dundee and on Mike MacKenzie’s comments on planning resource. I do not wish to criticise Dundee City Council—we tried quite hard—but I am conscious that, because of a lack of resources, we sometimes struggled to do things at speed that our constituents wanted us to do. The minister said that more money has gone into this, but I think that we should be setting some serious targets and ensuring that they are met so that planning matters are progressed on time. Given the minister’s local government experience I am sure that he has that in mind, but I would like some reassurance that that will happen. The planning process should not hold anybody up unnecessarily. I would also like confirmation of something that I thought that I heard the minister say about sustainable economic development, which has been the subject of much discussion. It is fundamental that economic development is to be taken as a material consideration. However, I return to something that Stuart McMillan and others have pointed out: there needs to be community involvement in any planning application, because there are many communities around the country that feel that they have been told about economic development that will result in X hundred jobs, but by the time the process has finished, X hundred jobs have disappeared because some small part of the application has been forgotten about and the slightly more efficient bit has been left behind. We need to ensure that we play fair with communities in that process. A map of long-distance cycling and walking routes is in NPF3—it is map 11. In my constituency, much of the route is on main roads. We should be moving to a position in which it is possible to go for a cycling holiday around Scotland without having to go anywhere near a main road, although I recognise that some bits of the route will have to use minor roads, which, in some respects, can be just as dangerous to cyclists as main roads, because drivers do not expect to find them there. We need to have such a vision. I would like it to be possible to get off the train at Montrose—as I will do later tonight—get on the bike and cycle to Brechin, which is where I would like to stop, and then up Glen Esk into the Cairngorm national park. That ought to be perfectly possible. It would not cost a fortune to make that feasible. I commend that thought to the minister and the chamber. My final reflection is on town centres, of which there are five in my constituency. I think that I am not the only one who is noticing that shops are closing in towns—even ones that are not large—some of which will never reopen. That is simply because we now shop online and use supermarkets, which will deliver. I know that a fund is being worked on to ensure that such premises can be brought back into residential use. I am sure that that is a good thing, but we need to work on it fairly quickly, because there are vacant premises that will not reopen as shops. I am sorry to end by making a few asks of the minister.

Tavish Scott makes the fair point that the issue does not affect a huge number of people in Scotland. However, I am sure he would agree that the real issue is the land. One cannot get rid of land, and it does not go away. It is where people live and put their feet. The law of the land is fundamental to the people who live there.

I start by heeding the comments of the Minister for Environment and Climate Change, who would like us to focus on the bill. I will do that, but I will go back to a subject that I mentioned briefly when the committee interrogated officials before we spoke to the minister. I am extremely concerned that we get the transition and the transitory provisions right. They have come back to bite us before—not in crofting law, but in other areas. I refer the minister to IO and LO v Aberdeen City Council—a family law case in which the policy behind the act involved assumed that the transition from the previous situation to what was intended would take place within a specific period. Unfortunately, it did not guarantee that that would be the case, and it became convenient for some lawyers to drag out their cases, so we finished up in a position where the law was in a complete mess, because it had been assumed as a matter of policy that the transition would be completed. I am sure that the minister’s officials are well aware of that, as is the minister, but sections 4(2)(c) and 4(4)(b)—and section 5, which is a transitory provision—contain dates. I am sure that they have been carefully thought about, but I encourage the minister and his officials to reflect on whether the things that those sections are intended to cover are absolutely guaranteed to fall within those dates. If they are not, the obvious implication is that we might have overspecified in the provisions, which would be extremely unfortunate. I shall now stop taking the minister’s advice to focus on the bill, because everything that can reasonably be said has been said. Alex Fergusson got that absolutely right some considerable time ago, and I have no desire to repeat what has been said, other than to say that the Government has done precisely the right thing by dealing with the issue as promptly as it has. I will elaborate slightly on the concerns that have been expressed—some of them by people who know a lot more about crofting law than I ever will—about the position in which we find ourselves, and I will comment on how we might deal with it. However, I will start by going back. Nobody has mentioned the Shucksmith report yet, but I will. It is probably a good thing that Michael Russell is not present, because his hair might go even whiter very quickly. Beside paragraph 2.1.5 on page 15 of that report, at the side of the page, an unattributed quotation says: “all croft land is a bequest to us from the past and it is our duty to pass it on to the future generation and not over exploit our inheritance for short term gain”. So say all of us, I suspect. I do not hear anybody concerned with land reform—we had a considerable debate on that yesterday, of course—saying that we should somehow get rid of crofting. That is not part of anybody’s agenda. Back on page 8, another unattributed quotation in the margins says: “There is a desperate need for the regulations surrounding crofting to be modified and hopefully simplified which would encourage the advancement of crofting.” Again, it is probably a case of so say all of us. I will quote fairly extensively from the foreword to the Government’s response to that report. It said: “In reforming crofting, we need to focus on what crofting can contribute to the development of a successful rural Scotland. We have to recognise that circumstances in the 21st century are quite different from the circumstances in the 19th century when the first Crofters Act was brought into force. The first Crofters Act was introduced to give tenant rights over the land they occupied to enable them to stay in their communities”— I think that we are with the script all the way through this. “Agriculture was a dominant feature of crofting but as we have moved into a more competitive, global market, crofting agriculture has declined and crofts have been put to wider uses.” I note Dave Thompson’s comments that we might get back to more agricultural uses if the appropriate facilities existed. “Today crofters exercise control over much of the land in their communities and trade their crofts and croft tenancies on the open market as demand for housing increases.” We all recognise that housing is needed. It is not possible to populate an area if appropriate houses are not available. “The consequence of these trends is that traditional crofting practices are in decline and more and more land is being taken out of crofting tenure as crofters exercise their right to buy and realise the value of these assets in the open market.”

Rhoda Grant makes an interesting and enormously complicated point in an already enormously complex area. I cannot disagree with her that, if we are going to stick with crofting—I am not suggesting for a moment that we should not—we must think about how the land law and the economics work. I will continue the quotation: “Crofting is now at a crossroads and we need to decide which direction to take in order to secure the future of crofting. Bringing new blood into crofting communities and releasing their energies to help secure sustainable economic growth will be key.” That is crucial to any proposals that we make to revise crofting land law because, in exactly the same way as in yesterday’s general land reform discussion, it comes down to the economy at the end of the day. The land is merely where somebody plants themselves and digs a hole in the ground. It will ultimately come down to the economic use of land, and we must not lose sight of that. I note that, in the overview that followed the foreword, the Government set out five principles, which were “Maintaining and increasing the amount of land held in crofting tenure ... Ensuring that land in crofting tenure is put to productive use ... Ensuring that housing in the crofting counties makes a full contribution to the local economy ... Giving more power to local people to determine their own futures ... Assisting young people and new entrants into crofting.” I suggest that that summarises in five lines the direction in which we will have to try to go. I will pick up one other thought, which is at the back of the Government’s response to the Shucksmith report. I do not think that this is a party-political issue. Recommendation 3.15.1 of the report said: “We believe new legislation is needed to replace, simplify and clarify the accumulated laws which set the framework for crofting today.” The response was: “The Scottish Government is sympathetic to the aims of this recommendation. However, in view of the complexity of crofting law, the process of simplification would, if properly undertaken, significantly delay the implementation of these policy proposals.” Therefore, the Government’s view was—these are my words, rather than a quote—“We’re going to do this little bit now and we’ll worry about the rest of it some other time.” We are still in that position. The point is that we will always be in that position unless the minister is prepared to take on what would be described in the jargon as the heroic task of trying to sort the whole thing out. I am grateful to other members for pointing out that there is a difference between consolidation and codification. It is important that we get our minds around that. Fundamentally, consolidation involves putting the words that we already have in the right order on one piece of paper. That might help. I suspect that, largely, that is done by those who produce such things commercially and make them available. I am absolutely sure that what we need is codification. I note that Rhoda Grant suggested that we should repeal the 2010 act and go from there. I seriously suggest that we should repeal all the crofting legislation and rewrite it from the policy upwards—ensuring, of course, that we have transitional arrangements that ensure that everything still works. Unless we can work out what the policy is meant to be, I suspect that we will just add another layer. Somewhere in the documents—in recommendation 3.15.2 of the Shucksmith report, in fact—it is stated that “No change should be made to those rights given to individual crofters in the 1886 Crofters Act”, so we have been at it for a while. That has probably all been repealed, but it makes the point that we are dealing with fabulously old stuff. [Interruption.] I missed that—I apologise.

I commend a couple of other thoughts to the Parliament. My colleague Angus MacDonald pointed out that there is different policy in different areas. That is why we need to go back to the policy before we write the law; the law will reflect the policy. Someone—forgive me, but I have forgotten who—made a point about things having to be sorted out in the Court of Session. That must be madness. If a decision has to be taken in the Court of Session, we have failed. We must write the law and not expect the Court of Session to sort it out for us.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government on repatriating red meat levy income. (S4O-02211)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his response, although not for its content. Scotland can rightly claim to have the best red meat production in the world. However, the short-changing of this country by the UK Government plainly reduces the marketing opportunities for the final product. Does the cabinet secretary see any short-term resolution of this impasse?

I welcome what the Scottish Government has been able to achieve. I will be very parochial in this debate because quite a lot has been achieved in my constituency. I welcome the Government’s continuing investment in stations—I highlight the three at Stonehaven, Laurencekirk and Montrose—and I welcome the fact that we now have more train services and more stops. I also note that most of my constituents who travel by train go to one of our big cities—Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh or Glasgow—whereas relatively few journey between the other towns. As Stewart Stevenson noted—he was the first to do so, although others have continued the discussion—there are different stopping patterns. I think that we can see that. On my route from Stonehaven or Aberdeen down to Edinburgh, I see two different kinds of train: one stops frequently and the other is essentially a fast train. Without going into all the details, I think that we now have the balance in the timetable about right. We have some fast trains and we have some trains that pick up or drop off passengers at a large number of stops, particularly as they approach their destination first thing in the morning or last thing at night. One change that no one has yet mentioned is ScotRail’s introduction of rules on the consumption of alcohol. I discussed that issue with ScotRail many years ago, and I did not think that anything would happen, but it has. That change has been appreciated. The improvements at Stonehaven are significant. We already have automatic doors and a variable-height ticket counter, and new customer information screens are on their way. I agree with Dennis Robertson that Stonehaven would be a good park-and-ride location for Aberdeen; the trouble is that there is not enough parking space. If the minister had a magic wand and could generate more parking space, that would be wonderful. Such a facility would reduce the number of cars on the A90, which would be good for everybody. Moving down the line to Laurencekirk, we have a new station, which opened in May 2009. I pay tribute to those who campaigned for it before I was elected. It has completely overwhelmed expectations: they were talking originally about 30,000 passengers a year, but in 2010-11 there were 73,000 and a bit. The station has given the town a huge boost, and prospective developers have written it into their plans as it is obviously an enormous advantage. Further down the line at Montrose, there is a new footbridge, along with the lifts that mean that there is now disabled access to the north-bound platform. That is long overdue and very welcome. I note—as I used to live there—that the view at Montrose is far better than Jenny Marra’s view over the Tay at Dundee. If members come and use the lift at Montrose station, they can look out over Montrose basin. It is a fabulous view and far better than anything on the Tay, to be honest. If members look the other way—although I would not—they would see a 5kW wind turbine. Montrose is apparently the first station in the network that has its own power generator, which is remarkable and perhaps an indication of things to come. Margaret McCulloch mentioned tourism, which is really important. At places such as Montrose, people can get off the train with their bike and cycle off into the Mearns and north Angus. That is something that we must develop. The moment that someone heads south from Montrose they hit a bridge—well, they go over a bridge—that is single track, and go through the Usan section. We are well aware that that short stretch represents a significant timetabling constraint, and it would be good to do something about it. I understand that there are moves to see whether something can be done about it in control period 6, which starts in 2019. I suggest to the minister that some signalling work might be helpful even now. I am sure that such things are being worked on. I recognise the Government’s work on fairer fares. Although that work has not been finished, it has made a significant difference to folk in my constituency. There was a huge amount of public frustration in that regard. I do not know quite how people feel about 40p between this and that—perhaps most people feel that it is not an unreasonable amount—but significant sums were involved in splitting the journey from Montrose to Glasgow into three tickets. That is now a thing of the past, which is very welcome. Finally, I will pick up on an issue that concerns the wider system. We are still in a position, as I have picked up from my local constituency base, in which trains and buses do not connect.

Someone cannot get a bus from Brechin—which is all of 10 miles inland from Montrose—that will get them into Aberdeen before a quarter to 9. It is simply not possible for a person to commute by bus and train from Brechin unless they have a 9 o’clock start in the middle of Aberdeen. That needs to be addressed. I have said so on paper to everybody concerned, but I still have not got a result—I suppose that I could be blamed for that. I would like to change such anomalies in my constituency, and I suspect that one or two other members would like to change similar anomalies in their constituencies, too. Over time, we need to do some work on such issues.

I welcome the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s report. As that committee recognised, the Scottish Law Commission has an important role in recommending reforms to update the law in Scotland. It is important that those reforms are not lost and that Parliament has the opportunity to translate them into law. The committee also recognised, as did the law reform working group, which informed its work, that a number of factors impede the consideration of Scottish Law Commission-inspired bills, most notably the availability of committee time to consider them. The Subordinate Legislation Committee has a busy work programme in dealing with secondary legislation, delegated powers provisions in primary legislation, legislative consent memoranda and Public Bodies Act 2011 consent motions. However, we recognise that there is some scope in our current work programme to consider bills that have been inspired by Scottish Law Commission reports, on the assumption that there will be no more than a few bills in any session. In order to enable the Subordinate Legislation Committee to consider such bills, the report proposes a change in the committee’s remit specifically to enable it to consider certain Scottish Law Commission bills, provided that they meet criteria to be determined by the Presiding Officer. The criteria proposed for the referral of Scottish Law Commission bills, as suggested by the law reform working group, are that only bills on which there is already a wide degree of consensus—I take the point that colleagues have already made in that regard; that do not relate directly to criminal law reform, which is absolute, I think; that do not have significant European convention on human rights implications, as far as we can see; and on which the Scottish Government is not planning any wider work, which we can ask about, would be suitable for referral to the Subordinate Legislation Committee. It is critical to the committee that any bills that are referred to it should be referred on the basis of a strict application of those criteria, as determined by the Presiding Officer, and that, as such, only a minority of Scottish Law Commission bills will be suitable for referral to us. Those criteria seem to be reasonable and appropriate. It is difficult to assess the impact that that approach will have on the implementation of Scottish Law Commission reports, but we have no doubt as a committee that it will effect an improvement. The Subordinate Legislation Committee performs a unique role in undertaking technical scrutiny of delegated powers provisions and instruments, and as a committee, we would not want to see that role compromised. Extending the nature of the bills that the committee might consider beyond what the law reform working group envisaged could undermine that role, and the committee would not want to see that. I emphasise to members that we do not want to be a justice 2 committee or a justice 1A committee, and we do not want to encroach on policy committees’ remits. The proposed changes appear to strike the right balance between enabling Scottish Law Commission bills to be introduced and referred to the committee, and ensuring that the criteria are rigorously applied, thereby placing an appropriate restriction on what the committee might consider. Mindful of the change in remit, the Subordinate Legislation Committee agreed to seek a change in name, and accordingly proposed that its name be changed to the delegated powers and law reform committee. The committee considered that the proposed name more accurately reflects the range of its responsibilities under its amended remit. In addition, the name reflects more accurately what the committee has been doing to date, as it has considered delegated powers rather than just subordinate legislation since its inception. We welcome the report’s acceptance of the proposed name change. In welcoming the name change, I reiterate that the purpose of that change is merely to more accurately reflect the committee’s remit. It does not represent any aspiration on the part of the committee to widen its remit still further. Indeed, the committee is of the firm view that its remit should not be extended, and in particular that it should not be extended in any way that would mean its considering policy matters. The committee’s role is to undertake technical scrutiny of matters, and members of the committee do not want to see that change. I again welcome the report and look forward to having an opportunity as convener of the Subordinate Legislation Committee or the delegated powers and law reform committee to contribute to an improvement in the implementation rate of Scottish Law Commission reports.

I recognise that I am relatively far down the batting list, and as usual, I do not want to repeat too much of what has been said. I will take a parochial view, as constituency MSPs tend to do, and reflect on the fact that Aberdeen is just up the road. I recall taking up a techfest invitation from one of the oil companies a couple of years ago, and Richard Noble—he of the very high-speed Thrust car—was there. I suspect that Nanette Milne was there at the same time. I remember Mr Noble’s wonderful statement that he had a project that he wanted to do and they did not have any money, but they did it anyway. I do not know how it was finally paid for, but I presume that somebody paid for it somehow. The man’s huge enthusiasm for what he was trying to do came across to me, and it struck me that that is one of the primary requirements of a good teacher in any capacity—professional or otherwise. If a person is not enthusiastic about what they are trying to do, they are not likely to succeed. We have previously discussed teachers’ qualifications. I would not want to make any comments about the appropriate qualifications, but I know from my childhood and from watching what happened with my children that, if a teacher is not enthusiastic, it will not matter how well qualified they are, because that will not come through. We must be careful that we do not confuse the education of our teachers with their enthusiasm for the subject and what they can communicate to their children. To continue to think about what has happened in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire, I noticed that there was a national science and engineering week in March, which included all manner of workshops. There were workshops on aerodynamics, birds, forces and fire, digital technology, explosions and implosions—vacuums seem to get everywhere—fantastic fungi, and gunge chemistry, which I am sure that I would have enjoyed, and several other workshops. I noticed the one on 3D science, which I have seen and would recommend to anybody. It was at a University of Aberdeen open day. By putting on the appropriate specs, I got to see blood vessels in the brain in glorious 3D, which was mind boggling. The experience is fantastic, and that is a wonderful way to teach the 3D structures of the brain to those who need to know about such things. I have also seen the Institute of Physics lab in a lorry, and commend it. The pupils really enjoyed it, partly because it was hands on in a way that some of what happens in schools is not and reportedly because of the enthusiasm of the volunteers, who were not all teachers; they came from local industries. I am a great fan of the science centres. Satrosphere in Aberdeen was over my back wall for several years. I went in once, but the interesting part about it was seeing the exhibits being offloaded in the yard immediately underneath our living room window. Strange and funny things emerged and disappeared through the doors. I also recall the Sensation science centre in Dundee. This will prove that science is not for everybody. My daughter went there as a volunteer. She showed youngsters who were rather younger than her around at weekends and promptly went off to college to read law, so we cannot win with everybody. All that has to do with science, but what I really want to discuss is engineering. Our oil and gas industries and, indeed, a great number of our other industries, require not only people who understand science, but people who can do things with tools. I am therefore grateful to Mark Griffin for raising that matter. I am not at all convinced that, in our school system, we introduce our youngsters to tools early enough. I understand well that it would be extremely difficult for primary schools to have some of the sharp tools around that we might want youngsters to learn about; I also recognise that our secondary schools are much better placed to deal with that. However, to reflect on my upbringing, by the time that I was 10—possibly a year or two earlier—I had done carpentry in school. I made an artefact—it was a wooden boat—that, sadly, I no longer have, although I could have reproduced it if I had had a bit more warning. To make the boat’s hull, I needed to cut round a piece of timber. To get the shape of the hull, I used a plane, and I certainly used a coping saw to cut round it. I cut the dowelling to make the mast, and I used a hand drill to drill the hole for the mast. To put the keel in, I had to cut out another bit of three-ply, which required a coping saw and a rasp. I then sandpapered it all before gluing the boat together. An eight, nine or 10-year-old who has had the opportunity to do that—it was not especially difficult—maybe has some enthusiasm for making and doing things and gets the idea that tools are things to pick up and use. If people know how to use tools carefully, the sharp bits are where they are always sharp, so they just keep their hands out of the way. We probably cannot develop those skills in our children early enough.

I have great difficulty in regarding anything as compulsory, save perhaps teaching maths as far as it can be taken because people should be pushed on maths until they cannot cope with it any longer. The difficulty I have is that some people are made differently, and not everything is absolutely required for everybody. However, I would very much like us to teach more engineering. Gender has been mentioned, as has the fact that there are apparently no women yet in the list of the 10 most famous Scottish scientists. I make the same point about one of my alternative careers in music. If one looks at composers—this is nothing to do with genre—one finds that, historically, all famous composers are men. Why is that? Expectations. That is beginning to change because we have changed the expectations. It cannot be that men can write music and women cannot—that is just not true. Equally, if someone were to look in on our national orchestra, they would find exactly what would be found in schools—girls are much more likely to play the stringed and high woodwind instruments, such as the flute, and boys are much more likely to finish up playing the brass and percussion instruments. Obviously, there are exceptions but, as I say, one would not need to look any further than professional orchestras to see that that is still how it works to this day. I simply suggest to members that that is about expectation. Therefore, what we must do is change the expectation. That is not only about role models, but about how we teach and speak.

I am quite prepared to address that subject—I addressed it as a convener of the party that I represent in the city that I once represented—but I will pass on that for the moment, because it is a big can of worms that we perhaps need to address on other occasion. I have observed that we need enthusiastic teachers; that there are expectations; and that we cannot get people using tools too soon. I also make the point that science does not always just follow—it needs an opportunity and insight. To be utterly parochial, Robert Watson-Watt, the inventor of radar, who has born in my home city of Brechin, is much celebrated and will, shortly, I hope, get a statue. It seems to me that his invention of radar would have happened—yes, he thought about it—but the arrival of the second world war gave him an opportunity to develop it in a way that might not have happened quite so quickly without those particular circumstances around him. We need to understand that science is not just about having good ideas or understanding; it is about having an opportunity to put one’s insight to practical use at a point in time. I commend the thought that we need more good science on television. I still remember an absolutely fascinating programme about how the pyramids were built and how the artefacts inside could possibly have finished up where they were; it all revolved around the fact that absolutely dry sand behaves like a liquid, not like a solid. If the right flow pipes and the right valves are put in the right places and there is a little bit of pressure from on top, sand will flow like a liquid. I got that from TV.

I recognise that I am relatively far down the batting list, and as usual, I do not want to repeat too much of what has been said. I will take a parochial view, as constituency MSPs tend to do, and reflect on the fact that Aberdeen is just up the road. I recall taking up a techfest invitation from one of the oil companies a couple of years ago, and Richard Noble—he of the very high-speed Thrust car—was there. I suspect that Nanette Milne was there at the same time. I remember Mr Noble’s wonderful statement that he had a project that he wanted to do and they did not have any money, but they did it anyway. I do not know how it was finally paid for, but I presume that somebody paid for it somehow. The man’s huge enthusiasm for what he was trying to do came across to me, and it struck me that that is one of the primary requirements of a good teacher in any capacity—professional or otherwise. If a person is not enthusiastic about what they are trying to do, they are not likely to succeed. We have previously discussed teachers’ qualifications. I would not want to make any comments about the appropriate qualifications, but I know from my childhood and from watching what happened with my children that, if a teacher is not enthusiastic, it will not matter how well qualified they are, because that will not come through. We must be careful that we do not confuse the education of our teachers with their enthusiasm for the subject and what they can communicate to their children. To continue to think about what has happened in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire, I noticed that there was a national science and engineering week in March, which included all manner of workshops. There were workshops on aerodynamics, birds, forces and fire, digital technology, explosions and implosions—vacuums seem to get everywhere—fantastic fungi, and gunge chemistry, which I am sure that I would have enjoyed, and several other workshops. I noticed the one on 3D science, which I have seen and would recommend to anybody. It was at a University of Aberdeen open day. By putting on the appropriate specs, I got to see blood vessels in the brain in glorious 3D, which was mind boggling. The experience is fantastic, and that is a wonderful way to teach the 3D structures of the brain to those who need to know about such things. I have also seen the Institute of Physics lab in a lorry, and commend it. The pupils really enjoyed it, partly because it was hands on in a way that some of what happens in schools is not and reportedly because of the enthusiasm of the volunteers, who were not all teachers; they came from local industries. I am a great fan of the science centres. Satrosphere in Aberdeen was over my back wall for several years. I went in once, but the interesting part about it was seeing the exhibits being offloaded in the yard immediately underneath our living room window. Strange and funny things emerged and disappeared through the doors. I also recall the Sensation science centre in Dundee. This will prove that science is not for everybody. My daughter went there as a volunteer. She showed youngsters who were rather younger than her around at weekends and promptly went off to college to read law, so we cannot win with everybody. All that has to do with science, but what I really want to discuss is engineering. Our oil and gas industries and, indeed, a great number of our other industries, require not only people who understand science, but people who can do things with tools. I am therefore grateful to Mark Griffin for raising that matter. I am not at all convinced that, in our school system, we introduce our youngsters to tools early enough. I understand well that it would be extremely difficult for primary schools to have some of the sharp tools around that we might want youngsters to learn about; I also recognise that our secondary schools are much better placed to deal with that. However, to reflect on my upbringing, by the time that I was 10—possibly a year or two earlier—I had done carpentry in school. I made an artefact—it was a wooden boat—that, sadly, I no longer have, although I could have reproduced it if I had had a bit more warning. To make the boat’s hull, I needed to cut round a piece of timber. To get the shape of the hull, I used a plane, and I certainly used a coping saw to cut round it. I cut the dowelling to make the mast, and I used a hand drill to drill the hole for the mast. To put the keel in, I had to cut out another bit of three-ply, which required a coping saw and a rasp. I then sandpapered it all before gluing the boat together. An eight, nine or 10-year-old who has had the opportunity to do that—it was not especially difficult—maybe has some enthusiasm for making and doing things and gets the idea that tools are things to pick up and use. If people know how to use tools carefully, the sharp bits are where they are always sharp, so they just keep their hands out of the way. We probably cannot develop those skills in our children early enough.

I have great difficulty in regarding anything as compulsory, save perhaps teaching maths as far as it can be taken because people should be pushed on maths until they cannot cope with it any longer. The difficulty I have is that some people are made differently, and not everything is absolutely required for everybody. However, I would very much like us to teach more engineering. Gender has been mentioned, as has the fact that there are apparently no women yet in the list of the 10 most famous Scottish scientists. I make the same point about one of my alternative careers in music. If one looks at composers—this is nothing to do with genre—one finds that, historically, all famous composers are men. Why is that? Expectations. That is beginning to change because we have changed the expectations. It cannot be that men can write music and women cannot—that is just not true. Equally, if someone were to look in on our national orchestra, they would find exactly what would be found in schools—girls are much more likely to play the stringed and high woodwind instruments, such as the flute, and boys are much more likely to finish up playing the brass and percussion instruments. Obviously, there are exceptions but, as I say, one would not need to look any further than professional orchestras to see that that is still how it works to this day. I simply suggest to members that that is about expectation. Therefore, what we must do is change the expectation. That is not only about role models, but about how we teach and speak.

I am quite prepared to address that subject—I addressed it as a convener of the party that I represent in the city that I once represented—but I will pass on that for the moment, because it is a big can of worms that we perhaps need to address on other occasion. I have observed that we need enthusiastic teachers; that there are expectations; and that we cannot get people using tools too soon. I also make the point that science does not always just follow—it needs an opportunity and insight. To be utterly parochial, Robert Watson-Watt, the inventor of radar, who has born in my home city of Brechin, is much celebrated and will, shortly, I hope, get a statue. It seems to me that his invention of radar would have happened—yes, he thought about it—but the arrival of the second world war gave him an opportunity to develop it in a way that might not have happened quite so quickly without those particular circumstances around him. We need to understand that science is not just about having good ideas or understanding; it is about having an opportunity to put one’s insight to practical use at a point in time. I commend the thought that we need more good science on television. I still remember an absolutely fascinating programme about how the pyramids were built and how the artefacts inside could possibly have finished up where they were; it all revolved around the fact that absolutely dry sand behaves like a liquid, not like a solid. If the right flow pipes and the right valves are put in the right places and there is a little bit of pressure from on top, sand will flow like a liquid. I got that from TV.

I support Mr Hume, not only because of the need to contain fish—although that is the primary reason—but because training is essential in any industrial process. Otherwise, we invariably run into health and safety issues. Out on cold water—the committee has been there—one can readily see that the issues might be considerable. Therefore, it is extremely important that people should be trained on specific bits of equipment in those circumstances. I also recognise that retaining a record of the training is an important part of ensuring that it has taken place. I commend amendments 16 to 20 to members.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am grateful for your generosity, and I am sure that my constituents—one of whom is Alex Johnstone—will be, too, because, sadly, they probably know more about the subject of flooding than any other group of constituents in Scotland. We have had plenty of experience. I thank the minister for coming up on what I recall was Christmas eve to see the problems at first hand. That was very much appreciated by all those who were involved. Alex Johnstone rightly mentioned the flooding of the old town in Stonehaven on 22 and 23 December last year. He did not have time to mention that, only a week before, the north end of the beach had been flooded, but this time by a high tide and a strong easterly wind, which wreaked a great deal of damage and which must have been a dreadful experience for some of the elderly folk who live there in sheltered housing. I suspect that they still have not returned. That was dreadful and came only a week before the events that Alex Johnstone helpfully discussed. On 21 October last year, further south in my constituency, I was wading through the overflowing South Esk in River Street, Brechin. With a few sandbags, we just about got away with it, but it really was close. Again, the minister has visited the area. There is a prevention scheme there, as the minister will be well aware. The scheme needs a significant amount of money; that is just about ready to go, and I hope that the scheme will be proceeded with very rapidly. The whole of the Mearns experienced heavy rainfall and there was widespread flooding, especially in Fettercairn, where a flood went straight through a shop and disappeared down an alley. In Marykirk, Auchenblae, St Cyrus and down to Edzell, which is in Angus, there were significant problems that lasted a long time. They are all being addressed—I will come back to that—but we unfortunately have considerable experience of water. However, several things have followed and, inevitably, I suppose, there are some good things. Local flood action groups have sprung up in most places in order to improve communications and resilience. They have enabled people on the ground to help the officials in the councils who are working on the matter to develop good solutions—we would expect that. They have also worked to improve warning systems for residents and first responders. It is probably fair to say that we are already in a better place should such incidents happen again, but we recognise that they will happen again. Another lesson that emerged from the floods has perhaps not been entirely learned. Much of what happened in Stonehaven had something, at least, to do with the effect of trees and other flotsam that had just been left lying around, having come along in the floods, which blocked culverts and bridges, causing them to overflow. I am not convinced that everybody has really learned that lesson yet and I am not sure that we are clearing such stuff from valleys as quickly as we should. I acknowledge the contribution of the police, fire and rescue and ambulance services, local volunteers and many local authority employees. Their actions were exemplary. There were also, of course, the existing flood wardens, who did what they could. I will mention the Stonehaven flood relief fund, of which Alex Johnstone is well aware. The minister and I—and, I think, Alex Johnstone—were in the town hall on Christmas eve to see the response of the community in trying to ensure that the children of families who had literally just been washed out of their homes would at least enjoy something that Christmas. That was genuinely heartwarming and we should put it on the record. Part of the response is the Scottish flood forum, through which the indefatigable Paul Hendy has been providing advice and encouragement. I have a report from him, to which I will return later. I also acknowledge the Bellwin fund, which has been implemented, and the considerable assistance that the Scottish Government has provided to Aberdeenshire Council in its hour of need across several locations. The petition that is before us today concerns insurance. The officers of Angus Council and Aberdeenshire Council are working hard and applying intelligence, good thought and engineering. There are many opportunities for local authorities in my area—and, I am sure, other areas—to undertake schemes to reduce flood risks. I use the word “reduce” because we all now understand that we will never eliminate such risks; it is only about reduction. Schemes throughout my constituency will, of course, be prioritised. They should be. It is inevitable that officers and councils will be concerned about the greatest good for the greatest number. That is the normal way of doing things. We will all be concerned about value for money and, inevitably, we are trying to make the best use of scarce resources. That means that some of my constituents—and some constituents of every other member present—will inevitably find themselves at the bottom of the list or, for practical purposes, not on the list because people never work their way up such very long lists. I acknowledge the point about cross-subsidy that other members have made. However, regardless of cross-subsidy across countries—this is nothing to do with borders—an element of cross-subsidy is absolutely essential in insurance. I want to ensure that we have got that point. Otherwise, we will find houses and possibly businesses that are uninhabitable and unsaleable because they are uninsurable at the market rate. We have all been out and about and found the remains of a cottage in a valley somewhere that, once upon a time, was an important place to be. We know what derelict buildings look like. In remote areas, that may just be an economic fact about which we can do nothing. However, we cannot afford to have derelict buildings in the middle of Stonehaven or, to be frank, anywhere else in our communities. If we happen to have a building in the dip in the High Street in the old town of Stonehaven that will be absolutely guaranteed to flood if any extra water gets down there, we must do something as a society and a community to ensure that that property can be insured. That has to be done in a sensible way—people might have to worry about making sure that the electric cables run down the walls rather than up them, as well as doing all sorts of other things that we know about—but we simply cannot afford to have buildings that are unsaleable and uninhabitable in the middle of our communities simply because the market insists on taking its market view. We just have to understand that. We must ensure reasonable distribution of risk—that is part of insurance—but at the end of the day insurance is about making sure that things that must be covered are covered even if we have to do so collectively. I do not think it matters how we do that. I understand that local councils are in a position to subsidise council tenants to some extent to make sure that they have housing insurance. Clearly that works only for council tenants; one could hardly expect councils to do otherwise. It will have somehow or other to be done at national level or at society level. I want to pick out one or two more things from the briefing from Paul Hendy. He has compared the Scottish flood forum’s inquiries into Stonehaven’s floods in 2009 and 2012, which Alex Johnstone mentioned. The numbers in 2012 are very much higher than they were in 2009 and I want to point out some significant ones. There have been at least six inquiries this time around from people whose excess on their flood insurance has been above £1,000. Alex Johnstone has already mentioned some figures. The numbers that I have show that there have been three cases in which the excess is above £3,000 and one case in which it is at least £10,000. For a normal home owner, those kinds of numbers would mean that their home contents were uninsurable. If the house actually falls down, they would be covered, but the contents in ground floors would, in effect, be uninsurable. That has a knock-on effect not only for the state of mind of the person who is trying to get back into a property that was flooded three years ago; how on earth can they sell that house to somebody else, whose mortgage provider will ask, “What is the insurance risk?” I return to the basic point that while we may not mind having derelict properties out and about, we cannot have them in our communities. Stonehaven is the most obvious example, but there will be others. We have to ensure that whatever solution we come up with recognises the need to subsidise people who are in such desperate situations—“desperate” is the word that we should use. Might I just have another 30 seconds, Presiding Officer?

That is a risky thing to say. Okay.

We talk about once in 75 years, once in 100 years and once in 200 years flood risks. I think that Chic Brodie mentioned once in 75 years flood risks. We will have to carry on using those numbers, but we have to recognise that they are historical numbers and they will, a bit like rateable values, very quickly mean absolutely nothing. Once in 200 years events will materialise considerably more frequently than once in 200 years. It might be sensible if we do something to change our terminology so that people understand what we are talking about. That is not a problem for this afternoon, but it is a problem that we have to address.

We have gone from the numbers to the solutions, but I absolutely agree. That comes back to my basic point that we are never going to prevent floods; what we have to do is ameliorate their effects as best we can. Part of that is about saying, “I don’t really want a 10-foot high wall in front of my building, but I might be very happy to live with a five-foot one that I can see over from my drawing room. If that means that the place is going to be flooded once every 100 years, rather than once every 300 years, I will live with the consequences. I may not be around to have to live with them.” I have probably covered all the issues that I wanted to cover. I am very happy with what the Government has done so far. I very much hope that it will come up with the money that Brechin needs, because we now understand the solution. We need to ensure that there is enough public funding to ensure that people get the insurance that they need and to ensure that schemes that are sensible and cost-effective are implemented across the country, particularly in Angus North and Mearns, as soon as possible.

I should also have declared an interest, because my office in Stonehaven was flooded.

Saying how grateful we are that a member has brought forward a subject for a member’s business debate can be something of a formality in this place, but I am genuinely grateful to John Mason for bringing forward this debate because he has brought to my mind something about which I knew very little—although perhaps slightly more than I originally thought—but which is clearly hugely important. I do not want to copy the contributions of John Mason and Margaret McCulloch. They have set out the general area, and I will add a little bit to that. We now know that disadvantaged groups gain something from holidays and recreation. We understand that physical and mental health will be improved by such holidays, and we recognise that that is perhaps especially the case for children. The economic benefits to the destinations have also been mentioned. The literature that we have been given suggests that the proposal that we are discussing is working towards lengthening at both ends the holiday periods for which holiday destinations are able to stay open. That brings a huge economic advantage to absolutely everyone concerned: a longer season means that there is more work for those who are, almost inevitably, seasonal staff; there is a longer period for every business to recover its fixed costs, which makes margins easier to cover; and there is also an incentive for regeneration, as more money goes into a destination’s economy in general, giving it a better chance of expanding. I suggest that the economic case for the destination is irrefutable. Remarkably, as John Mason has said, there seems to be some serious evidence that there is actually some benefit for the Government, too. That is one of the reasons why I imagine that the Government will reflect positively on the proposal. There is serious evidence from the Spanish system that every new euro that is invested brings back €1.50 to the Government. That must gladden the heart of every finance minister and surely suggests that this is one of the best possible investments for the Government, never mind the very clear social benefits that have already been mentioned. The recent report “Poverty and Social Exclusion in the United Kingdom”, which was funded by the Economic and Social Research Council, says that more than 30 million people—almost half the population—suffer from some form of financial insecurity; that almost 18 million people in the United Kingdom today cannot afford adequate housing conditions; that 5.5 million adults go without essential clothing; and that almost 4 million children go without at least two of the things that they need. If those figures are even remotely right, is it any surprise that holidays are too far down the list of important things for people to be able to afford them? As John Mason said, we instinctively know that holidays are a good thing. Why else do we go on them? However, I am grateful that there is some academic research on this—that always helps. I was particularly struck by research that was done by the University of Nottingham’s business school, involving work by John McCabe and Sarah Johnson on quality of life and social wellbeing. It was interesting to read the numbers that they came up with, which showed measurable improvements in family life, social life, family time and wellbeing, which are hugely important areas in which Governments struggle to bring about improvements. For the self-selecting group of people whom we really want to help, we can see a model that is at least financially neutral from the Government’s point of view. Surely that is something that we all want to support.

I welcome the motion. I have to say that I do not do languages, but I have huge admiration for anybody who does. I note that the motion is in consequence of the upcoming tour of the men’s and women’s cricket teams from Japan, who are coming over from 1 to 4 May. I hope that the weather behaves; as someone who has tried to play cricket in Cambridge in June in the snow, I know that the hazards are real. One never knows; it is just possible that it will be at least warm and dry. When it comes to language, I cannot help wondering quite how the Japanese cope with the language of cricket. It struck me that tickling a chinaman to fine leg might struggle slightly in translation. Goodness knows what the equivalent of nudging and nurdling might be. Of course, being trapped in the gully is an unnatural punishment at the best of times. As Alex Johnstone has already noted, this is the 150th anniversary of cricket in Japan. I note the connections with my constituency—I had not realised that Montrose was going to figure. Of course, I spent some time in Dundee, which has also been mentioned. I wonder what the attraction of cricket is. It has changed a bit over the years, but I think that the principles somehow remain. There is an attraction to cricket. Archbishop William Temple apparently described it in 1926 as “organised loafing”, but it has come an awful long way since then. Nonetheless, the basic principle is that one just needs a bat and a ball—and something that will do as a wicket if one insists on getting a batsman out. Therefore, it can be played practically anywhere by anybody of any age who has something with which to hit something. It does not, in principle, involve any contact with one’s opponent, so there should not be too many scratched or broken shins or any animosities as a result. It is therefore a fabulous bit of exercise that can be taken almost anywhere by almost any group. If the wicket does not happen to be flat, one will learn to watch the ball on to the bat, which seems to me to be very good. I note that the tour matches are in aid of the tsunami and earthquake appeal, so I hope that they are well supported. They really are the kind of things that we should be supporting. Cricket for Smiles is just a wonderful idea. Cricket is, of course, a sport for the young, the fit and the courageous. I was reflecting on the last time I played it. I was unwise enough to volunteer for a team that was being put together by my business’s development department, which was taking on one of the factories—it was quite a bit organisation. What nobody told me was that the factory fast bowler happened to play for the local league. I did score a run, however. When the first ball came down, I kind of got out of the way to the side, put the bat behind me and nudged it down to fine leg and got a run. I was bowled by the next delivery that was sent in my direction. I did not see the ball and decided at that point that it was time to get out of cricket. With that happy memory, I wish the Japanese teams all the best in Scotland. I am sure that they have a great deal more skill than I ever possessed, and I am delighted that they are coming to Scotland.

I am delighted to bring the motion to Parliament in the context of the event that I was able to host in the members’ restaurant on Tuesday and which I know many people enjoyed. It was an opportunity to celebrate our farmers markets and I think that, in considering each of the businesses that were represented, I shall be able to draw some lessons from the event. I will start with the butchers. As many members will know, my motion was lodged in the wake of the horsemeat scandal and the observation that our local butchers were benefiting substantially from the loss of trust in our supermarkets. I think that all butchers saw an increase in trade; indeed, I understand that some have seen a significant and sustained rise in turnover. Among those who were in Parliament in Tuesday, Hebbie Fowlie from Bert Fowlie Butchers in Strichen recognised that having seen new customers in his shop he had to keep them coming back. There is no doubt—and no doubt in his mind—that in time the supermarkets will fight back. Adam and Dawn Marshall from Reiver Country Farm Foods Ltd breed, fatten and butcher their own pigs and then cure and smoke the bacon and ham. Their business demonstrates the benefits not only of minimising transport but of retaining all that added value in their operation—a theme to which I will return. Community farms were represented at Tuesday’s event. Gorgie City Farm in Edinburgh, which is as much an educational experience as it is a working farm, has inspired young and old for the past 30 years. I must admit that I found its collection of chicken and duck eggs most interesting, not least because they vary enormously in size and colour. I have to say that its sausages are also very good and are to be recommended. Whitmuir Community Farm Ltd is an organic farm in East Lothian that is run by Robert Cruise and Heather Anderson and which is in the process of becoming a community benefits society in order to preserve it as a place of research and education in sustainable farming. I believe that the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment is already aware of that enterprise, which is another example of the kind of thing that we need to be promoting across Scotland. The approach clearly has benefits. On education, I note the work of Iain Spink from Arbroath who produces organic smokies and can be seen at agricultural shows demonstrating the smoking process. I have to say that there are few things better than a fresh smokie, certainly as far as fish is concerned. Two bakers were with us on Tuesday. Allan Brodie from Saltire Patisserie Ltd found that his cakes were very much appreciated and his haggis-flavoured bread, which is perhaps something of an acquired taste, is apparently in demand as a novelty. His magnificent saltire cake, which I believe is still in one piece, will be enjoyed later this afternoon. Karine Hay and Katia Lebart from The Wee Boulangerie Ltd in Edinburgh demonstrated with their range of breads that, even in these difficult times, it is possible to run a successful small business if quality products are produced. Those who sampled their bread will know well the quality of the products that they produce. The St Andrews Farmhouse Cheese Company Ltd was represented by Jane Stewart. It has expanded from simply producing milk—which we know is not a particularly profitable activity—into cheese making, and it supplies a number of local outlets. That allows it to generate and retain the added value within the business, and to reduce food miles, which is a subject to which I will return. Tanny Gill, who is a fromager affineur, is clearly passionate about Scottish cheeses. His message is that we should eat our own cheese rather than import cheese. How could one disagree with that? However, in order to do that, we will need to raise awareness of our local products. I suggest that that is one task that the Government can help with because it is difficult for a small business to do that nationally. Isla Gillon represented Cairn o’ Mhor Ltd fruit wines. It uses local fruit from the Carse of Gowrie. Its winery also has a restaurant, which made the visit a doubly pleasurable experience. Paul and Victoria Miller came from the St Andrews Brewery Company Ltd and gave us samples of some very acceptable beers. It is a great pity that the event was held at lunch time. If it had been in the evening, I might have enjoyed rather more of the beer, albeit that it may not have been safe to do so. I certainly enjoyed it.

I share John Mason’s disappointment. There are lessons to be learned from what has happened this week. The event begs a few questions to which people might want to come up with answers. The most interesting part of the story that St Andrews Brewery had to tell was that its whole process is local. It uses locally grown and malted grain. The spent is returned to local farms either as fertiliser or feed for pigs, which finish up on the table of the restaurant or pub where people drink the local beer. That is an example that sums up what farmers’ markets potentially have to teach us. A couple of centuries ago, what I have just said would have been wholly unremarkable. In fact, people would have wondered how anything could be done differently. However, in the past century, we have been through a process of intensifying farming and of cheap transport, and we have moved an awful lot of stuff around for reasons that we well understand. We are beginning to understand that there are significant disadvantages to that approach. We are recognising that we cannot afford to move food around and, indeed, that we do not need to. That is one of the overwhelming messages from the event; I am sure that that issue will come out further in the debate. We should be going back to a time when we think about what can be produced and consumed locally because that ticks all the right boxes. Although he was not able to attend the event, I must mention Bruce Brymer, my local butcher in Brechin, simply because he produces such excellent stuff. I thank everyone who came to the event and all those who produce local food in Scotland. I recognise that the Government has been supportive of our food industry—my aim is not to criticise the Government. I am sure that the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment will tells us all about that. I look forward to hearing other members’ contributions to the debate.

17. To ask the Scottish Government how it will ensure that the Student Awards Agency for Scotland will pay claimants promptly in the next academic year. (S4O-02001)

I am sure that the minister agrees that the improvements and simplification that were announced last year are welcome. If she has time to do so, will she outline how the new system will work?

The debate is fascinating and colleagues have raised many issues. I propose for the next six minutes to wear the hat of the convener of the cross-party group on construction, and I will address issues that relate to construction and to that alone, probably. I have already had the Government’s answer to my first point. I think that the Deputy First Minister has been looking at my notes, because the very first thing in them is “project bank accounts”. It is more likely, of course, that she has been listening to the construction industry, which has spoken pretty loudly with one voice on project bank accounts and retentions, to which I will come shortly. The project bank accounts issue is simply the issue of delay in paying down the chain of supply. The industry assures me that one very large contractor, which I will not name and which probably does more work south of the border than up here, has now told companies in its supply chain that they will be paid in 120 days. That is almost never, in the context of companies trying to put cash through their tills. By the time that payments get to the lowest rungs, the period could well be 150 days—five months. The longer a business has to wait for its payments, the bigger the risk of insolvency. The same industry contacts tell me that there are some 10 insolvencies in the construction industry per week across the UK. Once upon a time, we could have said that that was something to do with incompetence in the business but, this far into the downturn, we can say that incompetence will have gone. The businesses that are now becoming insolvent are simply being forced into it by being squeezed between the banks and the larger contractors, which are not paying their money. That is an urgent issue that we need to address, so I am absolutely delighted that the Government is reflecting on project bank accounts. That really is the right direction to go in for major contracts, and I encourage the Government to do that. Of course, the approach is not new—it is already happening in Northern Ireland. Indeed, the Welsh Government has just suggested that it will go in that direction. The subject of retentions is an issue not only of delay in money getting down the contractor supply chain but of protection from insolvency. The Deputy First Minister knows that fine well. A number that she might not know is that something like £500 million is currently retained in Scotland. That money really should be in the bank accounts of those at the bottom of the food chain, rather than being held at the top, presumably to keep some of the larger contractors solvent. If that is their model, perhaps they need to change it. The Deputy First Minister will also know that appropriate amendments to the bill have been drafted by appropriate legal people and have been put in her department’s hands by me. On behalf of the cross-party group on construction and all that it represents, I urge the Government to consider seriously how it will be able to address the issue. I am told that, to some extent, even the legislation will be too late. The Government really needs to find ways in public contracts to ensure that the money is pushed down the chain. It is not enough to pay the major contractor in 30 days, as the Government does. It is also essential that that money goes down through the chain and is not held on to on the spurious ground that something has not been done; otherwise, we will lose the life-blood of our industry.

I am absolutely sure that they will have done that. However, when a company is pricing competitively in the first place, it should not need to do that in order to be paid money that it is due anyway. I am sure that Chic Brodie accepts that. The last idea that I will bring briefly to the Parliament’s attention is integrated project insurance, which I do not think that any member has mentioned yet. Innovation is much easier when dealing with really big contracts, as there are probably more professional advisers involved and there is an opportunity to get things right the first time round. The idea of integrated project insurance is that all those who are involved in a project—starting with the architects, the major contractors and the major suppliers—put together a project that they insure as a single entity, with the costs of it insured as a single entity. That provides a significant reduction in the cost of the insurance. I am told that 80 per cent of the cost of insurance finishes up being paid to lawyers to sort out where the mistake was made rather than doing anything useful for a project. Apart from reducing the insurance cost—which is not insignificant in the construction industry—integrated project insurance forces those who are involved in a major contract to get the details sorted out beforehand and to have a contract specification that they can sensibly put their names to and insure as an entity. That tends to encourage folk not to have variations as they go along but to ensure that the design is finalised before they enter into the contract. As everyone in the construction industry knows, that is a good way forward.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. As you will realise, I was in the chamber to listen and had not intended to contribute to the debate, but I would like to make a few remarks. First, I congratulate Sandra White on bringing her motion before the chamber. Secondly, I will take any opportunity that I get to congratulate Professor Bob Steele, who has been instrumental in raising awareness of bowel cancer. I would also like to pick up on Jackson Carlaw’s comments. I think that he got it absolutely right. Men of a certain age, of whom I am one, can be pretty reticent—although I am not sure that the flowers who are in the chamber are especially reticent—to talk about such things, so it is hugely important that we make the point to our families and the rest of the population that they must pester us. I agree with Malcolm Chisholm—I am struggling to see how any future test could be any easier. I did not think that the test was a problem, but if someone can make it easier, that is fine. It is that reticence that we must get folk to overcome. Quite frankly, if we need some children’s pester power, so be it.

I congratulate the Scottish Government on its ambition, but I note that the ambition is shared across Parliament and will be inherited by future Governments. All members who have spoken have mentioned targets and plans, but how will we make it all happen? I am following a number of other members in considering how we will achieve behaviour change. Governments can, of course, have policies in that regard, but Governments control relatively little. The Government employs what feels like a great number of people, whose example will be important. However, as a parent, I note that our children may sometimes listen to what we say but, infuriatingly, they by and large copy what we do. Societal change is inevitably the sum of our individual changes, so it will depend on what we do. The best model that I can come up with for what we are trying to do in terms of the climate change challenge is probably how we have tackled public health issues over the past decade or two, because this really is about the public good. I refer members to a couple of recent public health issues, starting with smoking. Smoking has been an issue for a generation or two now, but I invite members to reflect on the fact that if an individual who smokes—there is nothing in society that smokes—is to stop smoking, he or she first has to see the risk of their behaviour and understand the desirability of the change; they then need to believe that change is something that they must do rather than something that somebody else must do and they must internalise that belief to the point at which they act on it. They also of course need to be able to persevere, and even then it may be too late. The ban on public smoking has undoubtedly helped that process, but I suggest that the individual requirements on the way are crucial. In that regard, I do not think that I have told anybody anything that we do not know. I now want to consider the on-going public health issue of obesity and being overweight, for which exactly the same sequence as for smoking must be gone through. I will not repeat it for the record, but will acknowledge that the individual must feel the need to make the change and must persevere. In this particular instance, society is not that helpful. Food is actually good and public bans on this and that are not going to help. We can see that the public environment for that situation is not particularly helpful. Before I go on to discuss one or two other little issues, I point out that the greener Scotland website provides some very helpful stuff regarding RPP2. How will we change our energy use? First, we have to ask the question, “Does it matter to me?” It must do, because it costs money. “Do I care about that?” That depends on how rich I am. “How much trouble is it worth taking to save that money?” We are struggling to give away loft insulation, but the UK Government has discovered that if an offer is made to clear the loft at the same time, people are much more likely to take it. If I can borrow a phrase from chemistry, we need to get over the activation energy. It is not just about inertia—there is a hoop to jump through. It also helps if we can see the costs. When we used to go through from the lounge for tea, my beloved and late, lamented mother-in-law would go back, find the light switch and turn off what was maybe a 100W bulb. On the way back, she would walk past the electric fire, on which two bars were still on. That is why her chemical engineer son had not worried about turning off the light; I knew that the 100W bulbs up there were helping to heat the house when she already had 200kW on with the electric fire. She simply could not see that or understand that the fire was giving out energy and that turning off the light was irrelevant in the context. Unless people actually understand energy, they will not respond in the right way. Metering is absolutely crucial: what gets measured gets done.

I am grateful that the member has taken an intervention. I agree that too many cookery programmes show meals that very few people will ever learn anything from. However, does the member accept that most people these days do not know how to cook? The skill has been lost through the generations. I am not commenting on whether women should be doing the cooking—most of us have not been taught how to cook.

As the cabinet secretary and Maureen Watt did, I start by expressing my condolences to the families and friends of Dr Stewart Rhind and Dr Julian Dawson, who were recently killed so tragically on the A90. As the local MSP, I want to assure members that I will not stop campaigning to reduce the risks on that stretch of road. I also commend the work of the James Hutton Institute. The loss of their colleagues will leave a hole. I encourage all the institute staff; they are doing a good job. In the context of the debate, what they are there doing is extremely important for the future of Scotland and we wish them well in their work. I want to turn to local food issues in North Angus and Mearns—

I apologise, Presiding Officer. I assure Bruce Crawford that the Forfar bridie is, indeed, mine. I, of course, share it with some regional MSPs, but I will claim it as my own because Forfar is in my constituency. I represent a constituency that has some of the finest land and products in the country. I commend McCain Foods Ltd, which produces potatoes. Potatoes are a staple diet for many of us. McCain’s products are for consumption around the world, but it grows its crops close to home in Scotland, which is a fine place to grow seed potatoes. I also commend Usan Salmon Fisheries Ltd, which works off the coast of my constituency. It produces Scottish wild salmon, which is now a protected geographical indication—an EU-protected name—and one of Scotland’s finest products. Many members have talked about the basic issue of buying locally. It has the obvious advantage of minimising transport and is one of the ways of addressing the dominance of large organisations. Big businesses can easily be competed with by local producers and retailers, who simply minimise the costs and maximise the quality. That really is where we should be going. I also commend Alison Johnstone for her mention of allotments, community gardens and the transition towns movement, all of which I am well aware of. They are potentially an enormously important part of the Scottish economy and the food chain. In fact, we get to the point at which there is not really a chain because we grow, process, cook and eat the food ourselves. That may seem a bit primordial, but it seems to me to be a good place to go back to. I am grateful to Dr Elaine Murray for mentioning cooking skills. I know perhaps rather more than I should about the issue because it is one of my wife’s research interests. It is genuinely the case that, through the generations—there is no point in blaming anybody—we have lost many of the cooking skills that our grandparents would have taken absolutely for granted. Members should reflect on the situation—I do not have to make this up—of a young student who does not know how to cut up a cabbage. If they are looking at a cabbage in the supermarket or the grocers and do not know what it looks like inside, they literally do not know what to do with it and are not likely to buy it. All they have to do, of course, is ensure that it is clean to start with, cut it up and boil it. It is a wonderful addition to the diet and has lots of good things in it—we will not have a nutrition lecture now—but if they do not know what to do with it at all, they have a problem. We genuinely need to address that issue. I also commend Bruce Crawford. I gather, now, that he is the man who created farmers markets. Thank you again, brother. I am all in favour of farmers markets. I have many in my constituency and I am sure that we have many throughout Scotland, but we are beginning to see the disadvantage of their being outside and only temporary. The outside is often cold and, if the markets are only there on a Saturday, that does not make them a regular shopping place.

I endorse Rob Gibson’s comments and acknowledge his mild chiding. It is pretty clear to me and some others around me that if we could get farmers markets into slightly more permanent locations under cover—that should not be strange; it is common in England—we could establish them as normal places where people go to shop rather than just somewhere where they shop on the occasional Saturday morning if they happen to be there and it is not too cold. There is an opportunity there with which the Government could perhaps help, and not necessarily with huge sums of money. I turn to labelling, perhaps in a slightly different context from some of the other speakers, although I endorse many of the comments that were made, including much of what Richard Simpson said. I have before me the “Beef Labelling Guide for people and organisations selling beef in Scotland: Guidance on the compulsory beef labelling system and the beef labelling scheme (the approval system for other labelling claims)”. I am sure that it is sensibly put together, but it runs to 20 pages and seems to imply that it is really difficult for the local butcher to say, “This beef came from such-and-such a farm.” I suggest that, if that is the case—that is my understanding—we have probably missed a trick. I understand that the rules need to be pretty comprehensive and that we need to ensure that there are no loopholes that people can get through, but it might be a little bit easier for local suppliers to say, “I genuinely know where this came from. It came off the lorry from such-and-such a place,” and be able to label things accordingly in an individual shop. I suspect that that would be helpful to the general industry. It might well be that the guidance needs just a little bit of working on.

I note that the minister has said several times that this is about consumer protection and proportionality. Does he agree that it is less about inspections and more about having good-quality assurance processes in the supply chain? If that kind of good system is in place, we will only be inspecting something that is working well.

Parliament might wish to be made aware of the fact that the snail may never have existed. The point was never proven, and was taken as read.

I cannot recall approaching a bill on a subject about which I knew so little, so I start by thanking the committee clerks, the staff of the Scottish Parliament information centre and others who have educated us. I am sure that every other member of the committee started in a better place, but I really did not know much—possibly only one end from t’other—as far as salmon went. I particularly draw attention to the contribution of our visit to the upper Dee riparian scheme, and I thank Mark Bilsby, the river director. I am also conscious, as are other members, of the enormous contribution that Marine Harvest made to our education. I thank Steve Bracken on the record for that. Members in the chamber who were not involved in those visits can be reassured that the committee learned a great deal from them, and as a result we are in a position to produce a stage 1 report that is, at the very least, well informed. I want to comment briefly on the points that others have made about the number of emails that we have received. I think that the industry is perhaps still not learning. A document that arrived yesterday has lots of pretty pictures and writing in white on a dark background that is almost impossible to read. In contrast, I commend Alan Wells, whom I think we can commend throughout, for the clarity of his information, which has black writing on white paper and is on two sides of a single piece of paper. I think that that is the way forward. Outside bodies might like to take note. We picked up, in particular, that there are conflicts across the industries. Fish farms are seen by the angling community as being the providers of lice, and the netsmen are everybody’s enemy because dead fish do not spawn. We need to understand—some members have alluded to this already—that the economic conflicts that are inherent in all of this are inevitable and they must be respected. We have to work with them; we cannot get rid of them. On the issues of anglers and netsmen, I note that the long-term trend in salmon returning to our waters has been downward. Perhaps it is stabilising, as the convener said, but perhaps it is not, because we will only know afterwards. The data never quite tell us at the time. I therefore commend the catch and release scheme on the River Dee. We were impressed by the work on that. I also need to note the views of Usan Salmon Fisheries in my constituency. It is concerned about some of the controls on it, and it wants to see a days at sea approach as an alternative to its having to get its nets out at the weekends. We understand that. Also, it likes the idea of management being transferred to the Scottish Government. We looked at that and—I think rightly—we concluded that the Government needs to consider the issues more deeply. I am glad that they will be looked at. We must not lose sight of the fact that these fishermen work in a business to which they have a proprietary right. However difficult we might find the management of that, we must not lose sight of their rights. I do not think that the Government will do that. Lastly, I turn to a subject that others do not usually think about. As convener of the Subordinate Legislation Committee, I would like to comment on what we did and the Government’s response to it, because I think that it will be instructive. Marine Scotland’s responses show that in the first instance there is a matter of clarity. The committee drew the Government’s attention to the status of the code of good practice, and the Government responded with the view that “a clarificatory amendment” will be made and, in addition, it will make an amendment to new section 4A. We have seen the Government respond to concerns about clarity regarding what a code of practice might be. There were also concerns about the powers that the bill will give. Regulations under section 3(1) “confer functions on any person in relation to the prescribing of requirements.” The Subordinate Legislation Committee was naturally concerned about that—the right people should have powers. The Government responded by saying that that will “be adjusted, by way of an amendment at stage 2”,

2. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to develop music education. (S4O-01830)

I suppose that I should declare an interest as a Musicians Union member and a former music teacher, although I did not teach in schools. I am sure that the minister agrees not only that instrumental and singing skills are valuable to individuals but that they have huge social and cultural benefits. Music education is an easy hit for a council reduction. What might the Government be able to do in the longer term to ensure that music is a continuing and expanding part of our education?

I am wondering how far back I have to remember to the days when large and, it seemed, significant parts of the council budget were ring fenced and separately accounted for at great expense.

I, too, thank Dave Thomson for securing this incredibly important debate. I also thank Alex Johnstone for his speech. First, because he articulated clearly that cold calling relating to property is a good opportunity for the crook to get their foot—quite literally—in the door or round the back. Essentially, the crook gets into the house and into the confidence of an uncertain and possibly vulnerable mind, which then gives them the opportunity to carry on doing what they are doing. Secondly, I support Alex Johnstone’s comments about Travellers. I have been involved with Travellers in the past, and he eloquently made the point about their work model and the possible unintended consequences of what is being suggested. It may well be that they have to change their model, but I thank him for bringing that matter to us. I remind colleagues that we are dealing with rogues. There is absolutely no value in talking about how to train people properly, or about methods of operation or in suggesting that people should study this or stick to that or the other protocol. It will not happen, and it has nothing to do with what we are talking about. The moment we talk about victims of cold calling, it is important to reflect on the characteristics that make somebody vulnerable. It is partly their age, undoubtedly. Of course, if people stick around, they get older. We are all working on it; it is an instinct. It is also partly, of course, ignorance. I do not mean that unkindly, because there are many things of which we are all ignorant. By and large, whether or not the tiles on the roof need fettled is something that most of us are not good at judging. I have a suspicion that, by the time I reach 80, although I may be capable of judging that, it will be difficult to look. In such matters we are, simply by dint of our circumstances, very vulnerable to a person coming along and telling us what they think—and it is extraordinarily difficult to tell them that they are wrong. Scams are not mentioned in the motion, but they are part of the issue. Human beings like to think that we are going to get something for nothing; instinctive greed kicks in when we are told that we have an insurance claim or have won something. It is awfully easy to believe that. Once we have fallen for a scam, how do we react? We are embarrassed. We do not want to tell people. We are also ignorant. We do not know what to do. We do not expect the law to be effective and we do not really want to tell the police and our family. We heard how older people lose confidence. The problem has been around for a long time. I am assured that the Eiffel tower has been sold for scrap: “It’s a secret deal and you’re going to get a wonderful bargain, my boy. The French Government couldn’t possibly make this an open tender, so you must pay up front and take it down at your leisure.” So effective was the scam that it happened twice. It is what we do, is it not? Time is running away, as it always does. The law is not as effective as it needs to be. We must recognise that most of us will become vulnerable if we hang around long enough. We need to protect vulnerable people in society. It will not be easy, but who said it would be easy? We must deal with the issue and I thank Dave Thompson for bringing it to Parliament’s attention.

2. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans to commemorate the centenary of the outbreak of the first world war. (S4O-01730)

I thank the minister for her response. I draw her attention to the fact that this year is the centenary of the Montrose airfield, which played an enormous part in training Royal Air Force pilots through the first war and, indeed, through the second. Does the Government have any plans to ensure that help is available for places such as Montrose airfield so that we can commemorate their importance and significance in the first war and beyond?

I must confess that, when I first heard that I would be speaking in the debate, I thought that I would get close to discussing life, the universe and at least half of everything. On reflection, it occurred to me, as the MSP for Angus North and Mearns, that I could talk about the Montrose Basin, the North and South Esk , the Glen Esk estates and, of course, the prime farming land of the Mearns, but I am not going to, because I want to pick up on some general principles that we might otherwise miss. The consultation sets out the three overarching aims, which are to “increase the general level of biodiversity on land and in our seas, and support healthy, well-functioning ecosystems; ... engage people with the natural world, for the health and well-being benefits that this brings, and empower them to have a say in decisions about their environment;” and “maximise the benefits for Scotland of a diverse natural environment and the services it provides, contributing to sustainable economic growth.” My problem is that, although I think that members know what the biodiversity debate is about, most of our fellow citizens do not. To quote Douglas Adams in “Life, the Universe and Everything”: “The Somebody Else’s Problem field is much simpler and more effective, and what’s more can be run for over a hundred years on a single torch battery. This is because it relies on people’s natural disposition not to see anything they don’t want to, weren’t expecting, or can’t explain.” There is a warning to us in there. Somewhere in the various pieces of paper that members have been given, I think that it has been suggested that there are 90,000 species in this country. Most of those are not big. We cannot conceivably do enough research to get past the grouse, the deer, the sheep and the red squirrel; we are simply never going to understand in any significant detail the bugs, the beetles and the algae. We must therefore recognise that there is one thing above all other that we must do: preserve the diversity of habitats, because we will never know quite what is in them. If we take habitats away, we will lose the things that specifically belong to them. We must involve people, because it is the people whom we represent who empower us to do the work that needs to be done. If members will forgive me, I have picked an example that has nothing to do with Scotland. It comes from a blog and it relates to England—there is no political purpose in that, but it is convenient that it does not say anything about the relevant local authority in Scotland. If refers—probably for the second time in the debate—to nightingales. In his blog, George Monbiot—I hope that I have pronounced his name properly—refers to a place called Lodge Hill, in Gillingham, in Kent, where the local council is proposing to take over an area, remove a wood and build 5,000 houses. It just so happens that there are a significant number of nightingales in that wood. It would appear that the UK Government believes in a thing called biodiversity offsetting, which means that is allowable to build such a housing estate as long as one generates what is, apparently, a similar environment close by where the same quantity of nightingales could, perhaps, be established. The blog states: “‘Offsetting could work in principle for nightingales in Kent—it is technically feasible but it is neither straightforward nor guaranteed’ If a site of around 500 hectares were found ... a similar number of nightingales might be established itself there.” Do we feel that that is a good way to go? Lots of people do not. How on earth are they getting themselves into that mess? The blog has, helpfully, had a contribution from a planner. He is not, I think, from the local authority concerned but, nonetheless, he makes the following points, which I make to show the problems that we might get into. He says: “The local authority is required to allocate a certain number of housing sites, and they have to pick the least worst option in a crowded part of England … Despite giving priority to the allocation of housing sites within the urban area, it is also necessary to identify greenfield sites outside the urban boundary in order to meet the housing requirements in Policy H1 of the Kent Structure Plan.” There follows a substantial paragraph that includes terms such as “Green Belt”, “Natural Beauty” and “Strategic Gaps”, as well as all kinds of policy decisions. Unless the people we represent recognise the priorities of the environment, there is a serious risk that we and the councils will come up with strategies that look wonderful on paper but enable us to make the kind of horrific mistake that that council in England might be prepared to make in saying that a wood can be taken away for houses because we believe that we can put a similar wood somewhere else. It is obvious nonsense when we describe it like that. That takes me straight back to my central point: we must, above all else, protect the diversity of habitats because, by and large, we do not know much about what is going on in them.

The economy of the north-east does not depend solely on the export of oil. In my constituency, in particular in Montrose, we have the opportunity to export technology and hardware around the globe in ways that will be dependent on the oil price but which will have nothing to do with how many barrels are coming through the pipes in Aberdeen. A few days ago, I spent a wee while looking at a large hole. Politicians periodically spend their time looking down holes, but no election is due and I was looking at a sand hole. Thousands of tonnes of sand have been removed from Montrose. Why? GE Oil & Gas is about to build a big box in the hole, to push the sand to the sides. It will end up by having a deep swimming pool in which to test the trees that it will manufacture for oil sites around the world. That is precisely the kind of activity that will fuel the economy of my constituency and Scotland, regardless of where exports are going, and which is an important part of what our industry has to give us. I must say that it is serious engineering—it is not just big stuff; the components are machined to one thousandth of an inch, and anyone who has used a lathe will know that they would rather leave that to an expert. We have a lot of industry that puts clever stuff down pipes into the rock beneath. I also talked to Halliburton, also in Montrose, which puts all kinds of valves, filters, liner hangers and so on well below sea level, to enable what is going on down there to work, to be measured, to be filtered and to be switched off when necessary. Of course, many people in my constituency do not work in the oil industry, but what I have seen of the oil industry in my constituency tells me that we have an export business that will last for a very long time, which is very innovative and technically extremely competent. From talking to the industries, I know that they are committed to our part of the world. They are not doubling the size of their workshops for any reason other than because they are committed to Montrose. They are putting in machine tools that cost millions, which demonstrates their commitment. Members talked about the training that is going on. I pay tribute to the businesses and others who are taking on apprentices. I think that the industry recognises that it might have a bit of catching up to do and that in previous years it did not take on enough apprentices. Angus College and Angus Training Group—and similar organisations in Aberdeen—are seriously involved in training. Apprentices are coming in, whether they are welders, machine operators or general mechanical engineers. There is a huge amount of activity and I get the impression that there could be more. If there is one thing that I want to encourage the Government to do, it is to believe that more training could be done. The Maritime Rescue Institute in Stonehaven, which was recently battered by storms and was mentioned in the Parliament, is training people in offshore techniques and survival in and rescue from the water. The kinds of activity that I have described are an important part of Scotland’s economy and are present in my constituency. Members often mention the need to get youngsters interested in science, technology, engineering and maths—those hard STEM subjects—at school. Although—as has been suggested—that issue is not currently within Fergus Ewing’s bailiwick, we really must work on it. STEM subjects start at school; they may even start at home. I tend towards the view that we cannot have too many engineers, as they can do a lot of things. We cannot have too many people who understand mathematics, and they will do other things. We need to encourage our education system and our teachers to produce youngsters who have STEM subject skills and generate some enthusiasm for that type of thing. That will benefit not only the oil and gas industry but our whole society.

I want to pick up on a couple of issues. First, the minister is well aware of the flooding. He came to see it, for which I thank him. Quite a number of the houses that were flooded are, in effect, uninsured because they have become uninsurable. It is not a question of people not wanting to insure their houses; they cannot get the insurance. Can the Government do anything to help people in the future who simply cannot get commercial insurance in such circumstances?

I am grateful that the minister visited Brechin. Frankly, Brechin got away by the skin of its teeth. The minister is aware of the proposed scheme there, and I seek his assurances that that will be progressed through his officials as quickly as possible.

3. To ask the Scottish Government how it ensures that Disclosure Scotland covers all relevant aspects of society. (S4O-01640)

When a convicted criminal is released on licence with restrictions on whom he may associate with—particularly in relation to vulnerable young adults—what discretion do the police have to alert relevant organisations to the risk that he may pose?

The minister will be aware that there was significant damage in Stonehaven, but he may not be aware that there is a unique local charity there—the Maritime Rescue Institute—that not only provides the local coast guard but trains lots of folk. It lost both its boats over the weekend—although I gather that it has got one back—and suffered a lot of damage to its buildings. As a local charity, it is in the same position as others will be in that it must pay excess money on its insurances. The charity will be asked to find many thousands of pounds. Is that something with which the Government may be able to assist?

Before I get into what I thought I was going to say, I will pick up on a couple of points that have already been made. I take Dr Elaine Murray’s points about the need to change our minds. Every scientist knows that that is what they do, but it seems to be the most heinous offence for a politician, especially in the minds of the media. We need to persuade the media of that point as well as a few others. I take Murdo Fraser’s amendment and the point about teachers. Iain Gray and I were recently at a meeting with physics teachers at all levels. One of the points that I made there and will repeat here is that I recall my physics teachers—they were successful: they got me an A-level in the subject—as being slightly mad. I do not want to overstate that adjective, but I want to make the point that teachers have to be an inspiration. It does not matter how good a pupil’s science is, they must still have some sort of role model whose appreciation of the subject inspires them. That is an important point that we sometimes forget when we turn out teachers: the good ones are perhaps born, not made. I will address some of the issues of science and I want to go back to an understanding of how we do science. Some things that we do are based on really old and absolutely basic science. Members will see in a minute or two where I am going with this. Thermodynamics and the laws of physics and gravity have been around for centuries and they inform some pretty basic things. With the benefit of hindsight, members will not be surprised when I get on to the subject of obesity, and they will see where the laws of thermodynamics come into this. Mike Russell mentioned James Hutton. The James Hutton Institute is based in Dundee—a little bit down the road from me in Brechin—and also a little bit further north in Aberdeen. It has done a huge amount of work on the genomes of potato and barley, in particular. That analytical science is undertaken so that better products can be bred. Genetic modification is only a way of speeding up the breeding process and we need to understand some of the science behind that, on occasion. The institute has also done some modelling to look at various options that might come out of the European Union on single farm payments, which will help it to have a pretty clear view of how such payments would affect the economy of our rural communities. Given that we are talking about something like €650 euros, that modelling is quite important work. I move on briefly to the subject of obesity. Very basic science tells us that we are what we eat. There is mass balance: what goes in and does not come out will have to stay. Equally, there is energy balance: energy that we take in and which does not come out one way or another must stay and be stored somewhere. Those laws are totally non-negotiable, whether we like it or not. We can do various things in experiments in that area, such as observe populations. The Scottish health survey, which is done annually, picks up all sorts of personal measurements. Some lifestyle indicators enable us to get some clues to what is going on. I have to report that the news is not altogether good: two thirds of us are seriously overweight and lifestyle indicators are not getting much better, either. Recent work has indicated that we can determine whether a child is likely to become an obese adult by looking at things such as the parents’ body mass index, the child’s birth weight, maternal gestational weight gain, behaviour and social indicators. They all give us a pretty good model of whether a child is likely to be at risk. Perhaps disturbingly, the genetic score makes precious little difference to the accuracy of the prediction. Our chances are probably defined at birth not by genetics, but by who we are born to. Various other experiments can be done. We can give people different things to eat and see how much they eat, for instance. Satiety work being done at the Rowett Institute of Nutrition and Health tends to suggest that if someone eats a protein-based meal, the number of calories is likely to fill them up better. Sadly, fat does entirely the reverse: it gives more calories but less satiety. That tells us what we already know, which is that fat-laden materials are not good to eat. We know a lot—we actually know a huge amount. We are currently doing an experiment. I do not know whether members realise this, but it is my point. Not just Scotland, but most of western Europe is doing an experiment by putting scientific evidence-based messages out there, which are being substantially drowned out by the advertising of products such as fast food, fizzy drinks and choc bars. We know what the result will be. If we want to ensure that we have a healthy society—or a healthier society—Government has to pre-empt the result of that experiment. We know that those health messages will not be enough and we must take charge of the environment in which we live in ways that, at the moment, Governments throughout the world are not prepared to do.

4. To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Government has to change the structure of local government. (S4F-01018)

I am delighted to hear that and I thank the First Minister for his comments. The Christie commission encouraged the Government to look at better integration of services. Can the First Minister confirm that that is how the Government proposes to continue its reform process?

It was announced a few months ago that a film of the classic novel “Sunset Song”, by Lewis Grassic Gibbon, is being considered. I understand that Terence Davies is to be the director and that a prospective cast has been assembled. The novel is set in the Howe of the Mearns, in the heart of my constituency, so I started to wonder what impact the making of the film would have on the community there and indeed on wider Scotland. It would be unwise not to use authentic settings for such a story, so I can be fairly sure that there will be some location shooting, but what will happen beyond that? Will it be possible to use a Scottish studio? What about all the post-production? Responses to inquiries suggest that much of that business will go elsewhere. That is disappointing and it is a missed opportunity. Scotland has achieved a great deal in feature film making in the 30 years since Bill Forsyth’s “Local Hero”—a movie in which a rich American tries to buy a Scottish beach. Notable successes such as “Shallow Grave”, “Trainspotting”, “Ratcatcher” and “The Angels’ Share” will no doubt be joined by “Sunshine on Leith”, which is in production as we speak and stars one of our great talents, Peter Mullan. Our ancient landscape, diverse cities and historic architecture have attracted film makers from Hollywood to Bollywood. Despite intense and increasing competition from our neighbours, Scotland remains a popular location for international film-makers, as we saw recently with the filming of “World War Z”, “Cloud Atlas” and “Under the Skin”. Film-makers come here not just because of our mountains, glens and medieval tenements, but because we boast excellent crews, world-class talent and extremely professional location services throughout the country. We have produced world-class actors, including household names such as Tilda Swinton, Peter Mullan, Ewan McGregor, James McAvoy, Gary Lewis, Martin Compston, Kelly Macdonald and Gerard Butler. We have world-class writers such as Paul Laverty, world-class producers such as Iain Smith, world-class directors such as Lynne Ramsay and David Mackenzie, and world-class composers such as Patrick Doyle and Craig Armstrong, to name but a few. I note that one of Screen Academy Scotland’s graduates, Tali Yankelevich, has been long listed for an Oscar in the documentary short subject category. Despite all those talented individuals and wonderful natural assets, we have yet to reach the levels of production, audience and economic impact that are experienced by other small, successful countries in Europe—for example, Denmark and Ireland. In the highly competitive and highly internationalised world of film, we lack some of the crucial levers that we require in order to attract more films here, to retain more of the value that they can bring and to grow our domestic production sector. Put simply, we need more films to be made in Scotland. Film is a hits-driven business, and to have more hits, we need more films. Not all films need to be big-budget films, as films such as “The Magdalene Sisters” and “Neds” have demonstrated. How can we achieve that? We need financial incentives to bring international production—that is what the rest of the world provides—to Scotland. We need investment in infrastructure and we need, especially, studio facilities that will attract productions and give our local film-makers scope to produce a wider range of movies. We need more direct investment in film production to boost the level of ambition in Scotland, including a greater contribution by broadcasters, who have a responsibility to work with public and private finance to raise the ambition of our big and small screen production. We need to create more work and more opportunities for people who work in film. As I have noted, our attraction for incoming productions is based in no small part on our world-class crew, but to sustain such a specialised and highly skilled workforce we need a consistent mix of high-value work; that is, network television drama and domestic film productions. How can we achieve that? We need to encourage talent and skill from an early age, and to ensure practical media literacy and encourage aspiring young film-makers to develop their talents. Put simply, we need to inspire our youngsters. We need investment in specialist skills development in the further and higher education sector, including our national screen academy. We need to train the next generation. We need to support business development across the whole film value chain, from production to exhibition, thereby ensuring that our film-related businesses are able to take advantage of new technologies and revenue models. The part that is missing is a world-class studio and facilities village. We must be clear that that will not be successful in isolation. When competing on the international stage, we must ensure that we have the necessary financial incentives and that support skills are developed to serve the industry. We are missing an opportunity. Scotland is a natural film set, from sea to mountain. We have the artistic talent and skills. We ought now to enhance the production facilities to ensure that we can build a world-class industry here in Scotland.

I am delighted to hear Nanette Milne’s story, which I had not appreciated before. She has just made an important point about discipline, which we parents know our children need. I wonder whether one of the problems of the corporate parent is that it is incredibly difficult for somebody other than a natural or adoptive parent to provide the necessary level of loving discipline, which is incredibly difficult to work out.

6. To ask the First Minister what progress is being made to ensure equal pay by employers subject to its public sector pay policy. (S4F-00940)

I am grateful to the First Minister for his comments about protecting household incomes through equal pay and the social wage, in public sector pay policy. I note that there was a letter in the Sunday Herald a few weeks ago from Bob Holman, one of the Labour Party’s renowned anti-poverty campaigners, who considers that universal services are an essential part of Labour policy. Does the First Minister share my surprise that it seems that the SNP is now the only major political party that maintains that view?

6. To ask the First Minister what progress is being made to ensure equal pay by employers subject to its public sector pay policy. (S4F-00940)

I am grateful to the First Minister for his comments about protecting household incomes through equal pay and the social wage, in public sector pay policy. I note that there was a letter in the Sunday Herald a few weeks ago from Bob Holman, one of the Labour Party’s renowned anti-poverty campaigners, who considers that universal services are an essential part of Labour policy. Does the First Minister share my surprise that it seems that the SNP is now the only major political party that maintains that view?

The debate has been more interesting than I feared it would be. I had thought that this might be a very long afternoon on a relatively simple subject, but we have heard interesting speeches. I have held a driving licence for about 40 years—how deplorable—and I acknowledge one or two things that members have said about the traffic conditions in which we drive. There is no dispute that there is more traffic on the roads—there are a few more roads, of course—but our roads are a great deal better and certainly a great deal safer than they used to be. I see crash barriers and central reservations in places that certainly did not have them once upon a time. Our cars are seriously safer and more reliable, and I am not just talking about safety belts and airbags. It seems to me that our tyres and braking systems are hugely better than they used to be. It is in that context that we should reflect on the statistics.

I defer to Dennis Robertson first.

Yes, most of them are probably faster, but I recall going up the M1 with my dad driving at 100 mph, so I think that at the upper limit they are probably roughly in the same place.

I absolutely agree; I am with you on that. I just wanted to put in what I said about faster cars as a part of the background that had not previously been discussed. There is huge support for what is being talked about. We have heard a lot of the statistics and a lot about the support from professionals, so I do not want to go into that. What I would like to do, though, is to return to a subject that has been discussed, particularly by Dr Richard Simpson. This is not the first time that it has been discussed this week, because we talked about it in the members’ business debate on Tuesday. Law can do some things, but culture does a lot more. I think that James Dornan at the beginning talked about the culture of drink-driving and his own attitude to it, which I share. I think that it is a generational thing. I note that members have referred to younger ages with regard to the issue: Dennis Robertson suggested that it was about the 17 to 35-year-old group, while Mark McDonald said that it was the 18 to 24-year-old group. I do not really know and I do not want to fight about the numbers, but it seems to me that we need some serious research on the issue. If we are going to change the culture, we need to be clear whose culture it is that we are changing, because there will be different messages for youngsters than for those who are our age. Stewart Stevenson referred to the hard-to-reach drink-driver, but he was not the only one who referred to that issue in the debate. Again, we need to do a bit of research on who that hard-to-reach drink driver is. I suspect that the police have a pretty clear idea about that, but anything that we are going to do for those drivers’ culture needs to be done specifically for them. I would like to concentrate on some thoughts about what else might be devolved. Again, I would adopt Stewart Stevenson’s position on the issue in that I would prefer everything to be given to this country’s Parliament to consider, but other issues might well come with that. Again, this is perhaps not the first time that this has been said, but police powers to stop and search would be very useful. I am not generally in favour of giving the police arbitrary powers to stop, but I think that it would be helpful in the area of drink-driving. I suspect that at the moment the police are quite good at stopping the right people, but they probably do so for some other reason, then perhaps check the alcohol level of the driver’s breath. It would be very much better if they did not have to do that kind of thing and had a clear opportunity to stop and search in circumstances in which they thought they would find somebody who is over the limit. I would very much support that. I noted what Dave Stewart and others said about young drivers, and I entirely take Alison McInnes’s point about the fact that if young drivers have a lower level when they start, they will get used to the idea that they are not going to drink. That is a very coherent point, which I would entirely accept. Again, that refers to things that we cannot currently do, but it wouldn’t half be good if we could do them in the Scottish Parliament now. I want to refer to one other thing that would come with that, which is a matter that is very dear to my heart and dear to some of my constituents; it is the fact that we cannot deal with very large vehicles—for example, mobile cranes. Such vehicles are not subject to MOTs and are driving around our roads in Scotland and on roads in the rest of the UK with a very different safety regime from the one for other vehicles. I accept that that has nothing to do with alcohol levels, but it is something that we ought to be able to address. I note from correspondence that I have received that the UK does not want to address it, so I would be very grateful if we had the opportunity to address it in Scotland. I add that to the list of things that we would be able to address were we independent. I turn briefly to Alex Johnstone’s comments about unintended consequences. I was not confused by what Mr Johnstone said. He made a perfectly fair point that I think the Official Report will put straight when people read it. He started by recognising that all offences are offences. I can quite understand his point about soft targets for people who are trying to get statistics. However, I do not believe that our police would do that; I think that our police would target the right place. I have sympathy for Mr Johnstone’s cause, but I think that the police know what they really should do and that, by and large, they would do it.

I join other members in congratulating Hugh Henry on bringing this important debate to the Parliament. I am sure that, in 2004 or so, when the bill that became the 2005 act was being discussed, the measure seemed like a good idea. We need to be careful not to rewrite history on that. I am sure that, at the time, medical staff, who often work on their own or in stressed environments and who are often out and about, particularly in ambulances and the like, seemed like a group of people who needed a bit of support. We can probably endorse that. However, when we use such terms, we recognise that many people who work in shops are in much the same situation, although they just happen to be indoors. As other members have said, many shopworkers are on their own and feel pretty isolated, and they are open to abuse. Therefore, it is not surprising that there should be calls for the terms of the 2005 act to apply to shopworkers. We can well understand that. However, the first question that springs to mind is whether the law of the land is adequate without doing that. I think that it probably ought to be, and we have heard the view that it is. I wonder whether it is perfectly adequate in substance and whether, as is often the case in law, the struggle is to do with the evidence. In the absence of recording equipment, people who work in shops perhaps feel that there is no possibility of bringing a case.

I take the point entirely. The answer, I think, is that it is difficult to see why it should be required, but I am sure that it seemed like a good idea at the time. I come to the point that Margo MacDonald rightly introduced early on in the debate. When our culture says that something is unacceptable, we do not, by and large, need law. We need law to say that murder, for example, is unacceptable, because some people simply choose to ignore that cultural fact—although they are very few. If we have a culture that says that we should not do something, people abide by it, generally speaking. However, if the culture does not tell us that we will not do something, law is probably inadequate. Perhaps that is the point. There are plenty of environments—shops will certainly be among them—and communities where the law is not respected. If the culture is such that people do not worry about the law, changing the law will not solve the problem, although it may be a reasonable part of the process.

Partly because we have a relatively short time, I hesitate to get into that debate. There is a point in it, but I return to my basic point that the law is not terribly good as a deterrent. We know that, so we need a culture change. It would perhaps be sensible to change the law—I am sure that the minister will have a view on that—but, fundamentally, we need a culture change, which is why we need a freedom from fear campaign, which we all need to associate ourselves with, and a change in behaviour in our society. John Wilson made an important point in his intervention. There are communities in our society where it does not pay to report people to the police. There are certainly circumstances in which an off-licence would not want to report something because it might lose its licence, and there will be situations in which the person serving in a shop does not want to report the person who has come in because they know fine well who they are, who they belong to and that, in their culture, that is just not done. That brings us back to the fundamental point that, although the law perhaps needs to be changed—I recognise the question that Hugh Henry has posed—I suspect that most of what we need to address is cultural. It is important that we do that.

This has been a fascinating debate. It is one to which I come very late and I therefore have relatively little to say. Having served my time on the Justice Committee last time round, I—

Thank you. Maybe I will come back, or maybe not. I have nothing else to declare on the subject, except that I am grateful to my colleague Annabelle Ewing for mentioning the separation of powers, which is not something that we talk about in this place very often. I am delighted that she mentioned the subject, because I had every intention of doing so. Some of the representations that we have heard about the proposed Scottish civil justice council do not bear that matter in mind, so it might be an idea to put a little on the record about what the separation of powers means. Historically, the separation of powers has been the idea that the executive, which is the Government, should be separate from the legislature, which is the Parliament, and the judiciary, which is the courts. That is roughly where the American system finds itself. When the President’s Executive seems to be in a markedly different position from the politics of the legislature, we can see that that does not really work. I suspect that that is why in these islands we have long since worked on the idea that the Executive and the Parliament should pretty much be the same thing. That way we can at least all be singing from the same hymn sheet. For a very long time we have recognised that the courts are separate and that underpins most of the Government’s response to the points that have been made about how much control should be in statute for the Lord President’s committee. I am grateful to Graeme Pearson for his comment about a heavy burden on the Lord—

The Lord President. I am sorry, we have too many lords. I think that Graeme Pearson’s comment is absolutely right, but Lord Gill will plainly be up to it, of course. It is his job to run the courts and ensure that they do their job properly. With respect, it is our job not to tell him how to do it, but to make sure that he has the powers to do it and the legal background or underpinning for what he wants to do. Bear it in mind that, at the end of the day, if push comes to shove we can tell him what to do, but we would be wise never to do so.

I accept that there is a risk of creep every time that we change something and put those kinds of words down, but I do not believe that that will happen in practice. The Lord President knows fine well what he and the Parliament are supposed to be doing. Our constitution works only when the two sides of our separated powers understand their remits.

I understand the principle, but I disagree with it. I do not think that we need to give the Lord President guidance. The Lord President is one of a long line of Lord Presidents who know exactly what they do and understand what things are about. We have probably got the balance about right, but it is important that we have this kind of discussion and understand the basis on which we legislate. I am sure that Lord Gill understands that and that his successors will. I have a direct question for the cabinet secretary on something to which I should perhaps know the answer but do not. Section 6 of the bill sets out who will be on the council and lists the Lord President, the chief executive of the Scottish Courts Service and others. The question that needs to be addressed is, what happens if one of those people is unable to attend? I am not talking about being on holiday. If someone is incapable of attending, for one reason or another, is there a deputy who can step in and is that allowed in statute? It is not obvious in the bill. I suspect that that should be allowed if one of the appointees were to be physically unavailable for a while. I will move on—rapidly—to the legal aid issue of part 2. It seems that the principle behind the bill’s provision is that legal aid and the rules on legal aid should ensure that there is an incentive for the accused to tell the truth. If the provision stops the anomaly that means that it is better for someone to plead not guilty when they know fine well that they are guilty, it seems a very good step in the right direction. I think that that is what is happening and it seems that that should be the fundamental principle that underlies any of the rules on legal aid. As long as we are moving towards a situation where it is in everyone’s interests—including lawyers’ interests—that the truth is told as early as possible, we might be going in the right direction. I want briefly to mention the issue of eligibility, which other members have referred to. The Subordinate Legislation Committee, of which I am convener, commented on the scheme of eligibility, which is set out in section 18, and the Government has responded that such significant powers are best left with ministers because of the flexibility required. However, others contend that that should not be the case. For what it is worth, my opinion is that the Government is probably right. Particularly when the powers are introduced, those skilled in this art will have to find some way of making them work and I am pretty sure that having to come back to this Parliament, with all the associated timetabling issues, is not a good way of providing flexibility. Nevertheless, we must ensure that the policy by which the scheme should work is laid down either in statute or in subordinate legislation thereafter. I think that that is where we are, but any thinking on the matter should focus on ensuring that the statute and regulations lay down the policy and that those who are skilled in the art can deal with the numbers afterwards. As for refunds, there is a decent philosophical argument behind the approach that has, however, not been pushed to the nth degree, and perhaps I might be allowed to do so for a few seconds. If I am accused of something that I am simply not guilty of, it is quite possible that my life will be seriously inconvenienced and my professional reputation ruined. No one is suggesting that the state compensate me for most of that inconvenience or any loss of professional reputation. If we should be refunding those found not guilty, why are we not compensating them for accusing them in the first place?

If the member will forgive me, my question was more rhetorical than legal. If that is the understood legal position, there is no particular argument for refunding people found not guilty on relatively small matters when there might be much larger consequences for the accused.

I am concerned about the interaction with the police, because the police are a can-do organisation that will say, when consulted, that they will do anything that needs to be done. Will the cabinet secretary assure me that the police will be specifically consulted in such a way that they do not respond on a can-do basis but are allowed to give serious advice on the implications of courts moving from A to B or B to C, so that we have the officers on the streets rather than waiting somewhere else to be called to court?

Given my well-known skill at languages, I will duck any attempt to pronounce anything in Polish, but I am glad that we have an opportunity to discuss this important issue. As usual, when I am this far down the batting list, I have no intention of repeating what has already been said, except to thank Christine Grahame for securing the debate. I am grateful to Christine Grahame for pointing out that, although the Poles came—and were welcomed—here as a result of their retreat from Europe, they took it upon themselves to defend parts of Scotland. That includes in my patch, up to Montrose. For many Poles, home was in Forfar, which is an ancient town in Angus. To this day, there are two plaques in Forfar that commemorate the presence of Polish forces. A plaque on Market Street, by the sheriff court building, commemorates a royal visit by King George VI and Queen Elizabeth, along with General Sikorski—he, of the famous helicopters, I think—on 7 March 1941. The other plaque, situated on the wall by the Forfar cross in the middle of town, commemorates the 10th Polish reconnaissance group’s stay in Forfar during the war. That group, as was mentioned, went on to take part in the Normandy campaign. The following words are engraved on the plaque: “To commemorate the sojourn of the 10th Polish reconnaissance group in the royal and ancient borough of Forfar. 18 October 1940—3 April 1942. Gifted to the town by the unit on their departure.” The unit was obviously grateful, and I can tell members why. The troops were not billeted in barracks, but were placed with local families. I suspect that that was typical of what happened around Scotland, and it is probably the reason why there is a great bond of friendship. The Poles formed a band and a choir in the town, and apparently performed regularly in the Pavilion picture house on a Sunday, giving concerts to locals to raise money for the war effort. Later, the 10th Armoured Cavalry Brigade, the reconnaissance unit, three signals companies and a grenadier battalion stayed in Forfar, too. I am told that one abiding memory is that the troops, when not training, helped with the tattie harvest—I am not sure how tattie will come out in the Official Report. Apparently they did so in pressed uniforms and white gloves, which must have been quite funny to see. That just goes to show how professional they were and how loved they were when they left. They clearly enjoyed their time in Forfar. I am grateful to Christine Grahame for lodging the motion for debate. I have to say that Mapa Scotland is a wonderful model—I wish that I had one in my constituency because, boy, would we make something of it.

Will the member give way?

I am truly grateful for being allowed to intervene, because I am very conscious that members have referred to the risks that were taken. John Park and others mentioned the role of the trade unions. I am concerned that no one has mentioned the fact that towards the end of the period of steel in the UK, the trade unions became a spur for health and safety legislation—some of which we sometimes now berate, but which has transformed in a generation the safety of our industrial processes.

It is an interesting experience to rise this late in a debate, when there is not very much left to say and there is probably more time to say it in than one would have expected. However, I will work my way through the issues that have come up. I am grateful to Kevin Stewart for telling me about Shetland’s housing support grant in his speech. I confess that I did not understand it beforehand, but to me, as a fellow former councillor, the idea of borrowing from one’s own harbour fund seems a wonderful wheeze. I think I now understand a little more about what might have been going on. I turn to the things that will be with us for very much longer, starting with business properties. Every one of those properties is an individual space, so we need to look at what effect the bill will have on the microeconomics of the individual business space—or possibly even a sub-space, as some of the big units might be subdivided or let in parts if that made economic sense. I admit that I have never had to run a business space, but most of the costs seem to disappear if one just shuts the door and drains the cold water taps. As long as the property is wind and watertight, the maintenance cost might be practically zero for a considerable period. It is not especially difficult to see why landlords—particularly absentee landlords who have no interest in the local community around the building—would think that it was cheaper to do that than to try to market it.

Just a moment. It is perfectly reasonable to think that, if there is an incentive—which happens to be business rates—to get a property back into use, a landlord may say, “I’ve now got a cost that I did not have before. Maybe I should see whether a lower rent would work.” That might get some economic cycle around it.

No, I do not. There is a cost in terms of time and effort in running one’s own business, as there is in doing anything. If the owner has a portfolio of properties that includes one or two over there, a long way from their backyard, which the owner does not know very much about and does not see what they are going to be used for, and there is no incentive for the owner to make an effort, they will probably put their effort somewhere else. They might be quite happy to live with those properties simply as elements of a balance sheet that will pick up eventually. It is perfectly reasonably to say that there will be occasions—I do not know how many—when an incentive, such as an additional cost called business rates, will wake people up and make a difference.

Forgive me for going on just for a moment. There is also a general principle to observe. I cannot remember who it was at the London Business School who pointed out that in economics one should stick to principles and not allow oneself to be confused by the numbers. It cannot possibly be wrong that if we create a cost incentive for the landlord to occupy property, rents will come down as he tries to find a market rent at which he will get some income.

Indeed. In some places—Aberdeen is a classic case—we see that. However, the bill will have different effects in different places. I need refer only to my constituency to demonstrate that the effect will depend on how far the property is from a centre of business. Forfar is not doing too badly. However, in Brechin, which is only 10 miles down the road but is one more stop away from Dundee, there are far more empty properties. I can see exactly the same effect as I come into my constituency from the north, from Aberdeen. In Stonehaven, there is no particular shortage of people who want to use business properties and there are not too many vacant ones. However, if we come an extra 15 miles down to Laurencekirk, we see a different situation. The effects are place specific, which is perhaps what we would expect with properties.

I have only to look to my previous home city of Dundee to recognise that that has happened. I can think of places where it has. In the current economic landscape, it is mighty difficult to calculate any effect on anything. A financial memorandum that says that the estimates are approximate and that the Government hopes that it might get a result in that direction seems rather more honest than others that quote numbers to two or three significant figures, which I am not sure that I am likely to believe in the current economic environment. On domestic dwellings, I welcome the idea that the penalty for non-disclosure should go up. As a former councillor, I am not with the idea that £200 would force people to do the right thing; I think that £500 is getting towards the right figure. I wonder whether a maximum figure that is rather more than that might be appropriate, but I am not sure how we would massage that, so perhaps £500 is okay. I will also pick up a point that the minister referred to but nobody else picked up on. The Subordinate Legislation Committee—which, of course, I convene—made the point that there is no limit in the bill on the amount by which domestic rates could be put up. That point was so fundamental that the committee felt that it had to point it out. The Parliament has to put a limit on any tax-raising power. If the limit is 100 per cent, that is fine by me and seems perfectly reasonable. If the Government had felt that it could be 200 per cent but would probably only be 100 per cent for the moment, that would not affect the fundamental principle. The important point is that there be a number in the bill so that the Parliament knows what power it is giving away. I am happy that it should be 100 per cent and, if that makes sense to the Government, so be it. I also like the idea, which Mark McDonald introduced to the debate, that once a property has been put back into use there should be some kind of rates relief. That brings me back to the estimated income and the costs. I confess that I am not sure that I need to worry too much about those. We want houses to be occupied and in use. There are about 150,000 people looking for a home. It does not matter if the figure is out by a factor, because it is still enormous. If we can do something to eat into it, that is good. If, at the end of the day, the income and expenditure just balance, that is fine if we get folk back into homes. Therefore, whether the income is really £18 million or £10 million does not bother me as long as it is more than the £1.8 million, £3.6 million or possibly £5 million that it might cost. Why worry? As long as one is significantly higher than the other, we are doing the right thing.

I take the point that there are a lot of one-bedroom properties around. That is a fair comment, but it is only a complication to the general principle. I understand that we will not necessarily have all the right things in the right places. The last point that I ought to pick up on is the issue of flexibility and the idea that rates relief on a home on one side of the city might be different from that on a home on the other side of the city, within the same council area. I can see why some flexibility is a really good thing, because there are places where we do want to incentivise for homes to come into use and there are places where we are not so worried. However, one person’s flexibility is the next person’s postcode lottery. I just hope that those who know more about this than I do—and I sit on none of the substantive committees for this bill—work out where we really do need the flexibility and what it is meant to achieve, so that we do not finish up with something that can be criticised afterwards. Would the minister like to come in?

The minister can see from his own local authority experience that, although there may be a general scheme across the country, every flexibility that is built in will turn out to be a double-edged sword somewhere—we just need to see that coming. That does not mean that we should not do it; it just means that it is a complexity that perhaps we could have done without. There is a lot in the bill that is good. I have been slightly concerned by members talking about numbers which are, by definition, approximate, and which we should not be worrying about. It seems to me that the general principle is right. How effective it turns out to be is something that the history books will tell us, and I honestly do not think that we could predict that at this point.

I am delighted to see everybody back from the holidays because I am glad that we are all here. Ken Mackintosh has asked for expenditure in three more areas—which is to be commended—yet he has criticised the Government for saying that it wants more money from Westminster. Given that all our money comes from there, what would he want us not to spend money on so that we can balance the account?

Will the member take an intervention?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what action is being taken to improve broadband speeds in Angus and Aberdeenshire. (S4O-01205)

I guess that we are getting a taste of what topical questions might be like in next year. I have heard everything that the cabinet secretary has said—including his responses to the previous questions, of course. I make the point that I—and many other members—represent the communities who will be in the last 10 per cent or so. To them, what the other 85 to 90 per cent of the population are getting is of little interest. Those small communities that are a significant distance away from existing telephone exchanges will be the last to be reached but, if I can make the point gently, they are the people—[Interruption.]

I come to this debate somewhat unprepared but, looking at what is in front of me, I have to wonder how Mr Pearson’s proposed commission would differ from any ordinary parliamentary committee. What powers would it have that would be different from those of, say, the Justice Committee, under whose remit such matters would normally fall? Mr Pearson is a member of the current Justice Committee and I was a member of the previous one but I cannot at the moment see how what the proposed commission would do would differ from what the Justice Committee could do. I agree with John Finnie that, given the Justice Committee’s history of being very busy, perhaps another committee with a new name and another set of folk in the Parliament should be set up. In short, I simply cannot understand why we need a commission to be put in the bill when the Scottish Parliament can set up a committee to carry out this work.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with Scottish Water regarding the adoption of private drains and sewers. (S4O-01155)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that there are new builds in Scotland that, for obvious economic reasons, are unlikely to be completed for a significant period. Some of those schemes have been built in part and, in piping terms, are complete. Such schemes could be adopted, were the rules to allow it. Will the cabinet secretary meet me and the head of Scottish Water to sort out how we can modify the rules to make some sense of the situation on the ground—quite literally—where such schemes really should be adopted, so that the roads can then be adopted, gritted and looked after, and customers can be given a sensible service by their local authorities?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making towards meeting the goals of the water framework directive. (S4O-01138)

I welcome the progress that has been made. How will improving water be considered in the context of the review of spending priorities for the Scottish rural development programme?

It has been a very interesting debate. When we have a consensual debate about issues that we all understand, we can bring our own experiences to it. I have experience of helping the victim of a very serious personal crime over a long period, and I would like to reflect on what I learned from going through that experience with her. I emphasise—I am sure that the cabinet secretary know this, but I want to ensure that we have got it—that there is a considerable difference between information and advice. I will stick with the generality of that for a moment. Information might very well be provided online—that is undoubtedly the way in which modern technology is going—but advice, I suggest, should generally be given by a person. Advice about what someone should be doing that is given online is likely to be incomplete and to be misunderstood by some. In this case, we are dealing with people whom we do not want to misunderstand anything. If we take the view mentioned by some members that both witnesses and victims are victims, we need to ensure that people who have found their way into the legal system involuntarily get the best possible advice on how to cope with it. In that regard, I repeat that we must ensure that when those people get advice, they get it early, and they get it from someone who can provide it in terms that they understand and who can get feedback that tells them that it has been understood.

Indeed. I make the point simply to distinguish between information and advice. In my friend’s case, the experience was very good, but it was based on the fact that she dealt with a single person in the victim support system, whom she made contact with pretty early on. That leads me to my second point. There is nothing new about this, but having a single point of contact, whether for advice about how to go on with life or for information about a case, is crucial. Whether that comes from the prosecution service or the police is neither here nor there, although I guess that it should come from the prosecution service the moment that it has been decided that someone is going to be prosecuted. The victim support system should ensure that there is a single point of contact with someone with whom it can work properly.

I do not think so. In my experience, the victim support lady was well capable of providing advice one way or another, getting hold of the appropriate help from other people and pointing folk in the right direction. The point is that there should be a single point of contact and that advice needs to come from a person, especially given the fact that every victim is traumatised and many will not be able to cope with that trauma. I am conscious that my time has flown away, so I will pick up on one other issue, which goes back to a point that Lewis Macdonald made early on in the debate. It is a well-known fact that victims, witnesses and perpetrators often come from the same community. I suspect that that is the norm. It occurs to me that there might be some cases—and they are likely to be the least serious cases—in which it might be appropriate for the justice system to go to the community rather than everyone having to go to the justice system. For someone in the centre of Aberdeen, where I lived once upon a time, there would be no issue. However, for people who live in my constituency, which is some distance from both Aberdeen and Dundee, a case could be made—and it should probably be considered now, while the Scottish Court Service is thinking about court buildings—that, in appropriate, relatively minor cases, the court could go to the community rather than people having to go a significant distance to the court. I do not want to elaborate on that point. I can see that there would be many issues to consider, and it would plainly not work in complex cases that need special measures; that would be extraordinarily difficult, if not impossible. However, I make the plea that, in the process of considering where courts go, we should consider the point that hearings do not necessarily need to take place in court buildings that are extremely expensive to maintain. That is one of the drivers behind the current courts review. Some hearings could go to the local town hall. I wonder whether the cabinet secretary could consider that idea.

I am grateful for the member’s support, but I must point out—although it might not be in my interests to do so—that civil courts, from which we do not expect somebody to do a runner, can much more easily be placed out in the country. We obviously have a problem with criminal proceedings in which someone is probably in irons in one way or another for some part of the process. Getting criminal cases out to the countryside may not be easy, but it seems to me that there must be some cases for which that would be appropriate.

4. To ask the First Minister what plans are being made for the year of homecoming 2014. (S4F-00748)

What concerns me as a local MSP is that although there will undoubtedly be some very large events in our large cities—I am sure that that is entirely appropriate—there should also be events in some of the smaller communities that I and other members represent. What plans are there to ensure that such communities are given the opportunity to host events?

3. To ask the Scottish Government whether a scheme promoted under the Flood Prevention (Scotland) Act 1961, which does not yet have confirmed statutory consents, will be eligible for grant support, including beyond the current spending review period, and to a level of 80 per cent of eligible costs. (S4O-01031)

The minister will be well aware that my concern is about the flood prevention scheme in Brechin in my constituency. What assurances can the minister give that, as that scheme and the many others like it in Scotland get the appropriate consents, money will be available, subject to the 80 per cent limit and the availability of funds?

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is regarding reports that the Ministry of Defence might have sold land in Scotland that was contaminated with radioactive material. (S4F-00712)

Does the First Minister agree that the MOD really must learn the lesson of Dalgety Bay, investigate all current and former sites in Scotland and be free with the information that it discovers for the benefit of our local communities?

I thank the minister and the Government for lodging the motion. I also thank them for grasping the nettle of obesity and for the couple of reports that were produced in the previous session of Parliament. Those reports set out some new groundwork, which was commendable. We also have an action plan, to which others have referred, which I think runs to some 15 pages. I will go briefly through a few parts of that action plan and reflect on how the plan affects my part of the world. Patricia Ferguson said that this is a particularly urban issue—I hope that I did not overstate that. I want to make the point that this is not just an urban issue. If someone lives in a relatively small town, once they have walked across the town and come back again, there is not very far for them to walk. Different places have different problems and different constraints, and we need to address them all. I want to make it absolutely plain, in case it is not obvious, that exercise is a personal issue. When I go back to my office this afternoon, the choice of whether I take the stairs or use the lift is—providing that the lift has not broken down—my personal choice. As we talk about social effects, places, social constraints and the obesogenic environment—all of which are perfectly valid points—we have to remember that the amount of exercise that we do is entirely up to us, as is our diet. However, we must accept that we all live in varied circumstances and that we cannot force people to exercise, which means that we must ensure that we have an appropriate strategy that covers everybody. As a preliminary point, I state that I recognise, as others have, that our society has reached a point at which being overweight has become normalised. Parents might simply not recognise that their children, and they themselves, are overweight. The action plan places considerable emphasis on cycling. I make the obvious point that cycling is not very safe when cyclists have to share the road with cars. Cycling is at its safest and arguably at its best when there is a dedicated cycle route. I live in Brechin, in my constituency, which is approximately 10 miles from Montrose in one direction, 10 miles from Forfar in the other direction and 10 miles south of Laurencekirk. Those are all journeys that my constituents could make—for work or pleasure—by bike if they did not have to compete with cars either on main roads or on twisty minor roads, which each pose different dangers. I note that, around the country, there are many unused railway lines. Dr Beeching might have given us part of the solution. There are many areas where putting a cycle track along an old railway line would go a long way towards providing dedicated cycle routes, which would help many of us. The same thing applies when it comes to walking. I made the point that the issues around exercise might not only be of concern in urban areas. My wife and I frequently go walking, and we need to be able to go places where we are not competing with cars or barbed wire. Even in Brechin, which is a relatively wee place, it is not necessarily easy to find many of those places, and we tend to finish up on the same circuit. I live in a wonderful environment in which crime is almost unknown. I recognise that many Scots do not live in such an environment, and I also recognise, therefore, that providing a safe environment in which people can go for a recreational walk is crucial and may in fact be the overwhelming factor in many urban settings.

The member makes a fair point. A busy, occupied space is a much safer space—until, of course, it becomes so crowded that the pickpocket has a field day. The action plan mentions attractive green spaces, and I make the point that Scotland is an attractive and green place. If people can get out there, they can go on wonderful walks. Over the past week, those of us whose local paper is The Courier will have received some wee booklets about walks in Scotland. My wife and I realised that we had done many of them. However, we also realised that it was hard for people to get to them if there is no suitable bus access. We need to address that issue. If we want to get people out of cars we have to ensure that they do not need cars, and having bus routes to the right places is part of that. My time is running out, but I would like to make one more point. We have many public facilities. Surely schools in particular should be accessible out of hours. I know that that point is clearly understood, but we need to work on it to ensure that sports facilities are as usable as possible by the local community.

I am grateful to Christine Grahame for bringing the motion before us. The moment we talk about history, we all have our different scripts. It is interesting that several hundred years on we have different slants on what happened. Where does the truth lie? Like many aristocrats at the time, the first Marquis of Montrose did the grand tour of Europe. It is reported that he studied at a military academy in Angers in France and returned as a brilliant military tactician and a poet, which is an interesting combination that we take for granted, but was not entirely obvious. Montrose perhaps also demonstrated that it is possible to swap sides in a conflict and still be regarded as an honest and honourable man. Nothing is ever simple, of course, and we should remember that Montrose was a key figure in a bitter and bloody civil war at a time when politics and religion were intertwined and the reformation was relatively recent. It was the time when Charles I attempted to dilute the hard-won independence of the Scottish Presbyterian church by introducing, among other measures—as we have heard—the book of common prayer. The National Library of Scotland contains a lively contemporary account of what happened next: a mob of women rioted in the high kirk of St Giles and threw a stool at the dean, who luckily managed to duck. Montrose was one of the leading figures behind the national covenant, which demanded continued independence for the Scottish kirk. Although he fought the armies of the king, he never sought to depose him and apparently was later appalled when the king was beheaded. The covenant expressed loyalty to the king, which was crucial for Montrose. When Montrose began to suspect that other covenanters, such as Archibald Campbell, the Earl of Argyll, were willing to sacrifice the king for their own political ambitions, Montrose demurred, came out for the king and led an army of Irishmen and Highlanders through the north-east, as we have heard. He also sacked Aberdeen. I suspect that the Aberdonians have never forgotten him, for it was a brutal sacking according to contemporary accounts. He then won a string of victories culminating in the battle of Kilsyth, where he destroyed the last covenanting army in Scotland and was in effect, albeit briefly, master of the nation. Montrose may have won Scotland but, in the meantime, the royalists in England were beaten. What lay ahead for him was defeat and the slaughter of his army at the battle of Philiphaugh, as we have heard; an ill-fated attempt to raise the Highlands for Charles II, who later dropped him; defeat at the battle of Carbisdale; and betrayal for money by the Macleods of Assynt. How do we remember Montrose? I suggest that we might remember him as a cultured, principled soldier with an unbending devotion to both the reformed Calvinist church of the time and the king. There are, understandably, people in the sacked city of Aberdeen who have a different view. A local history website records that “there was some good news in 1650 when the Marquis of Montrose was captured and executed. His arm was sent to Aberdeen and put on public display.” One wonders how they told one arm from another, but that was the fate of Montrose—hanged and quartered, with his head and limbs scattered around Scotland. As we have heard, he was executed on 21 May at the market cross in Edinburgh. Eyewitnesses recorded the dignity and grace of his bearing and the generosity of his last words, as I have them—we perhaps do not know the correct order: “I leave my soul to God, my service to my prince, my goodwill to my friends, my love and charity to you all.” I commend Christine Grahame for giving us the chance to remember the life of her most eminent clan chief, whose statue stands to this day at the end of the High Street in Montrose, in my constituency. I also commend the excellent Montrose museum, which holds James Graham’s sword.

4. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to address concerns raised by the Scottish Trades Union Congress regarding youth unemployment. (S4F-00631)

The STUC raised the issue of female unemployment. Can the First Minister give us an insight into what the Government is doing in that regard, in particular?

I thank the Scottish Law Commission for its hard work in producing the template from which the bill has come. I note once again that, in previous years, we have not been very good at implementing the commission’s work. I hope that we will get better at that. I thank Rob Gibson and Claire Baker for their comments on the previous Justice Committee. I think that I am the only member in the debate who was on that committee. Our consideration of the previous Long Leases (Scotland) Bill was interesting. Members have noted that we brought up issues to do with Peterhead harbour, which have been dealt with, but I also remember an interesting discussion about pipes and cables, which did not figure much in the recent investigation. Last time round, there was considerable debate about whether a lease for a pipe or cable even existed as a lease because, apparently, if it did, the area of land was a seam underneath that never reached the surface. I refer members to that interesting discussion. I want to pick up on the common good issues. As Stonehaven is in my constituency, I ask the minister whether he will spare me some time to ensure that we get the Stonehaven recreation grounds issue sorted properly, not least because, as the minister well knows, the town is short of spare space, so we need to ensure that the centre of the town is correctly laid out.

I thank the minister for clarifying that. That brings some relief, although all such things are subject to further clarification and we must ensure that we get it right. Blairgowrie leases have come up before. My recollection is that they are verbal, annual rolling leases that became locally deemed to be perpetual leases even though they were never actually renewed. That is a bit of local law, but it is honourable law. Nonetheless, it is an opportunity for mischief these days. I return to a point that others have made about the registers. When one goes to look in the registers, one should get the right answer—surely, that is the basic principle. I do not dispute that the law can change instantly and the registers can catch up later—of course, that is the case. Nonetheless, we should have the correct information in the registers as far as possible, and now is a good time to ensure that. Given that the housing market is at a historic low point and is not likely to pick up any time soon, this is a good time to do the work. I am concerned that we should not miss the opportunity. There was some debate in the committee about the European convention on human rights issues relating to the bill. Government officials said that those were a matter of huge importance to them and felt that they had been covered. I am not going to argue that the registers are an ECHR issue, but the question arises whether one of my rights as a citizen is the ability to go to a register and get the right information. I have a suspicion that, even if the ECHR does not say that it is, we could readily recognise it as such. I raise another concern, although to what extent this matters is another issue. Richard Blake of Scottish Land and Estates said: “I do not think that it will be a huge issue. In my practising career, I have not come across any examples of long leases in which sporting rights have been reserved.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 22 February 2012; c 628.] It may be theoretical whether any funds that change hands will have to go back to any common good fund, as they will probably be so small that they will not matter. The final issue that I raise is the bill’s interaction with the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill—an issue that we considered in the Subordinate Legislation Committee. How the two bills interact is fundamentally about the timing of transactions and registrations. Officials now understand that—we are getting indications that they are clear that that needs to be worked through—and I hope that the work can be progressed satisfactorily.

I give Mearns FM its second mention and I congratulate Christine Grahame on lodging an important motion. I thank her for the reception on community radio a few weeks back, which she was good enough to start on. I want to talk about Mearns FM because its history teaches us an important lesson or two. Stonehaven Community Radio first transmitted in July 1994 from the old primary school toilet block in the community centre playground. At that time community stations could operate only for 28 days at a time and the licence cost a substantial £1,000. The station proved to be a very popular activity for the young and the participants were in their teens. In 1996 and 1998 the operation was repeated, with the highlight being 17-year-old presenter Ross Gilligan interviewing Billy Connolly in the community centre. After 1998, community radio fell silent as a result of high costs, but when five-year community radio licences were introduced in 2004, Stonehaven started again. At that stage, volunteers decided to apply for an ambitious three transmitters in order that they could cover the wide geographical area that the station now covers. Volunteers play a crucial role in community radio, which would not operate without them. Not only does volunteering make community radio work, it provides opportunities for volunteers to learn, which is a huge part of what goes on. I take this opportunity to welcome to the public gallery Steve Holt, who is one of the volunteers and fixed parts at Mearns FM. Good evening, Steve. Stonehaven Community Radio was reborn as Mearns FM on 6 June 2009, which coincided with the annual Stonehaven feein market, which is an old tradition that involves potential agricultural workers coming down to the middle of the town to be fee’d, or hired, by local landowners. Community radio can assist in a vast number of areas, but particularly in providing training opportunities. Time does not allow me to say all that can be done in that regard. However, I point out that Mearns FM constructed a studio in the sixth-year common room at Mackie academy, which is the local Stonehaven secondary school. Every school day during lunchtime the youngsters broadcast live from there, picking up on their own interests and music and what is happening in their area. I understand that Mearns FM is also beginning to broadcast to the local Polish community, which seems to me to be an apt use of such a radio station. If the Polish-speaking community knows that there is a particular time in the week when it will have input, one can see that they will very quickly gel and, indeed, find the right volunteers to do that. That seems to be enormously important. To pick up on the issue of politics, I too have been interviewed on Mearns FM in the context of hustings. They are hugely valuable opportunities for listeners to work out what their politicians are about. I am not sure that I really understand the benefit of shoes on the radio, because it seems to me that unless they are squeaky shoes they are not actually going to make a contribution. I have a pair of special shoes that are organ-playing shoes. They are not squeaky because I would rather people heard what was coming out of the pedals rather than my feet hitting them. The ability for the four candidates for Angus North and Mearns to be in the Mearns FM studio, to be interviewed by the redoubtable Ken Venters, to make our pitch and to be recorded where necessary by other folk seems to me to be bringing politics to the people and that is an important part of what community radio can contribute.

Will the member give way?

I take Mark Griffin’s point, but the way in which the borrowing powers are set up means exactly the reverse: the larger the capital budget, the more we can borrow; and the less the capital budget, the less we can borrow. That does not seem to be the right way round.

I would like to take us back a few years and to a little bit of research into the history of the situation. Members have referred to Sir Oliver Franks’s report in 1957. I am delighted to say that I have a copy of that report in my hand. It is not the first one that I bought, because once I passed the exams, I made the mistake of getting rid of that document: I thought, of course, that I would never need it again. I am grateful to the Scottish Parliament information centre, which has produced a copy from the National Library of Scotland very quickly. Page 2 of that report says that “Since the war”—that was the second world war, of course— “the British electorate has chosen Governments which accepted general responsibilities for the provision of extended social services and for the broad management of the economy. It has consequently become desirable to consider afresh the procedures by which the rights of individual citizens can be harmonised with wider public interests.” Paragraph 10 of the report says that “over most of the field of public administration no formal procedure is provided for objecting or deciding on objections. For example, when foreign currency or a scarce commodity such as petrol or coal is rationed or allocated, there is no other body to which an individual applicant can appeal if the responsible administrative authority decides to allow him less than he has requested. Of course the aggrieved individual can always complain to the appropriate administrative authority, to his Member of Parliament, to a representative organisation or to the press. But there is no formal procedure on which he can insist.” I think that we recognise the sentiments, but probably not the subject matter. Post-war developments appear on page 8 of the report. I am looking to demonstrate how things arose. The report says that “new policies or regulatory legislation have meant new tribunals”. The Agriculture Act 1947, the National Insurance Act 1946, various rent acts and the National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act 1946 are cited and it is pointed out that “Tribunals today”—that is, in 1957— “vary widely in constitution, function and procedure.” Nothing much has changed since then. On page 25, Sir Oliver Franks looks at the right of appeal. He says: “The existence of a right of appeal is salutary and makes for right adjudication. Provision for appeal is also important if decisions are to show reasonable consistency. Finally, the system of adjudication can hardly fail to appear fair to the applicant if he knows that he will normally be allowed two attempts to convince independent bodies of the soundness of his case.” I am not sure that we would quite sign up to that these days, but a fair point is made about where Sir Oliver Franks was coming from. Members have referred to our debate in September 2010. I spent my time talking about the right of appeal, and I have re-read what I said. I stand by it, although I have no desire to repeat it to members. It seems to me that where there is a good and accessible—although not necessarily speedy—right of appeal, there will be good judgments. I think that we all recognise in life that, where there is no real prospect of something being appealed, those who make the decisions may well, without any malice at all, get lazy. Therefore, we are much more likely to get bad decisions. In the context of the consultation, the role of the upper tier, as I understand it, is on matters of law. It must be recognised, of course, that calling the right evidence and referring to it correctly is itself a matter of law. That seems to be entirely right, otherwise we will simply re-hear cases, but it begs the question what legal qualifications should be required of those who adjudicate in the upper tier. I note from the consultation paper that all the High Court judges, if I may so describe them, will automatically be on the panel. Can the minister give us clues as to who else might be deemed to be legally qualified and to what extent upper-tier members might be experts, rather than lawyers?

I am grateful for that clarification. It has occurred to me that the upper-tier tribunal will set precedent. It will be staffed by senior people and it will make law. I would have thought that what it decides will be binding on the first-tier tribunal in the future. I wonder to what extent there will be reporting systems that extract and communicate precedents to first-tier adjudicators. I suspect that in the past we have not been as good as we should have been at such communication. I also wonder to what extent it is thought that the appeals system might be rationalised in the future. One might suggest—theoretically and quite unreasonably—that the first tier might appeal to the upper tier, which might appeal to the sheriff principal and on to the Court of Session, the Supreme Court and the European Court of Justice. No one wants that to happen, but I make the point simply to demonstrate that it might be sensible if we had standardised lines of appeal and appropriate jumps could be made, to ensure that things could not go on for ever. I endorse what John Finnie said about access, which is essential, and what he said about early resolution and mediation, which are undoubtedly the way forward. Unreasonable cases should be eliminated from the system, but we must ensure that there are no unnecessary barriers to going to a tribunal for complainers. I guess that getting the right cases in and keeping the others out is a difficulty of any legal system. As other members have done, I note that the handful of tribunals that are included in the current proposal can be expanded to include other tribunals that are devolved and—in time, no doubt—tribunals that might subsequently become part of an independent Scotland. What I like about what is proposed is that constitutional change does not seem to matter; the system seems to be appropriate. I welcome that. Paragraph 4.9 of the consultation paper mentions a procedure for reconsideration of decisions of the first-tier tribunal. That sounds like an extremely good idea. The ability to go back and think again before passing something on to others is a sound approach in life. I confess that I am not familiar with such an approach anywhere in our legal system, so I would be interested to know how it might work. From paragraph 4.52 onwards, the consultation paper is about opportunities to improve. That is an extremely good thing. Christine Grahame said that some complainers are worn out by the time their case reaches a tribunal. As we think about the tribunals that pick up the pieces, we should consider the processes, which are often in local authorities, into which complainers will already have put a lot of time and effort. In that context, we might consider situations in which council legal officials are asked to be general and in-principle advisers in the process, although they are being paid by one of the parties. I think that the practice still goes on, although it is not entirely consistent with our ideas of judicial fairness.

6. To ask the Scottish Government when work on the Aberdeen western peripheral route will be completed. (S4O-00824)

I concur with the cabinet secretary’s thoughts about the objectors. The cabinet secretary will be aware of the suggestions for an alternative junction design at the north Stonehaven junction with the A90. Does he believe that there is some merit in those suggestions—there appears to be—and that they could yet be incorporated into the scheme?

I note the classes of scheme on which the minister has commented, but I do not recall seeing anything about oil product replacement technologies and the idea that waste products might be converted by technologies to something that would pass as petrol, such as isopropanol. Are those the kind of technologies that might also be supported by the fund?

As a former citizen of Aberdeen—I lived there when all this started—I am delighted that we have reached the point at which the city council now has a mandate to get on with an undoubtedly world-class project. However, I am disappointed with the nature of this parliamentary debate, principally because the motion bears little resemblance to what Labour Party members are now trying to say about it, having realised that what they proposed in the first place was probably not too bright. Let me return to the subject at hand. When this process started, I lived in Aberdeen—in AB24 5DE—and I remember when Sir Ian Wood first briefed MSPs on the subject. I had just returned from a visit to family in New Zealand, during which I went to the botanical gardens in Wellington and saw the open-air theatre. I recognise that the weather in Wellington is slightly different from ours, but we get some good weather and possibly less wind. I thought how wonderful it would be if that kind of environment could be created in Aberdeen, where I lived and which I know and love. Along came Sir Ian Wood, saying, “Why don’t we?” and, “Furthermore, I’ll pay for it.” Well done, Sir Ian. Thank you. I admit that the initial consultation did not get off to a very good start, as Alison McInnes mentioned. Frankly, there was an unhelpful drawing and the original consultation probably was not as wide as it should have been. The net result was that not a very large number of people expressed an opinion. I am glad that a very, very large number of people have now expressed an opinion and that they clearly knew what they were voting on—there can be no doubt about that. The vote might have been won by a relatively small margin, but Alison McInnes made the point well about the way in which elections have operated; some members here know about that.

Forgive me, but I want to make another point. In the debate, I have been surprised not by the Labour Party’s negativity, which I have got used to, but by the fact that it now wants to change the subject to referenda, although it will ensure that the press release is about Aberdeen. In my last minute, I will consider what the project will look like for someone who lives between Aberdeen and Dundee, as I do. Dundee, where I lived for a long time, has seen a vision of something being done to regenerate the city. If members are not aware of the waterfront project, they should be. That project, which will reach its pinnacle when we get the Victoria and Albert museum there, will transform Dundee completely as a place to do business, as a visitor centre and, therefore, as a place to live. Dundee has shown what can be done, and I do not think that it is entirely coincidental that there was a change in the make-up of the council. Aberdeen has an opportunity to catch up, but it sounds as though one of the political parties that might have something to do with the council after 5 May does not want that to happen. The message from today’s debate seems simply to be about whom Aberdonians should not vote for. Frankly, if they want to see some vision for and development of their city, they will have to turn to the other parties.

In a region where two colleges have not merged but there is nevertheless to be a regional board, what will the effect be on the activities and responsibilities of the college boards that presumably will remain?

I recognise that the member for Angus South is concerned about his part of the world. However, as the member representing the bit just north of that, I wonder whether he accepts that we are not so good at joined-up tourism. Visitors who can be persuaded to go from Dundee to Arbroath can easily be persuaded to go to the north of Angus and beyond. The fact is that we tend to market things within boundaries when in fact the boundaries are largely artificial. They might as well come up to Dunnottar castle, which is just about to appear on the Royal Bank of Scotland’s ultimate rewards current account card.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the V&amp;A at Dundee will have on the community of Angus. (S4O-00752)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her comprehensive answer, which has given me everything that I wanted to hear at this stage—I just hope that it all works out. Does she also feel that there are cultural opportunities from which our universities and schools can benefit? Are there plans to ensure that the V&amp;A is open to everyone, far and wide, and that proper communication will follow?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what support it gives to people living in homes without cavity walls to help them reduce their carbon footprint and stay warm. (S4O-00666)

I thank the minister for his recognition that such properties are often in rural communities. Does the minister agree that the green deal, although it is welcome in principle, is unlikely to give us a structure and a model that will help rural communities, simply because of the low density of buildings that will be appropriate?

As the First Minister will be aware, last week Ross and Bonnyman, which has been based in Forfar since 1973 and specialises in designing and manufacturing lifting products, went into liquidation with the loss of 80 jobs. Does the First Minister share my concern about the impact of such job losses on this small community? What support can the Scottish Government provide to ensure that some highly skilled members of that workforce find employment as swiftly as possible?

3. To ask the First Minister what impact the increase in applications to Scottish universities from Scotland-based students will have on the higher education sector. (S4F-00445)

Does the First Minister agree that, as applications by English students to English universities are down by 9.8 per cent and the number of Scots who are applying to study in England is down by 16.4 per cent, that demonstrates perfectly the destructive nature of the fee regime south of the border?

A constituent recently told me that what is important in my part of the world is the cost of booze, the cost of petrol and the speed of broadband. That is a somewhat materialistic view of the world, but there is a little point in there somewhere. We are dealing with the speed of broadband. Is it not strange to talk just for once about something to which everybody would say, “Yes, in my back yard”?

My time is a bit too precious to answer that, but it was a nice try. We know and have said that the debate is about the haves and the have-nots. We will have targets that refer to 98 or 95 per cent of the country, but I am concerned that what we need is solutions for all. We expect every house to have running water, electricity and sewerage. We should think, too, about every dwelling having broadband access. If we think in those terms, we must recognise that the technical solution will differ for each dwelling. I say to the cabinet secretary that, to achieve 100 per cent coverage, or as close to it as we can get, every necessary technology should be in the mix. Otherwise, some people will—by dint of geography—be left out when they should not be. I draw to the attention of the Presiding Officer and members a map of Scotland—it is like a measles rash—that shows not-spots in red, pretty good areas in yellow and very good areas in green. That map shows clearly that people who are within about 2 miles of a telephone exchange are probably okay. In my part of the world—Angus North and Mearns—people will get about 7 or 8 megabits. Outside 2 miles, the figure is down to about 1 megabit or less. The solution for places such as Marykirk and Johnshaven in my constituency, which are outside the 2-mile radius, is to have a fibre cable run to the middle of the village and to work from that. That is not economically viable for the profit-seeking BT, but it is clearly the solution that is needed, which is why gap funding is appropriate. In other areas, such a solution will not apply. We need to explore all such matters, but I will not spend more time on that. I will, by comparing Broughty Ferry with Marykirk, consider some benefits and problems. I do not want to upset my friends in Broughty Ferry—I do have friends there. Broughty Ferry is, of course, to the east of Dundee; people should never say that it is in Dundee. People who live in Broughty Ferry have a choice of supplier—BT, Virgin Media, Sky and O2—whereas people who live in Marykirk have only BT. The speed in Broughty Ferry is up to 40 megabits, whereas people in Marykirk might struggle to reach 2.5 megabits—I know of people there who must run two lines to get 2 megabits, which is 1 megabit for each line. People who live in Broughty Ferry pay less than £20 a month, whereas people who live in Marykirk pay at least £25 a month. People in Broughty Ferry have access to 3G, but people who live in Marykirk have no such access. That is the stark reality for people who are living 30 miles apart, and it should not be like that. It is like that simply because the commercial environment in which we have been working so far has given us those consequences, for reasons that we well understand because we understand the commercial world. What will be the benefits of getting it right? I will expand on those in the few moments I have left. Members have mentioned savings on travel, and saving money from being able to buy things online. Comment has also been made about telehealth. We could comment about how people can simply do business. Someone who runs a business over the internet could run it from Marykirk if they had access to 40 megabit broadband. At the moment, they could do that in Broughty Ferry, but not in Johnshaven or Marykirk. Getting it right will mean that people can have the world of information at their fingertips, and that is how we will draw older people in. Of course, if we hang around long enough, we will be the older generation.

As Christine Grahame said, some of us already are. If our older folk are accessing the information that they want and understanding that the internet is the place to get it—they do not have to go to the library because they can look it up online—they will get used to that and all sorts of other benefits will come to them. We need to recognise that we need solutions that will cover 100 per cent of premises, and that there are huge economic benefits to be had throughout Government, local government and private life that will far outweigh the amount of money that we are talking about. We really must get on with it. If it comes down to finding a bit more money, I am sure that the cabinet secretary will do his level best to do so.

This is a hugely important subject and—this is not a criticism of anybody—I am sorry that we have only four minutes each to discuss it. It means that it is difficult to have anything resembling a serious discussion but, characteristically, I will try. Uncharacteristically, I point out to Labour members that they are perhaps not on the best ground, having spent a long time doing precisely nothing. This Government has made some progress. More important, we have recognised that the issue is currently in the hands of local authorities. The list of local authorities and the payments that they make is in front of me, and my understanding is that most of the councils that make the poorest payments are run by members of the Labour Party.

I will, but let me say first that I think that Labour members have the option of convincing their councils to have a go, given that others seem able to succeed.

The Minister for Local Government and Planning, who was leading a local council at the relevant time, has already refuted that point, and I do not think that I need to do anything more than stand by his comments. I merely make the point to Jackie Baillie that most of the worst councils seem to be somewhere near her party. I am sorry that—

Jackie Baillie should just take the point. Labour members have some influence, and it would be helpful if they used it. I now want to make some progress. I have time left only to reflect on what was said at the round-table discussion at the Education and Culture Committee a couple of weeks ago. As Alison Todd from Children 1st pointed out, the problems arise “because the regulations and the legal system were not set up for kinship carers.” Robert Swift subsequently commented: “There is a complex interface between the benefits system and moneys that are provided by the local authority—one can impact on the other. The system is complicated.” Mike Callaghan from COSLA said: “Kinship carers have found that, once they receive allowances, other benefits have been taken off them.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 17 January 2012; c 611, 613 and 618.] Those three comments sum up the context for kinship carers’ financial income. It is clearly very difficult for people to access the right sums of money. Obviously, it is also difficult for the local council to find its way through the system and provide a similar payment, other than by simply deciding that, regardless of a kinship carer’s benefits situation, it will use its discretion to make payments up to the level of the foster care figure. That is what I think those councils are doing—I do not see any other mechanism. I commend that approach to councils because that is what they have to do, although it seems crazy to me that they are in that position. We are back to where most of us started in this debate: it is down to councils to do their job, but they are working in a horrible position given to them by Government. Some control over that Government intervention would not half help. The UK Government is going to mess around—and will continue to mess around—with welfare benefits, so it will be better when we do the lot, rather than leaving it to the discretion of the local council to sort out the mess.

I think that I have agreed with every word that Mr Henry has said and I am grateful to him for articulating those points, but I am sitting here wondering how we will pay for all that. What are we not going to spend money on if we spend it in the way that he suggests?

I, too, thank the cabinet secretary for her statement. Increasing the resources sounds like the right kind of solution, especially to those of us in rural areas, where ambulances are necessarily thinner on the ground. However, I make the point that rests are necessary for anybody doing a serious job, especially if they are driving. Can the cabinet secretary give me an idea of how rests will be achieved for ambulance crews and how we will be sure that they get them without compromising the availability of ambulances in rural areas?

6. To ask the First Minister what progress has been made towards securing an agreement with ambulance staff on emergency interruption of rest breaks. (S4F-00386)

I thank the First Minister for his response. While negotiations are on-going, it would be inappropriate for me to say very much other than to emphasise to any member who has constituents in rural communities, as I do, the importance of the issue to those who find that their ambulances are widely spread out. I am therefore grateful to the First Minister for his response and I hope that those negotiations will be concluded swiftly.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what assessment it has made of the effectiveness of both national health service and commercial weight reduction programmes. (S4O-00557) I, too, apologise for being a few moments late for this session.

The minister will be aware of research that was published in the British Medical Journal last year that indicated from extensive work that was done in Birmingham that commercial weight reduction programmes were significantly more effective than their public service counterparts. Has the minister a mind to encourage the NHS to take up commercial programmes, where appropriate, and so enable the NHS to concentrate on patients who may be more difficult to deal with in that regard?

4. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on the financial impact on rural communities of higher delivery charges for online deliveries. (S4F-00378)

Improbably, constituents of mine in Stonehaven—a mere 15 miles from Aberdeen—are being charged extra despite the fact that the delivery stations are on the south side of Aberdeen. Is there anything that the Scottish Government can do to support trading standards officers across Scotland to put an end to these unfair delivery charges?

I will look at the quite brief history of the regulatory review group and at where it has got to in the past few years. I will go back to July 2008, when Fergus Ewing’s predecessor, Jim Mather—who has already been mentioned and who, I think, is much missed—wrote: “Increasing sustainable economic growth is the over-riding purpose of the Scottish Government. Within this, making Scotland one of the best places in Europe to do business is one of the key national outcomes. So establishing a Europe-leading approach to the improvement of business regulation is in itself a fundamental government objective. Better regulation covers a ... broad swathe of government activity. It concerns Planning ... SEPA” and so on, and “it is relevant to government interaction with business, at Ministerial level, at official level, and through agencies such as Scottish Enterprise and Highland and Island Enterprise.” In 2008, Professor Russel Griggs, the leader of the group, wrote: “For many years now business has ‘complained’ that there is ‘too much regulation’. However the challenge has always been that when asked to be specific on the burdens that regulations impose both on individual businesses and the organisations representing them, they have found it difficult to highlight many specifics which they and Government can jointly engage in a conversation to discuss and resolve. This has led to: a) Business having a belief that Government is there to ‘fix’ regulation to make it better for them; b) A belief by Government that regulation is just one of the things that businesses ‘complains’ about like taxation. This has been exaggerated by many of the initiatives that Government in the UK has put into place”. He continued: “What this has led to is that the two sides of this debate have positions and views without any real understanding of the way the other side operates or needs to operate to satisfy their individual aims. In simple terms Business does not understand why or how Government operates and Government does not understand why business complains as it does not realise the full impact that regulation has on them.” Those words were written in 2008. Members will know that the business and regulatory impact assessments were introduced in April 2010, which is why it is appropriate that we should now review, as the regulatory review group has done, what has happened in the year since then. Page 2 of the report that the group published this week states that the group’s initial view “remains unchanged, that the BRIA process overtime will show both business and government that engaging in open and constructive dialogue in the initial processes around policy and legislation development leads to a better understanding of each other’s issue. Over time a natural dialogue should expand out beyond the BRIA process to confirm and seal the partnership approach that is at the heart of the creation of better regulation. We believe that in the first year the BRIA process has already demonstrated that it adds value to both business and government encouraging more detailed discussions between both. Lack of understanding however continues to be one of the key challenges for both business and government in this area and while it has improved greatly still has some way to go before it becomes a natural part of our culture.” The minister mentioned the work that has been done on Scotland’s environmental and rural services. I draw members’ attention to the four conclusions that the review group has come to, which are set out in that report, beginning on page 4, and which are fundamental to most of the good work that will be done on the issue. The first is: “Without a Minister driving and directing the process at the outset it is unlikely the project would have happened or developed as positively as it did.” It is incumbent on ministers to lead the process, precisely because there is evidence that it works. The second conclusion is: “The involvement and buy in of the most senior people in each organisation is needed for maximum impact.” That is not telling us anything that we did not know. The third, which is also rather obvious, states: “good communication is critical, making it clear to customers and the wider stakeholder community exactly what the initiative is and the benefits to be delivered.” The fourth states: “Changing the culture is important and improving shared and joint working between bodies can be as good an outcome as particular effects on customers.” I will refer to a couple of impact assessments that I have had a look at. The first relates to permitted development rights. Anybody who has ever tried to modify their home will understand something about that. As I worked my way through it, I found that the principal result of looking at the regulations and changing them has been to make it easier for some people to get planning permission and to free up planning staff’s time for the more important and more difficult cases. I also had a look at the impact assessment of the Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Scotland Bill, which is before the Parliament and which is intended to improve tenant farming. Time does not permit me to discuss all the things that I found in there—that is for another day. Both those assessments indicate the importance of discussion. I suggest that members look at some impact assessments, because they will find that the Government talks to a vast array of organisations when regulation is drafted. That is precisely what the Government needs to do, precisely what the review group is pushing it to do and exactly the way forward.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to protect communities from flooding. (S4O-00452)

Flood defence schemes are necessarily long term. Funding for schemes that do not yet have statutory consents, such as on the South Esk at Brechin in my constituency, will necessarily go beyond the current spending review period. Will the minister clarify the Government’s intention on funding for such schemes and will the Government consider further assistance to local authorities and others with the considerable up-front costs of developing such schemes?

I also declare my trade union membership, but I remind folk that I am here as an MSP to represent all my constituents. I welcome the chance to speak today although I would much rather be taking part in a different debate. I am concerned that we might have reached a low point in Scottish history. I take the opportunity to voice the concerns of my constituents in Angus North and Mearns, many of whom have felt it necessary to take industrial action today over the increased payments that are being demanded of them. One of the things that I find unsettling about this whole episode is the impression that the UK Government is relishing the fight with the unions. Mr Cameron and his coalition partners talk of the unions as an abstract concept, which is strange to those of us who are union members, rather than speaking about them as if they were made up of ordinary workers from households in communities. Yesterday, we heard the chancellor, George Osborne, talk about union members and taxpayers as if they were two separate entities. In his universe, they might be, but we know better. When the UK Government talks about withdrawing or reducing the current pensions offer as a result of the strike action, it is not threatening faceless unions but 300,000 ordinary members of the Scottish public. They are the teachers in the schools in my constituency; they are the health workers from Brechin infirmary, Kincardine hospital and Stracathro hospital; they are the clerks from Forfar sheriff court; and they are the benefits staff from Castlestead house job centre in Montrose. I am absolutely sure that those people do not want to go on strike, as our Conservative colleagues seem to imply.

I will come back to the member. Striking costs people a day’s wages—money that comes directly out of the slice that is disposable income at a time of year when families want more, not less. People are clear that when they go on strike, there will be a knock-on effect on others; they understand that. Our teachers appreciate the difficulties that some parents will have because their children are off school. Why are people striking? I think that James Dornan got somewhere close to the answer. They are striking because they have a point that they want the UK Government to hear, and they feel that striking is the only way to get their point across. People go on strike only when they have no other way to make their voice heard. Those people deserve to be listened to; they do not deserve to be derided by a Government that has increased VAT and national insurance contributions and which now wants to introduce what is, frankly, another tax by way of pension contributions.

Mr Rennie needs to learn another trick—we have already answered that question. When the chancellor says that he is going to take the money back if we do not do that, we do not have much option. My main point is on something that the parties opposite seem not to have worked out yet. I understand that we are talking about £2.8 billion over a period, although I stand to be corrected on that figure. I will put that in the context of the current UK deficit. When I spoke to Michael Moore at the Scotland Bill Committee a few weeks ago, the UK deficit seemed to be about £155 billion a year, although yesterday’s statement may have taken it to somewhere over £160 million—other members may know the correct figure. I simply make the point that we are talking about a very small figure in the context of the current financial circumstances, which I do not underestimate. What is wrong with making the proposed change now is the fact that it comes on top of all the other problems that the common folk of Scotland—and the UK in general—are getting to grips with. When VAT has just been increased, when people’s national insurance contributions have just been increased, when they have had their pay frozen and when they know that life is not going to get any better, they do not need the UK Government coming along with any excuse to put another 1, 2 or 3 per cent on what they must pay. That is why this is the wrong time for the proposal—that is the fundamental point. Yes, we all accept that pensions need to be reviewed in the long term, but the proposal is to grab money in the short term and to worry about the benefits in the long term. The UK Government should be sorting out the current financial crisis, not putting further impositions on those who are already contributing to resolving it—because everybody whom we are talking about is in employment and is making a contribution to our society. No matter how the change is painted, it is clear to my constituents and the whole of Scotland that the Conservatives and their coalition partners are increasing public sector workers’ pension contributions to fill a hole in their failed budget deficit plan.

The pensions issue will need to be addressed. However, the UK Government’s approach and proposals are the wrong solution at the wrong time. That is why I am here to stand up for the public sector workers in my constituency by voicing their concerns in Parliament. I hope that the UK Government is listening to my point about timing, although I very much doubt that it is.

I should like to draw the cabinet secretary’s attention to the fact that, when a constituent of mine called an ambulance in the middle of the night, some time ago, the ambulance could not get to them very swiftly because the address was not recognised by the ambulance’s sat nav system. The address is on a housing estate that has been there for several years, on a road that has certainly had houses on it for at least a year. Will she undertake to look into the matter, please, and to ensure that our ambulance service has the most up-to-date maps possible?

I would like to look at the issue in the context of the fact that my wife and I are now both carers for an extremely elderly relative. I acknowledge that our life is very simple, for reasons that I will explain, but I will tease out from that some issues that I do not think have been mentioned in the debate. The first reason why our life is relatively straightforward is that the lady in question still has some mental capacity, albeit that she has a very poor short-term memory. She also accepts her limitations, which means that she is not particularly argumentative. She also does not have any particularly significant recurring medical issues, which I have to knowledge is unlikely for someone who is 96. There are of course some issues for her, because old age does not come alone. Equally, we live in a new and therefore relatively warm house. There are also two of us. My wife and I share the responsibility, which makes life a lot easier, and we are still fit and pretty able. We get a great deal of help from Angus Council and, of course, the free personal care is greatly appreciated. Equally, we get some respite care and, to be fair, money is not a particular issue for us, as I think members would have expected. However, let me reflect for a few moments on the situation if any of that was not the case, because I recognise that it is not the case for many carers. In particular, I acknowledge that our experience of our local health service is that the staff recognise the need to talk to us as well as to the elderly relative who cannot remember what was said 30 seconds ago. They understand the need to communicate with the carer as well as with the patient. Equally, they understand the need for a home visit, partly because Wendy and I both work but possibly also because it is not very far for them to come and that is a much better way of operating. I also note that there are two of us, but I am pretty sure that, where there is only one carer, it is desperately difficult. The carers I have spoken to—I will come on to some of them in half a moment—often speak about a sense of isolation, and say that they are busy doing what they have to do, that they feel that they have to keep doing it and cannot leave the person they are caring for and that therefore they are all on their own and nobody else knows or understands. Sometimes, it just does not occur to them to tell people and to get some help. Because there are two of us, that makes it fine for us, but those who are working on their own need to understand that there is support. It may be that one of the most important things that we need to do as a society is to ensure that they understand that there is support available of one sort or another. Like others, I have seen e-mails from folk who think that the services that they receive as carers are, frankly, not very good. Some of them are grudging, and some of them have a take-it-or-leave-it attitude. In our experience in Angus, the professionalism, the charm and the good humour of the staff are the most obvious thing that comes across to me. I recognise that our elderly relative is probably more placid than some, but that does not alter the fact that an elderly person who has a very short memory, if any, is a desperately difficult person to deal with. Those who can do that, day in, day out, with good humour and often under considerable time pressure because they are always travelling around need to be praised for that. It will not surprise members to learn that we have to pay for respite. That really is not a problem. However, I recognise the comments across the chamber that more respite is a good thing. However difficult it might be to arrange it, carers need time to get the brain back in gear—me time—and time to get on with some of the things that they cannot do with the distraction of having someone else there who makes demands on their time. I should say, however, that some of the respite care that is available is better than that. When our elderly relative has gone into the care homes—she has been in one in Angus and one in Aberdeen—it seems, frankly, like she has had a holiday. Her time in those places has been hugely stimulating. Again, I pay tribute to the professionalism of the staff, who seem to have given her an extremely good time, and members will appreciate that we had a good time as a consequence of the respite. I welcome in particular the work that has been done by the Angus Carers Association, which is managed by Katie Webster in Arbroath and is an organisation that I have something to do with. It supplies free services, including emotional support, training for carers, relaxation therapies, counselling, leisure and exercise opportunities, support groups and a sitting service. That latter service is probably the most important, because it is the equivalent of respite. The group says, “You can come here and have time with a group doing anything you like and, for the couple of hours that you are out of the house, we will have a trained person there with the one you love, so that you get some time out.” Fundamentally, this issue is about joined-up action, adequate funding and the personal touch that carers provide. Of course, the more we can do to act earlier and in a preventative way, the better.

Will the member take an intervention?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding reform of the common agricultural policy. (S4O-00383)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his continuing interest, which I know very well and the farmers know very well. Farmers around me tell me of particular concerns about new entrants and the fact that Scotland, of course, has far more less favoured area than the rest of the UK. Those are particular concerns in negotiating with the UK, and therefore with the European Union. Does the cabinet secretary feel that any progress is being made on those issues?

I, too, commend Dave Thompson for bringing the issue before us. Rather than repeat what has been said before, as is usual, I will add a few thoughts. When I went back and considered how the King James Bible came to be written, I found, of course, that it was steeped in practical politics. Henry VIII was of one political persuasion, and supposedly of one religious persuasion. He was followed by Mary, of another. Then, with Elizabeth, they seemed to be back where they had started. Nobody was terribly happy with the translations of the Bible that they had, or with what those translations told them about the way in which kings—and, for that matter, queens—were supposed to interact with the public. Everybody could see an opportunity to get things rewritten—although there were some genuine textual concerns as well. King James therefore stepped in and did a good thing. He said to use the familiar language from the Geneva Bible and the Bishops’ Bible—if it worked and was right—but to be prepared to make changes if necessary. We would have had a wonderful version, but for the fact that the archbishop—one Richard Bancroft—decided that he had to have the last word. That is apparently why in 1 Acts, chapter 20 the word “bishopric” found its way into the translation. I do not remember seeing it recently. There were no footnotes, which is something that parliamentary draftsmen and Government report writers might bear in mind. If it cannot go in the basic text, perhaps it should not be in a footnote. That would be quite a good rule. Also, there were no pictures. That perhaps suggests that more modern versions were to come, because there have always been people who cannot read. There still are. The authorised version was supposed to replace the Bishops’ Bible in the readings of the Church of England, but it was never actually authorised and only got there because the other one was no longer published. Apparently, it took until 1674 before it replaced the version used in Scotland. Others have mentioned the book’s influence. It must have been the most influential version of the most influential book in the most influential language in the world. It remains so. I note that people are hand writing the people’s Bible. I have not contributed and I begin to realise why, as I attempt to read my handwriting. It would be most unreasonable to inflict it on other people. I think that we should stick to a printed copy, and I hope that other people’s handwriting has been better than mine. Let us reflect on what the Bible gives us. It is the Almighty’s dealings with his creation—and, in particular, with his people. It is a history book. Uniquely, it marks the change from BC to AD, or CE, as I think we now have it. Life actually changed then. It speaks about a long-term plan; it speaks about a completed task; and, mercifully, it tells us that our relationship with the Almighty is not dependent on our own efforts. It is the best news that we have in print and it is far better than anything that will ever come out of this place, in Government policy or otherwise. I commend it to the good people of Scotland as something well worth reading. I thank all those who have brought it to our attention.

4. To ask the First Minister what the outcome was of his trip to Qatar and the United Arab Emirates. (S4F-00257)

I have a considerable interest in developments in the North Sea and welcome that investment. Will the First Minister tell me anything more about discussions that he had about development of renewable energy across the globe?

How do the minister and his department interact with local authorities to ensure that flood schemes are prioritised and that money is made available the many years ahead that are necessary if local authorities are to be able to plan for their schemes?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what consideration it has given to the findings of the cost refinement exercise carried out by Transport Scotland for a grade-separated junction at Laurencekirk. (S4O-00176)

I thank the minister for passing on that information, some of which I have seen. Given that Laurencekirk, which lies between Brechin and Stonehaven, is in the middle of a 20-mile section of the A90 that has no bridge or underpass, that there are obvious safety issues at the south junction, despite recent improvements and that the local plan implies substantial further housing development, does the minister accept that the provision of a grade-separated junction falls within the category on page 199 of the “Scottish Spending Review 2011 and Draft Budget 2012-13” of essential “safety and congestion relief improvements”?

I will change tack slightly, because there are many things in the statement. I congratulate John Mason on discussing the impacts on those in our society who are less well off; I would have liked to do the same, but I will not repeat what he said. I will address the issue of capital expenditure, which is the other side of the coin from preventative spending. We build a house because it is a great deal more comfortable than living in a tent, and it improves health and a good number of other things. If we build our house decently, we do not have to buy another tent, or deal with the consequences of what blows in through the door. Capital expenditure is actually spending to save on a grand scale and for the very long term. We have been doing it for centuries, and it is the right thing to do. What are the benefits of having a constant—or at least fairly consistent—capital budget for a Government? The main benefit is for those whom we want to do the work. We cannot just rustle up a company that can build us a road, a harbour or a hospital. Those are professional businesses of considerable size and stature. If we are to maintain those businesses over time, develop the skills of the engineers and others, and provide the training that is required in order to develop and maintain those skills, we need consistency of work. The major point that Governments ought to know—including the Scottish Government and the UK Government—is that we need pretty level capital expenditure. If it is going to rise, it should rise gently. If it is going to fall, it should fall gently. The Scottish Government plainly understands that. What we have before us is an attempt to maintain capital expenditure when the UK Government has savagely cut it—a 36 per cent cut is savage in anyone’s currency. We should be resisting that. The main purpose of what I am about to say is to remind the UK Government that it does not have to be like that. We have before us a Scotland Bill—as a member of the Scotland Bill Committee, I am well aware that the bill is seriously defective. Indeed, the proposals in the bill for capital borrowing—which is what we should be doing—are quite counterintuitive. The larger our budget in any year, the more we may borrow. However, when our budget is high we do not want to borrow. The time when we should be able to borrow is when our budget is low. Not only is the ambition in the Scotland Bill defective, but the mechanism is defective. Why will the UK Government not let the Scottish Government borrow? I am struggling to work that out. The week before last, in the Scotland Bill Committee, the Secretary of State for Scotland, Michael Moore, let go the figure of £155,000 million as the deficit budget in the current year. He acknowledged that that was rather a big number—it was much bigger than he wanted. I absolutely agree with him. However, in that context, how would a few million spent by the Scottish Government servicing the debt to borrow a few tens or hundreds of millions for capital investment really matter? The answer, quite frankly, is that it would not matter. If the money was coming out of our budget, how could that possibly be a problem to the UK Government? Apparently it is. We simply cannot borrow, because the UK Government says that we cannot borrow. That could and should be addressed and, with the greatest respect, it needs to be addressed very quickly. What are the benefits? There are several. I shall pick out one or two. If we build homes, we improve the life chances of those who live in those better homes. We also have the opportunity to reduce energy costs and our carbon footprint. What are the benefits of improved transport? We would spend less time and probably less energy travelling, and travel would almost always be safer. That is the lesson of infrastructure investment. We all have experience of the benefits of spending more money on information technology. I suspect that most people listening and reading know those benefits, too. It improves the efficiency and commercial opportunity of our people. If we spend money on schools, how could that be anything other than good for our youngsters? How can it do anything other than improve our outcomes? As the ministers are well aware, I have a local interest in the issue of money being spent on improvements to roads where there are safety issues. Such investment clearly improves safety and the wellbeing of people who travel on such roads, and it reduces the costs of those public services that have to deal with the consequences of accidents on our roads. It is staggeringly simple. I have not told Parliament anything that it did not know. Surely I have not told the UK Government anything that it does not know. It is up to the UK Government to sort it. It is not that difficult. We need borrowing powers.

I found the opening speeches from the party leaders rather more interesting than perhaps they thought, since I notice that too many of them have left the chamber. However, I thank Fiona McLeod for her speech, given that my wife, Wendy, and I are carers for an elderly relative. Having said that, I will move on to other issues. I listened to Iain Gray, who had great fun. However, I noticed that it took him 14 minutes of his 22 minutes to get to the legislative programme, and he then overran. That was sad because it seems to me that there is rather more in the programme that he could have spoken about. I want to address an issue that Iain Gray did not manage to get to, which is the proposed new social care and health service and the idea that that might somehow be all put together through legislation. I understand that that would require the repeal of 11 bits of legislation, which might be an interesting issue for members. However, I would prefer a model whereby integration was achieved locally by whatever appropriate means rather than by a new national body that would suffer from all the failings of national bodies. I want to reflect on one of the things that Annabel Goldie said, which was that the First Minister had the opportunity to railroad through Parliament anything that he likes. I assure her, and anybody else who thought that she was right, that SNP back benchers—the First Minister knows this—are not here to be railroaded. [Interruption.] We have the collective interests of Scotland at heart every bit as much as anybody else does. As I am sure members will see, there will be no need to have a fight about this, because the First Minister’s heart is in precisely the right place. However, I take exception to Annabel Goldie’s comments. [Interruption.]

I notice that Willie Rennie has now left us as well, which is a great pity but perhaps wise.

Forgive me, but I do not have time. Mr Rennie pointed out that seven out of eight chief constables were opposed to having a single police force. I do not know whether it occurred to him that there might be a reason for that. However, much more substantially, I noticed that he referred to the Secretary of State for Scotland’s recent speech in which he apparently asked six questions of the Scottish Government. The record will show what those questions were, and they will of course be answered in due time. However, the secretary of state also suggested in the same speech that the Scottish Government should get on with the job. I wonder whether Mr Rennie and other Liberal Democrat members and, indeed, other members in the chamber have noticed that the legislative programme in front of us does precisely that: it gets on with the job. Let me turn to three other specific items, starting with the proposed police and fire service reforms. It seems to make a great deal of sense to have a single system across Scotland for the employment of folk in the police force. However, I share every sentiment that I have heard so far about local accountability. I am not entirely sure what Mr MacAskill will announce in the coming days, but it seems to me that it is crucial—I have said this before, and I make no apology for repeating it—that accountability be with local councillors, and possibly others who are elected locally, at a level that makes practical sense on the ground. Let me say, as a former resident of Dundee, that Dundee city might very well be appropriate in this respect; having also lived in Aberdeen, I think that the same might apply there. However, my constituency is divided between Angus and Aberdeenshire—of course, that is just the way it is—and I am concerned that the northern part might end up in an area where accountability with regard to the police extends across the whole of Aberdeenshire. If we want to follow that model, I should remind folk that Laurencekirk is an awful long way from Fraserburgh and suggest that, in this respect, our geographical areas should be appropriate. Some structures such as those in the Northern Isles and other areas up there are very wide but I am sure that the local members will talk about that. My point is that we must ensure that accountability is geographically appropriate. I doubt that many other members will have a vested interest in the proposed agriculture and fisheries legislation but, again, it is of considerable interest to me as a member whose constituency covers not only the North Esk and South Esk and the River Bervie, but the Usan Salmon Fisheries netting operation off the coast. Certain organisations already look after the various businesses and leisure activities, but it is entirely clear to me and to those businesses in my area that the current structures of governance are not working very well and that folk with diametrically opposed commercial interests are supposed to sit on the same body. Not everyone will have an equal voice and it is extremely important that we examine that legislation and get it right.

Will the minister expand on his comments on the green equity fund? I think that he connected it with community and locally owned facilities.

I, too, am grateful to Lord McCluskey and his review group. I start with paragraph 42 of his first report, which says: “Those who prefer to see the essence of the arguments distilled will find that that has been expertly done in the Expert Group Report. It would be superfluous to repeat their summary here.” So he does not repeat it. I would like to go back to the expert group convened by the Lord Advocate, under Sir David Edward, which reported last November—and offered, as it were, the view from the other side. The expert group had slightly longer to consider the issues. I will start with a quote: “It is sufficient for present purposes to note that the House of Lords”— which preceded the Supreme Court— “on more than one occasion, held that a criminal appeal to the House from the High Court of Justiciary was not competent. This was put beyond doubt by the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1887. The Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 provides that decisions of the High Court of Justiciary ‘… shall be final and conclusive and not subject to review by any court whatsoever.’” A little further down, the report notes that the Supreme Court, under the Scotland Act 1998, is a court with “constitutional” jurisdiction, ensuring the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament and the devolved competence of the Scottish ministers. The cause of the problem is that Scottish ministers include not only those who are obviously Scottish ministers but the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General. What are devolution issues? The report says that they have to do with “legislative competence”. I do not think that that is in dispute—which is one of the reasons why the Supreme Court will remain. The report also says that devolution issues are questions about “the exercise (or purported or proposed exercise) of a function by” a minister, and questions about the “failure to act by a member of the Scottish Executive” and whether that “is incompatible with a Convention right or EU law.” That, of course, is a point to which we will return. It is because, and only because, the Lord Advocate is a member of the Scottish Executive that his or her acts are subject to review as a devolution issue. There is no parallel in other parts of the United Kingdom. I apologise, Presiding Officer, for the speed with which I am going through this, but time is not on my side. On page 12—

Forgive me. As I have just said, time is not on my side, and I really want to get this on the record. The expert group’s report says on page 12: “Any tension between the tests applied by the Supreme Court and the High Court was effectively resolved by the decision of the Supreme Court in McInnes—” which was in 2010. “In that case, the Supreme Court also made clear that where a case raises special features of Scots criminal law and practice, the Supreme Court ‘must be careful to bear in mind the fact that the High Court of Justiciary is the court of last resort in all criminal matters in Scotland’.” I emphasise that that was the Supreme Court saying that. The report goes on: “In adopting this approach the Supreme Court recognised what has been repeatedly emphasised by the European Court, namely that it is not concerned with substantive domestic law but only with ensuring compliance with the rights secured under the Convention. Devolution issues only properly arise where there is an issue of procedural unfairness.” However, the report of the expert review also notes, on page 14: “in reviewing a devolution issue, the Supreme Court has (at least in certain circumstances)—” and this is prior to the recent Fraser case— “effectively reviewed the whole merits of a decision. It is unsatisfactory that such a wide jurisdiction should be the by-product of interpretative ingenuity applied to the concept of the expression ‘act of the Lord Advocate’.” That would perhaps be fine if the Supreme Court was made up exclusively of Scots judges. I go back to John Lamont’s comments—I am not sure why having a majority of Scottish judges would help; they should really all know what they are doing. Lord Hope’s personal response to the expert group is cited on page 15 of the report, at paragraph 3.16, which notes: “Lord Hope concludes by saying: ‘For the most part the fact that the Supreme Court draws its membership from several jurisdictions has not given rise to difficulty. In practice the other justices defer to the expertise of the Scots on matters of Scottish criminal law and procedure that may come under scrutiny, and I am confident that this will continue to be the case.’” Others will argue about other problems, but I take from the quotes that I have read out the point that the Supreme Court itself recognises that it is reviewing, although it should not be. It now finds itself with just one Scottish judge, sadly, although there will no doubt be two again ere long. The majority of judges in that court are simply not experts on the subject, but on occasion—albeit it might not be very often—they are asked to review the whole merits of a case. As far as I am concerned, that is what should not be happening, and the Supreme Court itself recognises that it should not be happening. Furthermore, every statute that I have cited recognises that that should not be happening. We absolutely have to address that.

I apologise for interrupting Mr McLetchie’s flow, which is always wonderful, but I put it to him that he has just skipped over the fact that it is the result of the Cadder ruling that any procedural aspect of an investigation is reviewable and the result of the Fraser review that any evidential issue is reviewable. Are we not now in the position in which practically any Scottish criminal case can be appealed to the Supreme Court?

16. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made in reducing the number of smokers. (S4O-00107)

I thank the minister for his encouraging response. Could he give me an understanding of what NHS Tayside and NHS Grampian will do for my constituents in Angus North and Mearns? The area is between the big cities of Aberdeen and Dundee but the services there are still, of course, important.

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made towards reinstating roads damaged by severe winter weather conditions. (S4O-00025)

The minister will be aware that the section of the A90 between the north and south Brechin junctions in my constituency is constructed of concrete, which makes it a great deal more difficult to repair. Even the small holes that are left will become cracks in next winter’s freeze-thaw cycles.

Will the minister take specific notice of the fact that that particular section needs to be dealt with differently?

I come in at the end of an interesting debate with a few thoughts that reflect things that have, largely, already been said. I was delighted to hear what John Finnie said about the police force, which was largely what I wanted to say. Nevertheless, I take the opportunity of repeating the central message that it would be sensible if accountability for our police was somewhere close to divisional level. In the north-east, which is the area that I know, that would mean accountability in Dundee city, in Angus and in Perthshire and that those areas would not take an interest in one another’s patches. Further north, Aberdeen city and Moray would be concerned only with themselves. I would have concerns, however, about Aberdeenshire being one division. I am sure that that would make numerical sense to the police, but my constituents in Laurencekirk might feel a little bit further away from Fraserburgh than they would want to be for local accountability. There comes a point at which the miles between communities mean that there is no longer local accountability. I wonder whether it might be appropriate, therefore, for police accountability to be divided between Aberdeenshire north and Aberdeenshire south, with boards on which the local councillors for each place would speak to superintendents and inspectors for those divisions. That is the practical accountability level at which we should be operating. Above that level, we should say to the police force that, as a very large organisation, it needs to be managed largely in the same way as any other organisation that operates throughout the country. I am not suggesting that we talk to management consultants about how we would do that, as we would spend a very large amount of money for the privilege of doing something that is pretty obvious. In essence, that is the issue. I respectfully suggest that the number of police forces at that level really does not matter. However, there is one area in which the number of police forces may matter, and it is an issue on which I am sure we will require a debate: the investigation of misdemeanours by our policemen. We are all human, and policemen and policewomen are human. We make mistakes that, by and large, we should not have a problem with, but we also occasionally do things that we should not do, which need to be investigated. There is a risk that, if we have only one police force, there will be no independence to allow accountability and investigation within the force of what may simply be criminal activities by a policeman or a policewoman. That is an issue that we must address, and we might need more than one operational accountable structure at the national level to ensure that we get that kind of inspection. I turn briefly to law reform, which I do not think has been addressed by any other member—I apologise for missing one or two speeches due to television schedules, which none of us likes. Members will know—if they attend a meeting shortly after Parliament closes this evening, they will know far better—that the Scottish Law Commission has been producing reports and reviews over a long period and has been doing some extremely good work in looking at the statute book and asking what we should improve. I have in my hand its report on unincorporated associations. I am sure that it is wonderful bedtime reading, but I have not yet found it necessary to resort to that. The subject is the kind of thing that needs to be looked at. It is undoubtedly within the remit of the Justice Committee because it is part of the civil law and it probably does not come with too much party politics attached. I respectfully suggest that it is the kind of thing that we need to find ways of looking at, but it is unlikely that the Justice Committee will ever regard it as a policy priority—for reasons that I well understand, having spent four years on that committee.

The Justice Committee’s convener disagrees with me, but we will continue that discussion elsewhere. Members will have got the point, and time is agin me. The position that I suggest is that Parliament may need to address how we look at our civil law—perhaps also our criminal law—and improve it through the mechanism that is ourselves, without falling out about which policy committee it has to go to. That is an issue that we need to address pretty rapidly.

Returning members will know that I generally enjoy speaking rather late in a debate: I try to resist the temptation to repeat what has already been said and instead fill in one or two of the holes. I wish to thank on the record the good voters of Angus North and Mearns for returning me as their constituency MSP; I trust that I will do them proud over the next five years. I will return to a constituency issue later, because it is pretty much de rigueur in this type of engagement. I begin by reflecting on what is known as the hierarchy of energy. Pretty much every document makes the point that if we do not use the energy in the first place, we do not have to create and transmit it. What we do not waste, we do not have to produce. I join others—notably Claudia Beamish—in pressing that point on the Government. In that context, there are three major uses of energy in our society. The first is all the electricity stuff, including the lights that we are working under at the moment, the second is transport and the third is heating. It is much easier for us to talk about and get our minds around electricity generation than to worry too much about transport and, in particular, heating. However, we ignore heating at our peril. Global warming may be with us, but we are talking about fractions of a degree. We know what a cold building feels like, and those who are concerned about fuel poverty know that we are really talking about living in a building that is cold. We know that that is very bad for our health, never mind our psychology. We must be prepared to address that issue in the future, but I have not heard very much about it today. One solution to all our problems is microrenewables. Any wind turbine or solar panel on a roof that generates electricity will heat that building or power anything else, which is obviously a very good thing. I should in passing declare an interest as a director of the Construction Licensing Executive, which tries to help tradesmen in this area to get qualified, although I receive no benefit from that completely unremunerated position. The CLE has realised that there is a considerable barrier to the microgeneration that will be essential if we are to meet our 2020 targets. A colleague of mine has informed me that we need 20,000 microgeneration installations in order to do so; frankly, it does not matter whether that figure is out by a long way. It is already very big and we need to get on with those installations. The issues that have been flagged up are consumer awareness of the options, the difficulty of finding the money to install equipment and certain technical matters, in particular consistency with regard to requirements for building warrants for solar panels on roofs. One might regard such matters as almost trivial, but they get in the way of people being able to install these things. Either no one knows what the rules are, or different installers give different answers because they work in different parts of the country where the local authority seems to have a different set of rules. We need to sort those things out. The third issue that I want to address—wind power from the North Sea—brings me back to my constituency. I am told by the many people who are working on the issue that the challenges posed by wind turbines are in many respects quite different from those that face the oil industry. Of course there are certain similarities—for example, the need to deal with deep sea and bad weather—but the approach to maintaining these offshore facilities will be different to that taken by the oil industry to its facilities. For a start, wind turbines will be unmanned and, secondly, it will take a good deal longer to travel out to them. As a result, those involved in operations and maintenance will either have to spend a lot of time on the water—after all, they will not be able to use helicopters—or live out there on some kind of floating hotel. People skilled in the art are already working on such matters but I think that, given the need to minimise the time taken in boats to get to and do something to these installations, there will be greater scope for having more ports. The basic message, therefore, to places such as Montrose, which is the port in my constituency, is that, if they are the closest to any of these North Sea installations, they will have a role in maintaining and operating them. I suggest to all members around our shores that if a port in their region or constituency sits closest to an offshore wind turbine there will quite clearly be opportunities with regard to its management. Finally, I welcome Derek Mackay to the chamber and thank him for his excellent speech; I should also mention Marco Biagi’s contribution. I also point out that if members finish early, as Mr Mackay did, they will get brownie points from the Presiding Officer.

I am grateful to the minister for reiterating what I think we all knew. Does he agree that we need to find some way of ensuring that something is built here? If so, will he agree to meet me and Transport Scotland to explore the options, which might include not a grade-separated junction but merely a bridge, and to explore with the local council funding arrangements for whatever is done? After all, I am aware that we might need to get funds from more than one source to make it happen.

4. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government considers that the High Court of Justiciary should be the final arbiter of criminal cases in Scotland. (S4F-00009)

I put it on record—I am sure that the First Minister will wish to confirm this—that there is international law, European law, English law, which happens also to run in Wales, and Scots law; there is no British law.

Can the First Minister confirm what I suspect to be the case: that an appeal from the High Court of Justiciary, the highest Scottish criminal court, can run to the Supreme Court without leave from the Scottish court, whereas there would be no appeal to the Supreme Court in England without leave from the Court of Appeal there?

I am in my characteristic position as the final back-bench speaker—a sort of tail gunner—so I must repeat one or two things, although that is not something that I do lightly. I thank my colleagues on the Justice Committee for their hard work during the past four years. It has been a hard-working, largely consensual and always respectful committee. I was a newcomer to the Parliament four years ago and it has been a joy to work on a committee that regarded its business as important and did not get stuck into the somewhat unconstructive party politics that are perhaps more common in other committees. It would be wrong not to thank Bill Aitken for his exemplary convenership of the committee during the past four years. I agree with members’ remarks about Robert Brown. Robert Brown seems to think that it is unlikely that he will come back; I find it rather presumptuous of the rest of us to think that we are coming back—an interesting straw poll is going on in the Parliament, but let us not worry about that. I also thank SPICe and the clerks, who did a fabulous job. I agree with members’ comments about the ministers, who have been seriously constructive on all our work—I do not say that just because I am a Scottish National Party back bencher. It has been a pleasure to work with them. We should also pay tribute to the civil servants, because although we have two hard-working ministers I do not think that they do everything that we see, so they probably have a pretty good team behind them, to whom I am grateful. Stewart Maxwell talked about the principles of the bill and why it is important. I am grateful to him and I have no desire to repeat what he said. The bill that I hope we will pass this afternoon is steeped in principle. The principles are two-fold. First, the law against double jeopardy is ancient and correct and has now been codified, which I am sure was the right thing to do. Secondly, we have established that provision for exceptions should be clearly set down in statute. At the very least, we have made the law of the land clear. I will run through a few points and establish the principles behind them. First, in relation to cases in which a person has been found not guilty of assault but the victim subsequently dies, we have set down the old principle that a second trial can take place because there is a new offence. It seems to me that that is right, although I note in passing that there is little evidence that the principle is much used. However, there is also little evidence that it is a bad thing, so we have stuck with it. The second general principle is that it should be clearly set down that the new-evidence exception applies only in serious cases. I reiterate my thanks to ministers for adopting the policy that I concluded a long time ago should be adopted, that is, that the approach should be restricted to High Court cases. I do not disagree with Stewart Maxwell often. I very much agree with what he said about the principles, but my view of retrospectivity is completely different from his. The ancient principle was that once a court had found someone not guilty their status before the law had changed. By passing the law we are changing the status of people who have been found not guilty on a High Court charge to one that allows for their recall, when previously they could not have been recalled. That is entirely the right thing to do because, as others have said, if new and compelling evidence comes to light—and the ways in which evidence can be garnered have now changed, of course—it is important that we are able to prosecute the acquitted person. We have changed the principle of retrospectivity, but it is the right thing to do. Other members mentioned admissions. Such cases would come back to the court only if there was clear and compelling evidence and a new trial was in the interests of justice. I do not expect that there will be many such cases, but it would be a mistake to leave them out. Equally, we have dealt with tainted trials. Members can see that I brought along the large file of papers on the bill. I did not do that to make any particular point, as colleagues are well aware of the size of file that we finish up with on such issues. Subject to some rather long amendments, which were almost as long as the bill, we have finished up with a short codification of the general principles on double jeopardy. We have got it about right. I am grateful and look forward to the opportunity to pass the bill later today.

I congratulate Bill Butler on that exposition of what Parliament is about, with which of course I entirely concur. I also congratulate Rhoda Grant on introducing the bill, on her tenacity—which has certainly been required—and on her pragmatism in adopting the changes that were forced on us. On amendment 4, which we earlier introduced into the bill, I think that the minister got it right when he suggested that paragraphs (a) to (d) of subsection (2) of the new section will, as a matter of ordinary statutory interpretation, be put together as a group and that paragraph (d) will be read in the context of paragraphs (a) to (c). However, if he is wrong, then it is worth putting on record, certainly from my perspective as a member of the Justice Committee, that we did not envisage the important definition in paragraph (d) covering family members. Robert Brown reminded us that the bill covers the situation where men are victims. We have begun to learn about that issue in my time in Parliament over the past four years. We have now as a Parliament, and perhaps as a civil service, come to understand that the victims of abuse are not automatically women and children. I am not sure that we have really got that into the institutional mind yet, but I think that we are making progress. To refer to a point that Bill Butler and others made, criminalising breach of an interdict should be very effective. As I think Robert Brown said earlier, that measure seems overdue. It is an obvious way to deal with problems where civil law breaks down. The courts will have told someone what to do, but they might not be prepared to do it. If there is an interdict, why should the breach of it not be a criminal offence? We might increasingly ask ourselves that question. If contempt of court is not an effective sanction, we might need to think about generally criminalising breach of interdict. I mention that merely in the by-going. Some further issues emerge from the revised financial memorandum to the bill. As the last back-bench speaker in the debate, I did not think that I would have much competition from people who had previously considered what was in the financial memorandum—it is not an area where we normally go. Time does not allow me to draw much to the attention of the Parliament, save to note that almost every paragraph of the memorandum says something along the lines of, “We don’t really know, because we don’t have enough information.” I think that that is indeed the case. It is a little sad, however, that for something so relatively simple and specific, the Scottish Legal Aid Board was not able even to distinguish between pursuers and defenders, and a good number of other bits of useful information were simply not available. Given that almost everything is computerised these days, one has to wonder why that was the case. People need to address a general question in that respect. Paragraph 42 of the financial memorandum says: “Finally, it is worth noting that the cost of domestic abuse to the Scottish public purse has been estimated to be as much as some £2.3 billion.” In that context alone, it is clear that this entirely worthy bill has got to be worth the small costs that might accrue in other places.

4. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government has concerns regarding clauses in the Scotland Bill that could result in appeals for Scottish criminal cases moving to the United Kingdom Supreme Court. (S3F-2938)

My question was not the best that I have ever written, because of course these are only proposals. Indeed, they are not in the Scotland Bill yet—they are unpublished, as the First Minister said. Therefore, they will not be consulted on and might yet be foisted on this country. Does the First Minister feel that there is anything that he can do at this stage to ensure the independence of the Scottish criminal justice system?

I am grateful to Mike Rumbles for bringing this debate to the chamber. The issue is, of course, rather an unusual one for a members’ business debate. Perhaps it would have been better to discuss it in Liberal party time, but let us not go there. The issue is really the proper management of our police service. From my industrial and commercial experience, I have to say that periodic reviews are needed of the structures, priorities and organisation of any team that has more members than the number of fingers on my hand. I am sure that anybody with experience of any organisation would back that up. Even if an organisation’s objectives have not changed, the operating environment will have changed. That is our world. When previous constabularies were amalgamated into the current structure in 1974, Ayrshire Constabulary became part of Strathclyde Police. Before 1974, Ayrshire Constabulary had a chief constable, two assistant chief constables and five chief superintendents. Today, the area that it covered has one chief superintendent, two superintendents and 150 more officers. I am sure that people blew their police whistles at that point and said that the amalgamation would be a disaster, but we have probably found ways of working with it. I do not know what the structure of Scotland’s police force should be and, with the greatest respect, I do not think that anybody else does, although people will hold positions. That is why I commend the Government for holding a consultation. I hope that that consultation will be thorough and that people will respond to it. From my experience in the Parliament and of consultations on bills and other things, I am quite sure that, with a bit of care, teasing out, listening and thinking, we will come to a pretty decent answer. We rarely get the perfect answer, but, again, that is life. I want to make one more point and ask members to hear me out before they intervene. I doubt that the number of police forces—and the number of chief constables—matters much. The management of any large team—and what we are talking about is large by any standards—has three levels. In this case, there are first the individual officers at the bottom. Alex Johnstone made the point that, fundamentally, they are what this is about. Any individual who tries to do a job needs line management so that they know what the job is, personnel support and technical advice. I note that there are, of course, specialist police officers, but let us live with that. The top of any organisation needs those who can engage with the world around them at the top level, which in this case would be the Government, international organisations and many others. The purpose of the senior management of any organisation with any purpose is to determine strategy and to ensure that the structure is reviewed. The middle layer of middle management has the job of making the connections between the bottom and top layers and, fundamentally, ensuring that the guys on the ground, who are particularly important in the police, fit in with the strategy and do the right job. Alison McInnes made one very important point, although she was not the first to do so. The other issue is accountability, which must mean the accountability of the appropriate people at the appropriate level. To assert that everything is working well because it is being done through chief constables at force level is surely to mislead. The reality is that we need to have accountability at the appropriate local level, and I suggest that that will often be superintendent and inspector level. There I must leave it.

Does the cabinet secretary share my view that, if we are to protect Scottish jurisprudence, we need to have decisions that are made by Scottish judges in Scotland?

Members will perhaps not be surprised that, in the brief time available, I will not consider the substance of what the committee has done—other members have done that—but will instead reflect on how we have done it. Other members, particularly John Wilson and the convener, have commented on some of the external engagement, and I suspect that the deputy convener will do so, too. I would like to consider our internal processes and reflect on what we have achieved, whether we could have done a few things slightly differently and whether we might make some recommendations to our successors. The first thing that happens when a petition comes in is that the clerks do a considerable amount of work to knock it into shape, if I might describe it that way. As other members have done, I thank the clerks for the huge amount of work that is involved in that. The Scottish Parliament information centre staff give us extremely helpful briefings, and I am conscious that no member has yet thanked them. I do not suppose that any staff from SPICe are here, but I put on the record our thanks to them. As members are well aware, we then have a first consideration and, in about a quarter of cases, the petitioners come before us to give a presentation. I am not sure that that figure is precisely right, but it is the one that I have been given as being about right. Typically, we then write to a large number of organisations to scope the issues that the petitioner has raised. We generally decide to write to the Government to ask for its response to the petition. That means that the second meeting at which we consider the petition, which comes some time later, is, effectively, the first meeting, because that is when we actually think about what the real issues are and try to tease them out ourselves. I wonder whether that is the best use of our time. Perhaps we could do things a bit faster in terms of getting to the meat of the issues. The result of that process is not only a little bit of delay, which we could eliminate, but a considerable amount of paper—a huge amount of paper is associated with some petitions, and I suspect that some of the words did not have to be written, although I am sure that they were written in good faith. Another issue is that we do not engage with the majority of petitioners face to face. I wonder whether we could rectify those issues by changing how we deal with petitions. Let me be absolutely clear that there are petitions in relation to which how we operate at the moment is entirely correct, but I would like to suggest an alternative way of working, where that would be appropriate—I guess that deciding on that would come down to the convener’s discretion, as such things usually do. As I have previously suggested, each petition could be considered by only two members, on some kind of timetabled rota basis that was suitable for those members, and one of the clerks. That would enable those members to tease out with the petitioners what the issues are and to do the obvious things such as writing to the Government and relevant organisations—members will be well aware of the kind of organisations that we speak to. That would ensure that, when petitions came to the full committee, the basic groundwork had been done. We can all see that, in many cases, that would work and would enable us to make progress rather faster. I also suggest that we need to be a little bit better at recognising those petitions that could be closed on first sight. In relation to some petitions, we can see fine well that the Government has adopted a position and is not going to adopt a different one, because it has already said that it will not. In such cases, we might as well just say so and close the petition the first time we see it.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it has taken to increase the number of people registered with an NHS dentist in the north-east. (S3O-12929)

What steps is the Government taking to increase registrations and access to dentists in rural communities?

My first thought is that we seem to have been at this debate for quite a while. It has gone on for a long time, but that is probably a good thing, because we are talking about changing the law as it has been for centuries. The bill is not a political whim or a policy idea that somebody thought would be a good one. We are reflecting on what has happened for generations and we must ensure that we get things right. After all, we are unlikely to change the law again soon. I want to go through the issues and reflect on the Law Society of Scotland’s comments, as it is clear that it is still not, for reasons that I respect, in the same place as us. It seems to me that the Law Society’s comments should be addressed, as it has considerable connection with the legal process day by day and week by week. I will start with tainted acquittals. The Law Society commented that the principle should apply only in solemn cases and only where the accused had played some part in the tainting of the trial. I understand where it is coming from, but I agree with the committee and comments that members have made so far. That is simply not the right approach. I think that the principle remains that if a trial is not a fair test—it should be a fair test—there should be the ability to have it again. It has nothing to do with whether the accused had any part in what happened. If the accused got off as a consequence of jury nobbling or evidence tampering, it seems to be in the interests of justice to be able to have the trial again. It seems to me that the principle is that if a trial is not a fair test, there will have been no justice at all, and that it is in the interests of justice that it should be possible to have it again. It may, of course, be appropriate not to have the trial again but to try somebody for perjury, for example, but that would be up to the Crown. That said, it seems to me that the principle is quite clear. If the original trial was not fair, it should be possible to have it again. The Law Society of Scotland is concerned about admissions and, again, I think that I understand where it is coming from. Lord Gill, however, gave a lucid explanation that I remember well. His point was that at the opening stage of the appeal before the judges, it is for them to decide whether the admission and the evidence for that admission can fairly be put to a jury. They are to apply those tests. The jury is to decide how reliable something is only if it gets to the jury. Again, it is quite clear that that should cover all offences. I think that the Government made that point. There is really no distinction to be made. If somebody owns up, or is said to have owned up to an offence, there is no earthly reason why the matter should not be brought back to the court to consider whether that is right.

The principal difference goes back to the idea of acquittal. The layman’s view is that if somebody walks away from the court and says, “I did it,” or that part of the evidence that proved that they did something was tampered with, they will have told the world that the test was unfair. To use a cricket analogy, they tampered with the ball, and that is not fair. If the guilty party tampered with evidence, they have taken away the right to say that they got away with it. In contrast, we need to be very careful about new evidence. The idea and importance of the rule against double jeopardy first emerged in that context. We need to be absolutely clear that we are looking for new-evidence exceptions only in the most serious cases and that we do not expect anybody to come back to court for relatively minor offences just because the evidence has improved. The public want the murderer and the rapist and possibly the armed robber and the major fraudster to be able to be brought back to trial. Those are matters of considerable public significance and we should be able, with new evidence, to break the historic rule in such cases. That is why I am, I confess, in the same position as those who have spoken so far: I am not sure that there should be a list. In fact, I am now quite sure that there should not be a list. We should couch things in terms of the level at which a crime was originally prosecuted. I am not with Robert Brown on the issue of general indictment. Of those who have spoken so far, I am with Bill Aitken. Only High Court cases should be involved, because those are the cases in which the public will be interested. I can see the principle that Stewart Stevenson has already enunciated, that a case might originally appear on a summary cause, but it seems to me that that would be the exception to the exception and we do not have to worry about it. It seems to me that we should be dealing with serious offences by anybody’s standards, that they will at the very least have been indicted and, I suspect, have been indicted in the High Court. That is where we should put the line.

Indeed, but this is not just about justice; if it were, there would be no limits. We would say that the moment there was new evidence anybody should be able to go back to court. However, we have accepted over the centuries that that is a bad principle, because it basically means that the state could retry until it got the conviction that it wanted. We recognise that that is not where we want to be, as a matter of human rights and good political principle. That is the principle that history has given us and we are trying to find exceptions while accepting that principle. Therefore, not all cases should be involved, although I understand the logic. The Law Society of Scotland was concerned about the problem of eventual death and I am sticking with that approach. Other members have mentioned the issue. It seems clear to me that if something ain’t broke, don’t fix it. That is where the law has finished up and there is no reason to change it. As the cabinet secretary outlined, it is a completely different event: a person will be charged with a different offence under different circumstances that will have generated a different investigation. That has not caused us a problem and nobody has said that it is wrong for any practical reason. People have argued about a matter of principle and it seems to me that we should go back to the original position given by common law. Colleagues have said everything that there is to say about retrospectivity. The trial of Mark Weston for the murder of Vikki Thompson makes the point far more eloquently than any of us could. It would be crazy not to make things retrospective. I understand the concerns that exist, but the practicalities are before us. It is a matter of public confidence; it is about the public knowing that the prosecution can go back for new evidence in the most serious cases, or for other issues in the most difficult or worrying cases. We owe it to the public to ensure that that principle is enshrined in the law so that the courts know what they are doing.

If I misunderstood Robert Brown earlier, I apologise for doing so.

It is all very well having the salt and grit, but if there is no machinery to spread it around it is not much use. Recently, at a meeting in Glen Shee, I discovered that Aberdeenshire Council’s new machine to clear roads in the area broke down more or less when the starting button was pushed; the gearbox was described as finishing up in a million pieces. I was told that the only replacement gearbox was in Germany and had to shipped in, with considerable delay. I am not arguing that everything should be the same, but does the minister agree that there should be some standardisation in the equipment that is used across the country? As a matter of resilience, will he look at what local authorities buy and use?

I start by apologising for arriving a few minutes late; that has been the order of my day. I congratulate Rhoda Grant on introducing this very important bill. I will reflect on only three elements because, as usual, I have no desire to repeat what has been said before, although I agree with it all. We are in a situation in which the existing remedies are commonly regarded as being inadequate and ineffective, which is precisely why it is important that the bill has been introduced. I wonder whether the Parliament spends enough time looking out for situations in which remedies are inadequate and ineffective. It might be part of what we should be doing to look around and ask where we should be legislating rather than waiting until something comes to us. It is one of the tenets of legal aid that a person either gets it or they do not. During evidence sessions, we heard about how the legal aid system is an all-or-nothing system. The free-at-the-point-of-need concept in the national health service is similar, and yet we have recently been through a process of ensuring that, on rare occasions, the NHS is capable of allowing a patient to pay for certain medicines that would not be available under the NHS. That process was pushed through with the help of the Public Petitions Committee, on which I sit. I entirely understand the principle, but perhaps the principle should allow exceptions rather than just being taken as the principle. I wonder whether we should still be considering whether protection orders should, of themselves, qualify for legal aid. I recognise the equality of arms issue, and I know that it would be difficult because there are complexities, but as one of my bosses once said to me, “If it wasn’t difficult, I wouldn’t have to pay you so much.” I also reflect on section 3 on the breach of interdict with a power of arrest. The change is long overdue and—again—I am looking at a situation in which the previous remedies have been plainly inadequate and the solution turns out to be very different. The bill will put the onus on the civic authorities, most notably the police, to enforce the citizen’s rights, rather than expect the citizen herself—as it mostly is—to enforce them. That is plainly what we as a Parliament should be legislating to do: it is exactly what we are here for. However, I wonder to what extent we go looking systematically across how we operate and at our legal system to find the situations in which we should intervene. I raise the issues, as I have done before, because we do not get the opportunities in our debates to consider such more philosophical points. We have to pick them up—as we always do in our legal system—in the detail of the cases that come before us. I wonder about some of the ways in which we bring forward legislation and the things that we look for.

I propose to change the subject slightly on the minister's thinking point. I have not heard—forgive me; I have not been here for every word of the debate—about the use of electricity. The comment was made that pump storage is the only way to store electricity. We know that we cannot store whizzy electrons—they must just be used. The balance is important. However, we will surely have far more batteries, because we will have far more electric cars, one way or another. At some point, the charging regime for the consumer will therefore need to be time as well as kilowatt dependent. Charging batteries overnight is useful, whereas charging them during the day is not. I have not heard about that, but surely that needs to be part of our forward thinking, as we do not have electric cars yet.

I will ask the minister about an issue that relates to the snow gates on the A93 heading north to Glenshee. Sometimes the police shut those gates—that is their responsibility—as a precaution overnight, but everybody knows that they will open in the morning. The overhead gantries on the main roads will say that the snow gates are closed, but everybody knows that the gates will be open by the time that people reach them. Will the minister take that issue to Transport Scotland? I appreciate that real-time information is wanted, but sometimes such information needs to be ahead of time.

I have no more respect for statistics than Cathy Peattie does, but if they are comparative year-on-year figures, they show us trends—that is all.

Once again, I note the annual event that is this debate. As is my custom, I will not repeat the things that others have said, but that does not mean that I do not agree with them.  I am surprised that statistics have not yet been picked up on. Violence against women is all about individuals and human rights, so statistics might seem to be slightly irrelevant, but we have some, nevertheless. Just fewer than 54,000 incidents of domestic abuse were reported in 2008-09 and a few under 52,000 in 2009-10. I do not set too much store by those figures, but if awareness is rising and the statistics come from a similar reporting regime, it looks as though things are getting better. That is nothing to be complacent about, but perhaps the statistics offer us some hope. The statistics also point me in my next direction, which is to encourage the current and successive Governments to ensure that everything they do is evidence based. That is hugely important to our work in the area. It would be easy to spend money on things that seem like good ideas, but unless we are doing evidence-based research and finding out what works, there is a risk that we will ring fence the wrong money. There are financial effects from the human rights issues that we are talking about. Assaults on women lead directly to homelessness, which the Government and local authorities in particular have to deal with. There are ways and means of encouraging local authorities, for whom tackling such violence is a primary responsibility, to think about where they spend their money. Single outcome agreements are only part of the process of saying to councils, "It would be very much better if you spent your money on prevention rather than cure." If money being spent on looking after women in their homes and reducing violence saves councils from spending money on the consequences of children and women being made homeless afterwards, it is a good way to spend the money. When I look at existing research, I notice depressingly familiar risk factors—if I may put it in epidemiological terms—including poverty, disability, and the effects of alcohol and drugs. We know about those factors. That should encourage us as a Parliament, a Government and a society to tackle those issues because we know that, on the way through, we will help to tackle violence against women. I note that the fact has already been mentioned that domestic violence is not directed solely against women; some men suffer it. There is a tension in the statistics. I picked up entirely what Johann Lamont said and I absolutely agree that we must not lose sight of the fact that the majority of the problem is men's violence against women. However, we also must not lose sight of the fact that there is another side to that coin. We must look after those men and ensure that they are not  simply ignored because they are statistically the smaller group. I return to the major issue and congratulate Scottish Women's Aid on its 35 years. Some things are improving. Its work is obviously valuable and I trust that it will carry on. That brings me to another issue. As a former local councillor—as many other members are—I do not like the idea of ring fencing but, in a policy area such as domestic violence, there is a pretty persuasive case for the Government's saying that we must tackle the issue, that it is setting aside a sum of money one way or another and that, if that money goes through the local authority, it must be put in the direction of domestic violence. I will comment briefly on Rhoda Grant's Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill, which we are considering in the Justice Committee. I do not want to pre-empt anything that the Justice Committee will say about it, but it has three essential measures. One is the idea that we should remove the need for a course of action for a woman to be able to bring a civil action. That makes a great deal of sense. Secondly, and crucially, the bill proposes that we improve access to legal aid because many women who flee their homes and seek to flee from violence do not come with purses stacked full of money. That is an important issue. The third point is that making a breach of interdict a criminal offence—and, therefore, something with which the authorities will deal, rather than the victim herself having to deal with it—is another extremely important measure.

Absolutely. I was not suggesting for a moment that I think that. The statistics merely show that poverty is one of the risk factors.

I, too, welcome Angela Constance to her post. Following the previous question, which related to geography, and on the subject of the skills range, will she ensure that the 35,000 training places include those that are necessary for the economy? I speak from my engineering background, in particular, and I am concerned that, as the recession eventually goes away, we have the right skills.

I am grateful that we have a little bit of time for a change, and that we can consider things a bit more widely. I start by going back to the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004; I will look at one or two of the issues that emerge from it, and consider the successes and the not-so-much successes. The 2004 act starts, in section 1, by looking for strategies. Although strategies tend to cover bits of  paper with words unnecessarily, I will not complain about somebody thinking about what strategies should be. That is surely the preliminary to doing anything. I am therefore grateful that the Government has actually pursued a strategy, which is progress from the 2004 act—for better or worse. It has considered the difference between carrots and sticks—and that might turn out to be the theme of what I have to say. Antisocial behaviour orders come under part 2. Clearly they are relevant, they have their place and they have had some achievements, but they are not the answer to every question. I notice that noise nuisance was enthusiastically pursued by local communities. As a local councillor, I put a noise team into the west of Dundee, and those provisions were widely used and widely respected. I endorse the view that Robert Brown has spoken about, on acceptable behaviour contracts. Those have been derived from the legislation, and they certainly have a place and a value. Part 9 contains provision for parenting orders. I have asked the question and, as far as I can establish, we have no evidence that any parenting order has ever been applied for or made. I do not particularly hold that against anyone although, if we had looked through the bill—members will appreciate that I was not here at the time—I would have thought that some research would have indicated that they were unlikely to be effective, or perhaps there needed to be a model beforehand. Everything in the bill was not quite perfect. Part 11 concerns fixed-penalty notices, which have been discussed. They have been a huge success, and they have saved a vast amount of police time. They were an extremely good thing. In two phrases, I have come across one thing that turned out to be a complete waste of time—although I am not blaming anybody for it—and something that was a wonderfully good idea, on which we can build. The other part of the message needs to be: let us work with what is good and live with the realities of what is bad.

That is a view, but I am not sure that many people will see it that way, to be honest. I will put the rest of my remarks in the current context. In my days as a councillor, I thought that the introduction of community wardens was an extremely good idea and I commend their use for the future. We have seen—possibly as a result of a Justice Committee inquiry, but possibly not—a huge move  towards community policing, which the Government has encouraged. It has made a significant difference on our streets and required no legislation. It simply required people to think about what the strategy was and to implement it. The net result, attribute it as members will, is that crime figures are at a 32-year low. Knife crime is falling, which is wonderful, and offence referrals to the children's panels have dropped 40 per cent in the past four years. We can give credit for that in any direction that members like, but some things are clearly going in the right direction. What I like and commend about the strategy is that it is not the Government telling people what to do; it is built from the ideas of experts and stakeholders. It is about finding things that will really work, not grabbing headlines.

To be honest, it is not at all surprising. I do not expect anything to be evaluated quickly because we are talking about changes in attitudes. We are probably looking for annual statistics and we need several sets of them to be able to work out properly what is going on. We cannot simply come along with a strategy that says what we will do now, expect everything to turn and off we go. It just does not work like that outside the military. I am, actually, surprised that we think that we can get anything meaningful out of an evaluation on the timescale proposed. I am not sure that many researchers would be terribly excited by that. We have a long-term attitude towards, and strategy on, alcohol. I find it disappointing that we failed to take the recent opportunity to sort out minimum pricing, because that would have been a step in the right direction. I regret that that failed. I hope that members have seen the Scottish social attitudes survey that was published recently, although, of course, the figures are for 2009. The survey points out that most people are aware of litter and rubbish as an issue but, generally speaking, do not have other problems—although some people have many problems, of course. The interesting point that emerged from the survey is that a major determinant of people's perceptions is what they see in the media rather than with their own eyes. The Government has to work on that—as, indeed, do we all—because, if we are putting out the wrong messages, people may be listening to them, which would be a mistake.  I commend the cashback for communities scheme, which has been a hugely significant way of putting money into the right places. Small sums of money going to organisations can do great things. Just up the road, in Forfar, the Drugs Initiative Group Forfar's Pitstop youth cafe has made a significant difference and did not cost a fortune. A couple of years ago, I visited the Grampian Fire and Rescue Service in Aberdeen, which is where I stay, and talked to the people there about their work with the local community on the Gramps, which will mean something up there but will probably not mean anything to anybody else. There were major difficulties with youth fire raising on open ground, all of which have been brought under some kind of control by a serious education intervention. That is precisely the kind of thing that we need to do. I also commend the Dundee co-ordinated anti-crime network—DUNCAN—project in Dundee. As a city councillor, I was well aware of that project, which considerably improved what was going on in the city centre. Grampian Police's operation Whalsay reminds us that an awful lot of antisocial behaviour when we are out can be avoided by the way in which we behave. I hesitate to mention it all, but one way of summarising what they are reminding folk is a good idea, particularly at this time of the year, would be: on nights out, plan what you are up to, stay together, look after your property, think about what you are doing and do not drink too much.

I do not wish to trivialise the significant problems that people have when offenders reoffend, but is the First Minister in a position to confirm that the vast majority of those on the sex offenders register comply with their requirements and do not appear to constitute a significant problem to the public?

I start by congratulating Bill Butler on his pursuance of the subject. Without his determination, we simply would not have got here. I am also grateful to colleagues for addressing many of the points of detail in our report, which means that I will not do so. Instead, I will pick up four matters of principle that have emerged through the process that we have been through as the Justice Committee, and  I will ask one or two folk who are outside the committee to consider some of the issues that the process has thrown up. Of course, there are no personal comments in this contribution. Responsibility lies where it lies, and we need to try to find ways through the issues. The first point is that the bill has come to the Justice Committee relatively late in the session. As it happens, we have agreed to make it our member's bill priority. I am therefore sure that we will have time for it, and I am glad about that. However, I am conscious—Bill Butler will be the same—that other bills in the Justice Committee portfolio will probably slip as a result of the timetables that we have been given. That raises an important point that I want to make: if everything is referred to the Justice Committee, we will lose members' bills—we might have lost the Damages (Scotland) Bill if we had thought that others were a higher priority. We need to grasp that important matter as a Parliament. Secondly, this is one of several bills that have come from the Scottish Law Commission. It is fair to say that in this session we have made considerable progress in dealing with them, and I hope that the commission is happy with that, but we still do not have a mechanism in principle to deal with the good work that comes from the Scottish Law Commission to the Parliament. I put that issue before the chamber. I am not sure who should be responsible—the Presiding Officer, the Parliamentary Bureau or the Government—but we have to grasp the issue. The Scottish Law Commission is doing good and professional work, but unless we are careful some of it will simply be missed and not brought forward fast enough. Thirdly, I bring to members' attention a small point in the bill: the use of discounts—or multipliers—and the consideration of the time between the date of the victim's death, the date of settlement and the lifespan of any beneficiary thereafter. We have had some argument about which multiplier we should use and have been referred to the Ogden tables but, very late in our evidence taking, we came to the conclusion—at least, certainly, I did—that there should be two multipliers or two applications of the Ogden tables. We have the problem of deciding how to address and bring into the discussion an issue that has come late in our evidence taking. Fourthly, I will consider an issue to which Bill Aitken referred: the difficulties in Scots law when we have conflicting decisions. Brown v Ferguson and Guilbert v Allianz Insurance plc are conflicting High Court decisions on damages. Equally, whether psychiatric loss should be included in non-patrimonial loss is subject to conflicting outer  house decisions: Gillies v Lynch and Ross v Pryde. I am concerned that, as far as I can see, we have no mechanism in Scots law for resolving those difficulties, other than by introducing legislation to the Parliament. That is wholly unsatisfactory because, unless legislation comes through the Parliament, we find ourselves in conflict with one of the rules of law, which is that people have a right to know what the law is. Conflicting High Court decisions mean that we do not know what the law is. We must address that at some stage.

I am grateful to Alex Johnstone for getting us to Brechin, which is where I would like to stay. Given the current weather, I am conscious that there is a lot of snow that will eventually melt. The people of Brechin know a good deal about flooding. Has the cabinet secretary had any conversations with Angus Council about dealing with the flooding projects that Brechin so desperately needs?

Does the minister agree that, in that context, there is scope for use to be made not just of ecology, but of the historical environment? Should tourism be encouraged across the wide range of our cultural background?

To ask the Scottish Executive what the effects of the Scottish budget will be on local authorities. (S3O-12015)

I thank the cabinet secretary for the information that his answer contained, which I am sure will come as a huge relief to local authorities throughout the country, despite the previous questioner's comments. Will the cabinet secretary reflect on the situation in Scotland relative to that in England and Wales?

I congratulate Bill Wilson on his motion and on his excellent speech. Rarely do we get such good-quality philosophy in the Parliament—we would be a great deal better off if we did. If we work out why we are doing things, it is much easier to get the right answer. I welcome the large number of visitors to the gallery. I will address my final remarks to them. Like Alison McInnes, I represent the north-east. The area has a wonderful academic record, but I cannot but reflect on the fact that its record was once even better. Members will have to look in the history books—there is a challenge. Once upon a time, the two universities in Aberdeen and the one in Fraserburgh meant that there were more universities in north-east Scotland than there were in the whole of England. Members should feel free to go and look that up. There is one point that I want to make before I leave the floor to other members, so that they can talk about issues that concern them. I went  through the biographies of the 129 members of the Scottish Parliament, to find out how many of us have a scientific background. I was happy to use a wide definition of science. In the list of engineers I was happy to include members who are skilled with the tools. In the list of people who studied science I included people who had studied psychology, of course. I also included our three medical doctors, who are well known to us all. However, I was able to find only 19 members out of 129 who have any kind of post-school experience in science. I do not hold members' lack of experience of science against them. In no sense do I want to disparage members who have studied other subjects, which are important. However, the level of understanding of science is probably less than the Parliament could sensibly use. It is probably fair to say that we have more lawyers than scientists.

I have nothing whatever against lawyers, or members who studied law but never became lawyers, but I wonder whether we could do with a few more members who have experience of science. My challenge, not just to the scientists in the gallery but to those who might be listening in another medium, is this: "Why are not some of you here? Your Parliament needs you."

To ask the Scottish Government what support it is providing to protect the Bervie braes from future landslips. (S3O-11681)

For the record, I should make it clear that I am talking about the Bervie braes in Stonehaven—there are others. The minister will be aware of the issues surrounding consent from residents that is required for the Bervie braes work, and that that has the potential to hold up the project past April 2011. Can he confirm that, if the project is  delayed, Scottish Government funding will still be available at a future date?

To ask the Scottish Government what representations ministers have made to the United Kingdom Government regarding the renewable heat incentive. (S3O-11621)

The minister will be aware that it is difficult to overstate the importance of incentives in promoting the growth of renewable energy and that we have a huge opportunity, not merely for manufacturers but for installers and those who train and accredit them. Can the minister give me some encouragement by saying whether his efforts with the UK Government will bear fruit? The  renewable heat incentive is hugely important to the renewables sector.

I am grateful to Robert Brown for that summary of the bill's provisions, as it saves me having to say one or two things that I would otherwise have said. I will pick over some of the issues that members have not said much about. I reinforce the view that the bill is a facilitating piece of legislation and remind the profession that there is no requirement for anybody to do anything at all. I commend the minister for ensuring that—in his own words—the bill "will not have a significant impact on traditional firms" and for generally resisting the temptation to lodge further amendments. That is good in principle. Although I understand why the Law Society would have liked to have had lots of amendments lodged along the way, I think that we have the right things separated out in the bill. Nevertheless, we must be prepared to return to the issue at some stage, to  give the Law Society the help that it has been looking for. Like the minister, I acknowledge the concerns of some folk within the profession about the competence and appropriateness of the bill. Some of those people are in the public gallery this afternoon, seriously outnumbering the press. Perhaps that reflects the fact that they understand what we have been doing and the press do not. I am glad that we have sorted out the guarantee fund, which should be open to all. I am particularly pleased that we have established that it does not cover the non-legal services that businesses may provide. I can see some difficulty—even the odd court case arising—in sorting out what are legal services and what are not, but at least we have made that principle clear. I turn to the Law Society's powers of inspection, the powers of regulators themselves and all the issues of external ownership and how the businesses might work. However well we have drafted the provisions in the bill—let us do ourselves the honour of assuming that we have framed the powers in it perfectly—it is only as good as the use that people make of those powers to reflect what is going on around them, to regulate, to inspect and to control. I say that partly because, in recent crises, institutions such as the Financial Services Authority have had the powers to do all sorts of things but have somehow failed to use them. We must ensure that the powers that the bill invests in folk are properly used and that soft-touch regulation is used only where a soft touch is appropriate. It is hugely important that we have the right people doing that. My final point has been raised on several occasions but has been ducked. As far as I can see, there is no specification regarding the description of the new organisations. If a firm is predominantly lawyers but happens to have an accountant and a surveyor, what will it call itself? If a firm is predominantly accountants but happens to have a lawyer and a surveyor, what will it call itself? If a firm is a bunch of surveyors who have taken on a lawyer and an accountant, what will it call itself? I suspect that common sense will come up with some decent answers in those cases. However, when firms are composed of very mixed combinations of professions, I wonder whether the public will get confused and whether there will be an opportunity for sleight-of-hand representation. Perhaps we should think about having proper descriptions somehow or other.

Cathie Craigie's remarks sum up the problem that we have. Rightly, she is concerned about taking a step into the dark. The issue is who will bring their money in. However, the issue that is before us now is the structure of the people who will run the businesses, which is a different matter. We address the issue of who puts money into businesses by ensuring that they are fit and proper people, not by deciding what fraction of the population are lawyers or anyone else.

I fear that I do not have time.

I am sure that Mr Baker will be able to wind up. I am concerned about another issue. I understand where amendment 123, in the name of Robert Brown, is coming from; the Justice Committee debated the issue on many occasions. However, I am concerned that, as the minister pointed out, Mr Brown has lodged an amendment that is untried and has not even been consulted on. We have talked about 51 per cent of ownership being in the hands of professionals, but we have never talked about its being in the hands of lawyers. That is not ICAS's position or the Law Society's position. Does it worry the member that he has lodged an amendment that has not been consulted on and is no one's policy?

I, too, congratulate Maureen Watt on bringing her motion to the chamber for debate. It is sad that so few members have stayed to debate what is going to be an enormously important part of our future economy. I would like to reflect on four things, the first of which is the Crown Estate. I understand that Richard Lochhead has already started discussions with local authorities and others about how the Crown Estate should perhaps be modified and how our involvement with it should change in such a way that Scotland's communities can benefit from the natural resources off our shores and the benefit is not all transferred straight to London. I do not think that one needs to be a nationalist to see that there is a point in there, and it is one that the Scottish Government needs to pursue with some vigour. Secondly, I reflect on the sheer scale of the opportunity, which others have mentioned. The numbers are quite staggering. I endorse the thought that the First Minister expressed in his speech earlier this week about the need for the financial institutions to recognise that they have an opportunity to invest in something that is genuinely new. They can put money—and it will be very big sums of money—into developing something that is simply not there at the moment. Their investment will not just change the value of other assets but create new ones. We have to enthuse the financial institutions around the world to get behind this sensible investment for the future. I also make the point that some of the things that we know about the oil industry are not true of the renewables industry. The maintenance side of the business will be much more about ships than about helicopters. Clearly, the oil comes up and the helicopters can come down, but when a lot of what we are doing involves turbines, we will not be able to get helicopters in there, so the maintenance industry, at least for offshore turbines, will be different. That will make our ports more important, which is my third point. Members who are in the chamber at the moment know an awful lot about Aberdeen. We also recognise that Dundee is well placed, and it will make its case. However, I observe that the smaller port of Montrose is an extremely important part of the equation. Indeed, it is mentioned in the study. Montrose is already interested and active in  the oil industry, and it is well placed for the future. I had an interesting discussion only last week with the chief executive of Montrose Port Authority, John Paterson, about deepwater harbours and serious efforts to be involved in the offshore renewables. I encourage the minister and the Government not to forget Montrose. One thought on Montrose is that a railway goes through the centre of the town, but there is no railhead for cargo. There is surely an opportunity for a containerised railhead. A lot of other products could go through such a facility, but I certainly think that those who are trying to do engineering in the area would be grateful to be able to get their goods, containerised or otherwise, on to the railways. I do not think that we really want to run everything on the roads of Angus. There are good reasons for not doing that. The fourth point that I would like to reflect on is not just the scale of the money that is involved, because banks know about big sums of money, but the challenge to integrated decision making. If we are going to make this work, we must ensure that investments, Government authorities, planning authorities and all the other custodians of decisions, checks and balances, safety and so on recognise that we need to make it happen. It only takes one party to get in the way. We need a collective, national decision that we are going to win the battle, that we are going to win the race, and that we are going to be the renewables powerhouse of Europe. Only when we all do it is it actually going to work.

I will explain why I agree with Cathie Craigie on the need for low-cost access to tribunals, and why that will not necessarily cost anything. Tribunals are courts of appeal for administrative decisions and are therefore not very different in their function from any other court of appeal. We need courts of appeal because people who make primary decisions are human, and human nature means that we make mistakes, act in ignorance, are occasionally lazy and are very occasionally biased. I will reflect on the stage 1 consideration that the Justice Committee is currently undertaking of Bill Butler's Damages (Scotland) Bill because it is instructive. The fact that most members who are  present today are on that committee will add some flesh to that. Administrative decisions, regardless of what they are about, essentially involve the application of rules to a set of facts. There are two models for applying rules—at the extremes, that is; members will recognise that there are many in between. At one end we can have a set of rules that are so detailed and complete that they provide for every situation, even if in reality that is sometimes arbitrary and unjust. The decision maker simply uses an algorithm and comes up with the answer, rather like using a calculator. That application of rules in an administrative setting is very mechanical, but it will be done correctly so long as there is a court that can review it. If there is no court to review it, mistakes will be made and nobody will worry. However, in that context, the court does not have to be particularly swift or available because we know that, if somebody makes a mistake and it is challenged, it will be corrected. Should an error be made, there will always be an opportunity to challenge and correct it, so the system will work even if the judicial process is both slow and expensive. Contrast that with the other end of the spectrum where, instead of having an algorithm whereby everything is laid down, the decision maker goes through a hierarchy of principles and tries to apply the facts to them. When errors are made in that system, a slow and expensive legal review system will fail. That is one of the things that we have discovered in our scrutiny of the Damages (Scotland) Bill. The courts have not sorted out some simple things to do with the award of damages for fatal accidents because it is too expensive and too uncertain to go there. However, had another court system been readily available, those things could have been sorted. If we try to make our decisions on principles, we will get a good system only if the appeals system is easily accessible and cheap enough so that we will go there to get a decision. If someone has easy access to a good court of appeal, how many mistakes will be made? Very few, because the person making the decision realises that the decision will be appealed, that they will lose and that it will cost them one way or another, so they have an incentive to get it right. To go back to the beginning, if one has an absolute set of rules that one can follow like a computer, the system of appeals does not have to be good so long as it exists. If one applies principles, the system of appeals has to be good, swift and available; otherwise, errors would not be corrected because there would be too much risk involved in the correction process. That is what has emerged during consideration of the Damages (Scotland) Bill, where there is a risk that we will  end up including some arbitrary rules to overcome the problem of a bad judicial process, which means that it cannot be appealed properly. It is plainly important to have good-quality folk on tribunals, good training and a sensible structure and I do not want to gainsay any of that, but the way to sort out administrative decisions is to have easy, low-cost access to tribunals. If there is such access, it is much more likely that the original decision will be correct. Low-cost access does not cost any more because most of the cases never happen because good decisions are made by the administrators in the first place. Above all, we need cheap, low-cost access to tribunals and then our administrators will do a good job.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to combat Johne's disease in cattle. (S3O-11525)

I will be brief. Farmers in the north-east are facing problems tackling Johne's disease and bovine viral diarrhoea. What input may farmers in the north-east make to the activities that are going on?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to combat obesity in the adult population. (S3F-2616)

I share the First Minister's enthusiasm for the statistics, which are slightly surprisingly good. Does the First Minister agree that prevention is better than cure? If I compare the population's understanding of the effects of being overweight with its understanding of the effects of smoking, it seems to me that, by and large, the population does not yet understand the former fully. Is the Government doing enough to educate the Scottish people so that our society can make the kind of progress that we need it to?

Presiding Officer, I apologise to you and to the chamber for an extremely unsatisfactory broadcasting schedule that meant that I heard James Kelly's opening remarks, but no more, and that I did not hear John Lamont's opening remarks. I apologise to those members, in particular. That broadcasting schedule was extremely unsatisfactory; I trust that it will not be repeated. The issues that I would like to address have already emerged in the debate, but I will look at particular details. As all of us know, we face funding challenges that are unprecedented within the lifetime of the Parliament, at least. We must be extremely careful to ensure that we provide integrated funding decisions. We have heard about services that are provided by local authorities, about services that are provided by the health service and about the role of voluntary organisations. Each of those has various funding challenges, various funding streams, and various things that are more or less ring fenced—or not—and subject to decision making by a good number of different people. If we are to get anything resembling integrated and sensible funding of drugs services—or any other service—we must get rather better at making funding decisions. That is one of the challenges for the Government, the health service and local authorities.  I return to an issue that Robert Brown raised briefly and that has not been mentioned again—the issue of whether some drug problems are demand led. I have the impression that there are folk who would not be using drugs if someone had not put them in their way. That leads me on to a point that, largely, has not been discussed—the fact that the police are working hard to disrupt the supply of drugs. That work needs to be recognised, applauded and affirmed. Whatever one makes of the war on drugs, part of it is designed to ensure that drugs are not readily available. If they are, we will change society's approach to what is and is not acceptable.

I am conscious that this may be the only subject that I will get to discuss. Two members towards the back of the chamber have indicated that they would like to intervene, but I will issue a challenge to them first. I use recreational drugs—at least, I use two drugs that are non-medical. One is not recreational; I use it to enable me to stand on my feet at 2 o'clock in the afternoon, given the time at which I got up this morning in order to get here from Aberdeen. It is called caffeine. All of us use it, but it has a serious value in our society. The other is ethanol or ethyl alcohol, to those of us who are chemists, or just plain alcohol, to most of us. I take on board Patrick Harvie's comments. If alcohol were invented now, I suspect that we would ban it, but it has been around for a rather long time and an awful lot of us survive very comfortably with it. Is it possible to state whether a drug is wholly recreational, has no significant addictive qualities and can be made chemically pure so that it is safe? If we can define those, Patrick Harvie might have a point, but I am not convinced that we can do that.

That has clarified the point, although in the time that remains I am unable to elucidate all the issues within that. Patrick Harvie might think that a drug is recreational when it is not addictive and does not interrupt biological function, but it will come with the problem that it is not chemically pure. Unless we can derive something that is chemically pure, safe and readily available, and that does not have any other biological consequences, there is no such thing as a recreational drug. In addition, I do not agree with  the member's comment about the reasons why someone takes a drug. It is either dangerous or it is not—whether it actually affects the individual is another matter. I will close with a thought about smoking. Is smoking a good idea? It cannot possibly be. My wife has an aunt who is well into her 80s—she is possibly approaching 90. She has smoked all her life and it has not done her any harm at all. Is that a reason for saying that smoking is okay? Plainly not.

I am reassured because the system's resilience was as good as it was. I am sure that that reassures the cabinet secretary, too. Will she consider reviewing the resilience of NHS 24's out-of-hours telephone systems, which tend to work across NHS board areas? As she knows, I am particularly concerned about rural areas where the boundaries of boards such as NHS Tayside and NHS Grampian meet, where systems tend to be back-ups for each other and where it is important that the systems work.

To ask the Scottish Government how much more the average household in the north east would have had to pay if the council tax freeze had not been introduced in 2007. (S3O-11254)

Will the cabinet secretary reflect on the essentially strange anomalies that can occur across borders? I have constituents who live a few hundred yards apart but pay significantly different amounts of money because they live either side of a boundary. We have talked about how a local income tax would be a more appropriate way of funding. Does the cabinet secretary have any other options for reducing the inequity of council tax payments across constituencies?

I have to follow Mike Rumbles—an interesting experience. I can readily pick up one point that he made. He clearly feels that feudalism was ended, but it was not, which is one of the reasons why—to  return to the Government's programme—there is a bill on long leases, which is feudalism in disguise.

It is. Feus were long leases forever, and long leases remain. There are not that many of them—I am told that there are about 9,000—but they need to be dealt with, because they are left over. They are one of those bits of English land law—sorry, Scottish land law; there are far too many bits of English land law—that have not yet been addressed. I am pleased that they are being dealt with, not so much because I am particularly interested in long leases—I do not suppose that very many people in the chamber are—but because dealing with them means that we continue to catch up with the programme that the Scottish Law Commission put forward. We as a Parliament should keep our eye on the ball and ensure that we pick up on the proposals that the commission produces. The law on long leases has been left over and addressing it is long overdue. I look forward to ensuring that we do so properly in the Justice Committee. I want to spend a bit longer on the proposed forced marriage (protection and jurisdiction) (Scotland) bill, which is on an issue of far wider significance. It is not one of which many people are aware and I do not expect many members to talk about it. However, for people who are involved in forced marriages the matter is of huge significance. We are not, of course, talking about arranged marriages; we are talking about forced marriages, when one or both parties are simply unwilling to enter into the arrangement. Scottish law is not entirely without remedies, as members are aware. However, the remedies are inadequate and the position in Scotland has fallen a little behind the one in England, where a statute was introduced in 2007, and it is extremely important that we catch up. The proposed bill will enable victims to seek civil remedies and it will enable people on the outside who see what is going on to try to bring proceedings to prevent a forced marriage. It will also enable people who are suffering in forced marriages to bring a demand for some kind of redress to the door of the people who forced them into marriage. The bill will be hugely welcome. Forced marriage is not part of and mostly takes place outside our Scottish culture, but it is something that we need to address and I am grateful to see it in the Government's programme. The arguments around double jeopardy have been well rehearsed. There is a measure of agreement on the need to deal with the matter. Considerable reference has been made in the Parliament and the press to the World's End case. It is worth pointing out that the case came to an end because the judge ruled that there was  insufficient evidence—double jeopardy has nothing directly to do with that. A lacuna in the legal system in that regard has already been remedied. If the World's End case is to be brought back to court, that will have to be because more evidence is found, not because there is a different ruling on the evidence that has already been put before the court. People need to be clear about that. If there is more evidence, of course, the proposed double jeopardy bill could apply to the case. There are two issues to do with the reform of the double jeopardy rule. One is whether the reform should be retrospective. We should be aware that that concerns academics. A person is brought before a court on the basis of an understanding of the legal system of the time; to change the system afterwards and tell people that they can be brought back and retried is to change the legal system under their feet. Although that concerns some academics, I do not think that it concerns the man in the street. We can all see that if someone really was guilty and we now have the evidence to convict them, we should use that evidence and ensure that they are convicted. The second issue is the offences to which the new approach should apply. In all discussions we have said that they should be serious offences. The difficulty that the Justice Committee will have when it considers the bill will be in relation to what constitutes a serious offence. I do not expect us to come to a definitive answer. No doubt we will finish up with something on the statute book, but I do not think that it will be clear where serious offences start and stop. At the end of the day, we will have to draw a line somewhere and live with the consequences. There might be some discussion about that, but I am not convinced that we will get to a clear answer. Richard Baker, who is no longer in the chamber, commented on the Labour Party's wish to see more antisocial behaviour legislation. I would be interested to hear the detail of what he had in mind. If the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 has fallen into disuse, that has probably happened because it is not proving very useful. If amendments are being proposed they should be brought forward and considered—I am serious in suggesting that—but there is not much point in blaming the current Government for failing to take action when, as far as I am aware, no suggestions have been made and the 2004 act is not being used. I am slightly surprised that Richard Baker thinks that we should proceed on the Bowen review of sheriff and jury procedure. The report is pretty hot off the press and must be sensibly digested, as the Gill review must be. We could not reasonably  have expected a seriously thought-out bill on those matters to be put before us today. I will pick up on one or two comments by members—as we have time, it would be good to use it. My good friend Alex Johnstone said that we needed a Government and then expressed concerns about what that Government needed to do. He did not say that the country needed a Tory Government, but that was what he meant. That is fair enough—as he is a member of the Conservative party, I got that message. Alex Johnstone also said that only by reducing the public sector would we be able to grow the country. I take the arithmetic point, but I say to him and to anybody else who is listening that growth works its way into our economic cycle in two ways: through the wages that are paid to people and through the income tax that people pay or corporation tax. Most of the taxation that goes to the national Exchequer—which Alex Johnstone would want always to remain in Westminster—does not return here. That encapsulates the problem with the Calman recommendations and the near-Calman proposals that people might make. When the Scottish economy is grown, most of the benefit goes away and does not return. The Tories and others who promote Calman must get their minds around that issue. Jackie Baillie, who is still in the chamber, is always an able performer. She talked about mutterings in the corridors about our leader. I took a straw poll among my colleagues, who have not heard such mutterings. I suspect that the mutterings about our party leader are those of other parties, which are spending far too much time listening to themselves. I do not think that Alex Salmond is in any trouble with his back benchers. Of course, if I thought that he was, I would not tell members, but I do not think that. If we had a problem with our leader, we would tell him, but we have no problem. I am gratified to understand that Mike Rumbles recognises the reality of minority government. He said—I am sure that the record will put it better than I remember it—that it is up to a Government to honour as much of its manifesto as it can get through. He may have used the words the other way round. On 5 May next year, the electorate will reflect that the Government got through as much as it could and will see that measures that did not get through were not put through because of the other parties.

I will come to Mike Rumbles.  The electorate will recognise that the minority Government—which was apparently expected to last six months—has done a staggeringly good job with the mandate that it was given three years ago and they will think that it is a very good idea to give us a much better mandate the next time around.

I will do so. I take Mike Rumbles's word, but we might not have been able to get through other parts of the programme with Liberal Democrats' assistance. Presiding Officer, can I give way to Tricia Marwick?

Yes. That is reassuring and is what we hear on the doorsteps. SNP back benchers have an extremely good idea of what is going on in the country because we spend much of our time there. We do not have to be put off by the words that we hear in Parliament, many of which show wishful thinking and are remarkably ill informed.

I share in congratulating Mark Cooper on the success of the campaign. I also congratulate Lord Foulkes on lodging an amendment that has changed over time, with the duty being brought back to the provision of information so that it is not discriminatory against pubs that would otherwise have struggled to comply with it. I hope that what we finish up with is only the start of changing the culture in which pubs operate and the way in which they choose to set up their facilities. Rather than put a stick to their backsides, we have dangled in front of them a carrot of what should be good behaviour.

I support Bill Aitken, although I am absolutely with the principle of amendment 4 and the idea that some people have something to say  to the Parole Board but would struggle to write it. However, Parole Board proceedings could rapidly turn into a court-type situation, where people would need to be represented and there would be the opportunity for cross-examination. Amendment 4 would create a problem rather than a solution.

Amendment 63 replaces stage 2 amendment 378, which we were not very happy about when it came to the Justice Committee. I point out to James Kelly and others who are concerned about freedom of speech that, if amendment 63 is agreed to, the bill will say that, to commit the offence, a person has to behave in a threatening and abusive manner, has to cause fear and alarm and has to intend to do so or be reckless as to whether they are doing so. The offence under the suggested provision is very much narrower than the one that was suggested at stage 2. It is very much narrower than the offence of breach of the peace, which would cover all that and a lot more. This response to the decision in the Harris case has created a very narrow offence. I do not think that we need have any worries about those who wish to preach anything at all. If the preaching of any gospel is threatening and abusive and likely to cause fear and alarm, I suggest that it should not be so preached. One of the other issues that emerged is that the original amendment 378 did not have a title, which caused us some problems. When we were considering serious and organised crime—

I am sorry. I will stop.

I point out to Karen Gillon that the evidence is that the number of knives being carried is reducing. The number of knives being found is certainly reducing, and the police are looking very hard for them. Richard Baker said: "we need to ensure that they leave the knife at home." I absolutely agree with him. I suggest that there is no dispute throughout the chamber, nor within the public gallery, that the knife should be left at home. The issue is how we ensure that. I return to the point that has been made many times in the debate. Whether I like it or not—and I do not like it—the evidence is that mandatory sentences do not work.

Forgive me for a moment, Richard. We merely have to look back over the centuries in which we had capital punishment to realise that it did not prevent people from doing a lot of things. Mandatory sentences simply do not work, and we know that. That is why we have to ensure that we listen to the evidence and do things that are appropriate. I want also, improbably, to quote Bill Aitken. He said: "We have to save lives from being wasted." I agree with him. One of the best ways of wasting lives is to send young men, who are simply doing something that they perceive, incorrectly, is appropriate in their culture, to prison—the university of crime. Those are the points that are being forgotten about or ignored, and they are the other side of the argument. If I believed that mandatory sentences would stop people carrying knives, I would vote for mandatory sentences, Government whip notwithstanding; I think that most of my colleagues would do so, too. However, the evidence is that mandatory sentences are not the right way to go and on that basis—because I care about the long-term future of Scotland—I cannot support the bill as it stands.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will therefore be brief. First, I remind the Parliament that amendment 61 creates a presumption against short prison sentences. Every time that a member has risen to say that the option of short prison sentences will be taken away, he has been talking nonsense. Secondly, Dr Richard Simpson suggested that there should be an amendment on remand. I ask him why he did not lodge such an amendment.  Thirdly, I refer to Professor Fergus McNeill's evidence to the Justice Committee, which is quoted in paragraph 175 of its report. He said: "three things help people to stop offending: getting older and becoming more mature; developing social ties that mean something to them; and changing their view of what they are about as a person. Short periods in prison do not help with any of those three things."—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 19 May 2009; c 1893.]

I, too, thank Bill Kidd for bringing before us this timely motion. I also acknowledge the example of Julie McElroy. It takes individuals to get us to consider things in this world, and Julie McElroy is an inspiration to us all. I also commiserate with the minister because what tonight's debate has done is produce an extended wish list of things that the Government needs to worry about, which I am going to add to. We need to be slightly careful not to ask for too much—particularly in these straitened times—but the point that all members have made is that we are talking about relatively small stuff. We are not looking for megabucks but, as the minister well  knows, the deaf community needs some help. Half a dozen more translators would make a significant difference and would not cost us megabucks. I want to pick up on some references that other members have made. First, the deaf community is extremely varied. The document "The Long and Winding Road: A Roadmap to British Sign Language & Linguistic Access in Scotland", which the minister will be well aware of, points out that the deaf community includes people who become hard of hearing in later life, those who acquire profound deafness as adults, those who were born profoundly deaf, those who use BSL as their first language and, of course, those sad folk who are deafblind. Each of those groups has very different requirements, but each has a significant number of members. Lip-reading has already been mentioned, so I do not want to extend that discussion, but I was aware of the fact that beards and moustaches are a significant problem for lip-readers, because Christine Grahame and I discussed the subject elsewhere earlier in the year. In my case, the purpose of the beard and moustache is not to make up for hair that is missing from the top of my head—mercifully, that does not seem to be going. It simply reflects the fact that, as a very young man, I decided that I was not prepared to spend as many hours as I would have to shaving, were I to shave. I turn to some of the issues that are raised in "The Long and Winding Road", which identified a significant number of gaps in provision only last year. In general, there is simply not enough public funding to allow the profoundly deaf or deafblind to go to rehabilitation courses or to allow people who become deaf in adult life to attend lip-reading and communication classes. There is not enough money for training people to be interpreters and translators, and money is not routinely available for sign language courses for people who become deaf or the parents of deaf children. I repeat that we are not talking about megabucks, but money is an issue. Another issue that I want to bring to the minister's attention, which has already emerged in Aberdeen, is to do with the change in social work. Aberdeen and North East Deaf Society was an organisation that provided social work to the deaf community in the Aberdeen, Aberdeenshire and Moray areas. I do not want to go too far into the background, but for reasons that I am not prepared to dig up, it ceased to trade and the councils had to find other ways of dealing with that social work responsibility. They have done so, and I have no doubt that they will meet their statutory responsibilities. However, one of the upshots of the society ceasing to trade was that its building and facilities  became unavailable. The significant point was made to me that, for members of the deaf community—we are talking about thousands of people—the use of the building was more important than the social work that was provided there, because it gave them a space in which they could communicate with each other and be together. Although the provision of those social work services was a statutory responsibility that the council took over, it had no duty to provide premises where the deaf community could meet. That issue will not go away; indeed, it may recur as stringent times mean that more such services receive less funding. We are not asking for megabucks; we are simply adding to the understanding of the minister and the Government of the disparate communities that involve folk who are deaf, who need our help. We understand that, and we bring it to the Government's attention.

I, too, welcome the report. Any report from a learned gentleman who says, "This isn't quite within my remit, but I'm going to go there anyway and see whether I can sort something out," is to be welcomed. It is full of practical advice, which I, as an engineer, will always welcome. Pointing out that I am an engineer reminds me that I am not a qualified lawyer. I am, therefore, extremely grateful for the chapter that tells us how the system works. I commend that to anybody who would like to be reminded of how the system works. The only experience of it that I have had is of once sitting on a jury, but I will not recount that. We are trying to ensure that we make better use of the courts' resources. Sheriff Principal Bowen pointed out that he was not trying to spend any more money and certainly was not trying to increase the resources that were available. I am, therefore, not the slightest bit surprised that he suggested that there should be a business meeting before a hearing to ensure that people have got their minds around the issues. He also pointed out that, in court, the procurator fiscal has a number of jobs to balance. The Lord Advocate might need to consider whether the amount of administrative assistance that is available to procurators fiscal is adequate. It is difficult to see how they can concentrate on the case in hand while they are worrying about how they will manage the rest of the day. That was a little aside that maybe needs to be looked at. I take Bill Aitken's point about the use of television links. We might need to get used to the idea that there should be a defence agent at both ends of the link. If a significant amount of business is being conducted with a prison on the day, that might well make sense. There is no reason why there should be only one agent. The point has been made well that we should improve the use of police time. Members have  also commented on the angst that is caused to victims and the inconvenience that is caused to witnesses. I will address those issues a little later. Improved communication is undoubtedly a good part of any process anywhere. Sheriff Principal Bowen picks up the point that the communication between the procurator fiscal and the defence agent is not always what it might be. I appreciate that that is sometimes a matter of plain bad luck and sometimes a matter of bad timing with holidays. It will occasionally come down to personality, as things often do in life. However, if it is not obvious who within the Procurator Fiscal Service is taking on the case, one should hardly be surprised if the agent is not sure whom to talk to. That is another little nudge from Sheriff Principal Bowen in the direction of the Procurator Fiscal Service to get it to consider whether its systems are perfect. Communication between the agent and the accused has already been discussed, and we perhaps need to be a little bit more radical on that. I do not want to discuss the business process any further, as it has been adequately covered. Nevertheless, I have a question that the minister might like to address about why it is appropriate for the time limit to be extended from 110 days to 140 days. I was a little confused by that. I presume that the other suggestions are intended to improve the system by speeding it up, so why would we want to extend it? One possible answer is that what is currently happening in the sheriff court is much more akin to what used to happen in the High Court. Maybe 140 days is the correct time limit and always was for such cases. However, I would be grateful if the minister could establish the logic behind that, at least. The Mikado, wonderful fellow that he was—I will not sing any of the operetta—was intent on making the punishment fit the crime. I wonder whether we should be prepared to be a bit more radical in making the trial process fit the situation and whether Sheriff Principal Bowen has pushed the boat out far enough.

Forgive me. I will give way to Robert Brown in a moment. It seems to me that there are a large number who come before our courts who are guilty—plainly guilty—who know that they are guilty and who ought to plead guilty. I am not at all sure why, in the name of democracy and justice, we should allow them to continue to mess us around. In those circumstances—not all circumstances, as there is a place for proper trials and things being properly decided—in which we know and the guilty man knows that he is guilty, why on earth should we give him the opportunity to go right to the end  of the process before saying, "Well, you're a bad boy anyway. Here's your punishment"? I just wonder whether the discount system should start right from the beginning. It will depend on the discretion of the judge—the sheriff in this context—and it must depend on the quality of the evidence. The question is whether we should make it—

Hang on a minute—I will just get this on the record before the member interrupts. The question is whether we should make it quite clear to the accused that, in those circumstances, he should plead guilty early or he will pick up the tab. I am not sure that we have pushed that point far enough. If Cathie Craigie will forgive me, I will let Robert Brown intervene first—but there is plenty of time.

I do not know, and the court does not know—but the court will know in the end, in that the sheriff will be able to form a judgment on the totality of the evidence and on its quality. The sheriff can say to the accused, "You were fooling us all the way along—I am not having that." As long as the accused knows from the beginning that that is the way it will be, and as long as he has a clear idea as to whether he is guilty, it seems perfectly appropriate for the quality of the evidence to be used and for the accused who messed the court around to lose his discount. At the beginning, the agent should say that the evidence is so complete that the accused should stop messing people around.

I return to my original plea: I am not a lawyer and I do not know how well the system is  working but, reading between the lines of what Sheriff Principal Bowen has presented to us, I think that it might not be working as well as it might. That is why I said a few minutes ago that we need to consider whether to be more radical. At times when we have restricted resources, they should be going towards making sure that the innocent are proved to be innocent, and we should not be allowing the guilty who know that they are guilty and whose guilt will be proved to mess us around on the day. We need to ensure that legal aid meets the same aspiration, and the sheriff principal gives the impression that things are not yet sorted in that regard. I am sure that ministers are well aware of that.

Does the cabinet secretary believe that we get 100 per cent reporting? I suspect that many professional people will not report other than very serious incidents and that a vast number of such acts may go unreported, which we should be getting to the bottom of.

I, too, am not a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. Therefore, I come to the matter late and, I suspect, see it from a slightly different angle, which I hope will help the Parliament. I start with an issue that was picked up by several respondents to the committee, which is the issue of safeguarders. If training and consistency of standards matter for panel members, the obvious question is why they would not matter for safeguarders. As I read it, the only possible way of dealing with the issue is to have a quango that looks after safeguarders, which is not in the real world. I have read that there are fewer than 200 safeguarders. I remember trying to deal with a group of a few hundred folk across the country. We organised ourselves by electing a president, a vice-president and a treasurer. All training could have been provided by one salaried administrator, which is proportionate. I do not see why that is  impossible in this case. I suggest that it may be the kind of answer that everyone seeks; and it would surely be a great deal cheaper and easier to implement than another quango. Wearing my Justice Committee hat, I turn to the issue of discretion and where it is exercised. Discretion should always be in the right place, but it is suggested that, in a couple of circumstances, it is not. I refer members to paragraph 120 of the stage 1 report, which relates to sections 58 and 59 and states: "These sections set out the obligations of local authorities and the police to provide information to the principal reporter when a child is in need of protection, guidance, treatment or control and when the local authority or police consider that a compulsory supervision order should be made. This provision is in contrast with the current requirement that local authorities and the police should refer a case when they consider that a compulsory supervision order may be necessary . This change seems to move the key decision making power from reporters, traditionally the gatekeepers to the children's hearings system, to local authorities and the police." If I saw evidence that that was a researched policy change, on which evidence had been taken, we might be able to discuss it, but I see no such evidence. If the committee has not taken evidence on the change, is it an intended part of the policy? I leave it to the minister to reflect on the matter. There seems to be a change—was it intended?

I am grateful to the minister for his explanation. I am sure that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee will pursue the issue at stage 2. The Association of Directors of Social Work has raised with us the issue of the discretion that was previously exercised by the principal reporter. It points out: "The Anti Social Behaviour (Scotland) Act 2004 introduced a power to the Principal Reporter, on instruction from a hearing, to seek enforcement through the courts of the implementation by the local authority of a children's hearing's decision. An important element of this was the discretion of the Principal Reporter. The Children's Hearings Bill, as currently drafted, reaffirms the power, transfers it to the National Convener, but removes the discretion. This means that if a children's hearing so requests, the National Convener must take the local  authority to court to seek enforcement of the hearing's decision." There may be time for the minister to address that issue, although I must make one further point.

Again, I thank the minister for his response. This is what parliamentary debates should be like. I am glad that we occasionally have time for such debates. If I may be indulged, I want to make a third point, which others have previously made. The Justice Committee has been dealing with the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill. Section 38 of that bill, as amended at stage 2, states: "A child under the age of 12 years may not be prosecuted for an offence." I wonder whether inviting a child to plead guilty or to accept guilt for an offence for which they cannot be prosecuted is an infringement of some part of their human rights. Surely if, under the law of the land, that child is not capable of being put in front of a court and prosecuted for an offence, it cannot possibly be right that they can find themselves in front of some other tribunal, having, in effect, been charged with that offence and pled guilty to it. That is not necessarily the minister's problem—perhaps the Cabinet Secretary for Justice needs to address it—but I think that there is an inconsistency and that the Government needs to grasp the nettle. When we discussed the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill at stage 2, we discussed the introduction of the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill and that matter being dealt with in it, but it seems to be being dealt with in neither bill. It seems to me that there is a lacuna that we should address.

I well understand Ken Macintosh's point and I do not particularly disagree, but it is possible that we are becoming better at noticing and referring to the system children who need care. The situation now might be no different other than that we are noticing cases more.

Further to the question and to a question that I have asked the corporate body before, I wonder whether we could discuss the issue of cross-party groups. The last time that I asked whether the videoconferencing facilities were available to cross-party groups, I was told no, because the groups are not primary parliamentary functions. I will not ask the same question again, because I know that I will get the same answer, but, given the small numbers and the fact that the use of the equipment is pretty low, will the corporate body reconsider its policy? A significant number of people in Aberdeen have a professional interest in the cross-party group on obesity, which I convene, and they cannot get here for meetings.

Rising at number 14 in the batting lists—that would be a strange game of cricket—I am conscious that much has already been well said and probably repeated. Therefore, I will pick up just a few issues rather than try to give a comprehensive review of all the issues involved. Returning first to the point about statistics—I apologise for doing this, but we need to nail it—I want to pick up where John Wilson left off. In correspondence between the UK Statistics Authority's Professor Jowell and Keir Starmer QC, the Statistics Authority acknowledges that, from the statistics that are available in the UK, we should not say that the "overwhelming majority" of victims are women. It is quite clear, even to the UK Statistics Authority, that there are a significant number of male victims, which is why the UK Statistics Authority has removed that phrase. I ask other people to do so, too, because I think that such language skews the argument just a little too far in one direction.

Forgive me, but there are a few things that I want to cover. Of course, that does not alter the fact that the experience of female victims is very different from the experience of male victims. Walking down the street, one sees an awful lot of black eyes on ladies' faces and, by and large, victims who are men do not suffer from broken bones. Clearly, violence against women is an issue. However, in terms of pure numbers, we need to be careful not to imagine that quite as much domestic violence is in the direction of women as one might have thought. In addition, I want to refer to some statistical information from the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which has attempted to do some research on domestic abuse. The CDC's findings state: "Each year, women experience about 4.8 million intimate partner related physical assaults and rapes. Men are the victims of about 2.9 million intimate partner related physical assaults." That is over a third of those that could be established. I suggest that that might turn out to be somewhere nearer the right kind of proportion, although I acknowledge that the outcome for male and female victims will be very different. I have to agree with Patrick Harvie that domestic abuse is a complex gender issue, but that does not alter the fact that it is a gender issue.  Therefore, I can only try to draw together what Mike Rumbles said and what Patrick Harvie and Johann Lamont said by saying, "Look, guys, I think that you are actually talking about the same thing." Gender issues are involved, because women's experience and men's experience of domestic violence are different. Clearly, we recognise—I hope that we recognise—that men have a position in our society that is generally one of power and women, generally speaking, suffer as a consequence. Surely, however, there is also a power analysis. Given that the matter depends entirely on the power within the relationship, it does not follow that the woman is the unpowerful one. I think that we can all see that, so we should not fall out over it, but there have been some slightly intemperate comments one way or another that worry me and that we could perhaps just see off. As one of the final speakers in the debate I want to highlight something that has not previously been mentioned, which is how public authorities say that they deal with the issue. In a letter to me, the Lord Advocate stressed that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service takes all allegations of domestic abuse very seriously, whether the victim is male or female. In the view of procurators fiscal, there will be no presumptions in their analysis of any case. Clearly, they need to take the information that they are provided with, but it is clear that the Lord Advocate believes that there is no gender analysis at her end of proceedings.

Christine Grahame is a fraction ahead of me there. I also spoke to Grampian Police, which is quite clear that its view would now be the same in recognising that there is such a thing as a male victim of domestic abuse. The police now try to be even-handed—those are my words, not theirs—but whether that was the position historically is an issue that I will leave members to contemplate. However, that is now where at least Grampian Police is. By contrast, the response that I received from Aberdeen City Council—I do not want to pick out a particular local authority, although other members have done so—quoted research that suggests that, in 93 per cent of cases, domestic abuse is committed by a male perpetrator. The statistics that it was prepared to quote were the court statistics, which shows that public authorities are not looking over a terribly wide area and they see the easy statistics that come from the court rather than what is behind them. From that, I draw the  conclusion that, although we might be beginning to gain some understanding, and although some parts of public authority, such as the police and the Lord Advocate, have got there, I am not convinced that every other public authority understands that there might be two sides to the coin, and that they need to be careful about what they are doing.

What progress has the Government made on providing construction contractors with a common prequalification procedure for public contracts?

Prequalification.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to promote food and drink from the north-east. (S3O-10793)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his encouragement. The food and drink sector is, of course, very important to my constituents, with some 45,000 people employed in the industry in the north-east. How will the £300,000 of extra funding that the Scottish Government is providing this year to promote Scottish food and drink be targeted in the north-east, and how will that money be used to protect jobs and to grow the sector in these challenging times?

To ask the First Minister what the anticipated average savings in terms of fuel bills and carbon output will be for applicants to the energy saving Scotland boiler scrappage scheme.(S3F-2437)

My understanding is that the £2 million or so available in vouchers has already been allocated. What more can the Government do to ensure that those who have missed out on the scheme can benefit from other schemes?

To ask the Scottish Government whether the reported legal action by objectors might cause delay to the completion of the Aberdeen western peripheral route. (S3O-10610)

Is the minister aware that much of Road Sense's case appears already to have been taken by the Aberdeen Greenbelt Alliance to the Bern convention secretariat and comprehensively dismissed? Does the minister agree that, in view of the substantial costs that are associated with any delay to the project, the objectors should bear the costs of any further appeal?

I am pondering the member's thought about the hierarchy of victims. Perhaps it is not so much a hierarchy of victims as a hierarchy of situations in which offences take place. An off-duty policeman would be treated differently from one who was on duty, but I suspect that Hugh Henry's proposed bill would not distinguish between a shop assistant working in a  shop and one who was going about his or her private life away from the shop.

I, too, congratulate Hugh Henry on bringing what I believe to be an important issue to Parliament. When I stop and think about it, I have to conclude that the wheels of our society turn through the  provision of services to the public. Of course, we have informal social contact through friendships and so on, but society operates through workers having the ability to do the things that need to be done to help others. I have not the slightest doubt that, if workers believe that the law is not providing adequate protection, it needs to be changed. However, the first question that springs to mind is the one that John Lamont raised earlier: do we really need to change the law? I am as convinced as I ever was that there is no need to do so and that the current law is adequate. Aside from its adequacy, however, there might be two other reasons for changing it. First, as we established in previous debates about aggravated offences, by making something an aggravation we generate in the legal system a box that can be ticked. As a result, that information has value in the system by allowing people to understand that the aggravation existed, and the fact that it is useful for, say, statistical and informational purposes might well be a very valid reason for producing a legal aggravation. Secondly, in generating an aggravated offence in this regard, we might be making the law really send out a signal. I do not believe that, by and large, the law sends out signals, because I do not think that anyone is looking for them. Let me attempt to rationalise what we are being told. Is the fall in the number of offences in the health service a result of the 2005 act and the fact that people have suddenly realised that they might be committing an aggravated offence? No, because those people do not know that they are committing such an offence. Let us be honest: only anoraks know that. Has the 2005 act enabled the authorities, unions and anyone else to generate poster campaigns telling people who commit these offences that they might be facing more serious charges? If so and if those posters and other such information—which I have seen—have got the message across and thereby reduced the number of offences, that is plainly a very good thing and would of itself entirely justify having the aggravated offence, even though the law itself has not really been changed. That would seem like an extremely good reason for supporting the proposal in principle. That is a separate issue from the one that John Lamont addressed and—I think—correctly dismissed. From what I have heard, the USDAW campaign is to be commended. I have not read up on it, but nothing that I have heard about it seems to involve changing the law. Instead, it seems to be all about providing information and changing people's attitudes, and is absolutely the right direction to head in. The fact is that making people safer in their work, no matter whether it involves dealing with  other people, machinery or anything else, is all about having a good system. If folk in our community represent a risk to workers, we probably already know about them. We just have to be better at sharing the information. In my days as a councillor, I was told by the council, "There are some people in your ward you really don't want to call on. We're not going to tell you who they are, but if you ask us about so-and-so we will tell you whether they're on our list." It was a very sensible precaution for those of us who might have found ourselves knocking on a door of someone who was known to be difficult—or, worse, dangerous. Our high streets and licensed trade have all kinds of good information-sharing systems to pick up troublemakers and other difficult folk, and I believe that such systems are an absolutely basic requirement. In our information society, that kind of information should be used in every service that we provide. I do not think that anyone has mentioned the document "Managing Occupational Violence and Aggression in the Workplace", which was recently produced under the auspices of the NHS and the Scottish centre for healthy working lives. A table on page 11 lays out a number of reasons for the non-reporting of offences in the workplace, and I think that we need to consider them in any legislation or, indeed, any other activity. The most common reason for non-reporting—cited by 44 per cent of people, for what it is worth—was that the victim dealt with the matter themselves. I am sure that that is highly commendable. After all, as responsible and emotionally mature people, we should be able to deal with most of the trivial brushings-against and rubbings-up that we experience in life. However, that flies in the face of the idea that we should be passing information around. On that basis alone, we and indeed other workers must learn to report everything, because if we do not report it, someone else cannot find out about it. One person's trivial event might later turn out to be someone else's not-so-trivial event, but if it is never reported no one will ever know about it. Given that 29 per cent felt that the event was too trivial to report, it appears that a significant majority of events are never going to be reported because the victim on each occasion thinks that it is not worth doing something with it. I should also note that 14 per cent of victims felt that management would not have acted on the event and 9 per cent felt that reporting would have made matters worse. Such systems issues have nothing to do with the law, and every employer needs to consider them in thinking about how they deal with the problems that are experienced by their employees, how they pick up and handle that information and how they make life safer for everyone afterwards.

Does the cabinet secretary share my surprise at what is going on in the Parliament, given that Labour did not support the increase in police numbers in the first place and given that Andy Kerr lambasts the SNP in today's Daily Mail for not making its cuts fast enough? Does the cabinet secretary share my view that if Labour were in power now, the police would be in a seriously sorry state?

To ask the Scottish Government what support it has  received for its proposals to introduce minimum pricing for alcohol. (S3O-10331)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that large list of folk who have supported her. I would like to add to it. She might be interested to hear that I recently undertook a survey of Aberdeen residents and that, of the 1,700 responses that I received, almost two thirds were in favour of minimum pricing. Given the support that she mentioned and the clear backing of the public for minimum pricing, when does she anticipate having the full support of the Parliament for it, which will ensure that the concerns of residents in Aberdeen and throughout Scotland are not ignored?

As usual, I do not want to spend too much time repeating what colleagues have already said. Instead, I will look at one or two issues and perhaps offer a few helpful comments. The first thing that I will do is go right back to the very beginning and point members in the direction of section 1, which sets out the regulatory objectives as "(a) supporting the constitutional principle of the rule of law, (b) protecting and promoting— (i) the interests of consumers," and "(ii) the public interest generally, (c) promoting— (i) access to justice" and "(ii) competition in the provision of legal services, (d) promoting an independent, strong, varied and effective legal profession, (e) encouraging equal opportunities" and "(f) promoting and maintaining adherence to the professional principles." I take us back to those objectives simply to make the point that that is the intention of the law. Some of the comments that have been made have  tended to suggest that the bill might be there to undermine those things, but it is made clear at the beginning that that is not the intention. We have to ensure that, when the bill is out there working, it sticks to its original principles. I am conscious that there is concern about ethical principles. Section 2, which I will not quote, expands on those. It was clear in evidence to the committee that the minister felt that nobody who is involved in any of the alternative business structures should be subject to any lower ethnical standard than the standard to which lawyers are subject at present.

I take Robert Brown's point, although I would also make the point that those who have trained as lawyers have those ethics, in exactly the same way that those who have trained as medics have them—it is part of what they do. In exactly the same way, I might say that, for those in my profession of chemical engineering, safety is their middle name. That does not alter the fact that we should ensure that those ethical standards are somewhere in the text of the bill—it does not matter where. There is an argument that the professional privilege, which is accorded in section 60, assumes those kind of ethical standards. However, it might be worth ensuring that we write them down. Another issue is how we might allow businesses to describe themselves. I do not think that there has been any comment on that yet, so I would like to make some. Some people have described it as branding, which I think is an error. I ask members to turn their minds to the idea of a can of soup, which I hope will be helpful. The brand would be the "Heinz", "Campbell's" or "Baxters" on the label. They all make tomato, minestrone, mushroom and other soups. The descriptor is the word "tomato", "minestrone" or "mushroom"; the brand is "Heinz", "Campbell's" or "Baxters". Reserved descriptions are known in the law of food. Once upon a time, we used to buy margarine. We no longer buy much margarine because little is sold as margarine. That is because the reserved description is that margarine must be 80 per cent fat. We look for reserved descriptions of legal services providers, so that potential clients know from the business's description what they will get. The branding is the commercial name and the descriptor should say what the business is. With that in mind, some possibilities arise. Members will understand that I present them not because I think that they represent the right  answer but because they might be a way of progressing the debate and finding sensible words. If a future firm were composed of 60 per cent solicitors and 40 per cent accountants, it might be at least reasonable to describe it as "solicitors and accountants". If the numbers were the other way round, it would be "accountants and solicitors". If the split were 50:50, we would have to resolve that—how that would be achieved does not really matter. A firm would have to say underneath its description and in letters that were not too small that it was a regulated legal services provider, so that we were clear that it fell under the umbrella of the bill. I suggest simply for further comment that, if the split were not 60:40—if the percentage of solicitors were more than 80 per cent and the percentage of accountants or others less than 20 per cent—the firm might be "solicitors with accountants", along with the subtitle of being a regulated legal services provider. We will have to produce a table with such descriptions. I have merely presented some thoughts in the hope that other people can improve on them. In connection with that, a firm should not have to be 100 per cent solicitors to describe itself as a firm of solicitors. Perhaps being at least 90 per cent solicitors would be enough. I will push on quickly because time is against me, as always. The suggestion has been made and continues to be made that advocates should be able to be involved in alternative business structures. It is worth putting it on the record that we do not have many practising advocates. They are supposed to obey the cab-rank rule, to which I will return briefly. If they were allowed to be involved in alternative business structures, the number who would not have a conflict of interest would be reduced, which is clearly not in the interests of competition. Paragraph 10 on page 58 of the Thomson review quotes an authority that suggests that the cab-rank rule is "a polite fiction". The Faculty of Advocates might choose to address that issue, because the perception is that the system does not work as well as it should. I endorse Richard Baker's view that we must accept the bill in principle and push it forward. We must see whether we can improve it—I am pretty sure that we can. I take on board Robert Brown's comments about the effects of unrestricted competition, of which we must be aware. Voting down the bill is in no way the right thing to do at this stage. We must proceed with the bill today and find out whether we can improve it, in the light of the many comments that we have received.

To ask the First Minister, in light of the announcement by the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body that the Parliament is seeking to reduce its budget by up to 15 per cent by 2013-14, what projections the Scottish Government has made in relation to its budget over the next decade. (S3F-2350)

I am probably not the only member who finds those figures somewhat chilling. Will the First Minister expand on the Scottish Government's thoughts on how those substantial cuts, which, as we are well aware, result from mismanagement down south and the biggest deficit in history, will be accommodated in the Scottish budget so that we protect front-line public services as far as possible?

The third general assembly of the World Reformed Fellowship is taking place this week at the University of Edinburgh. This year's meeting in Scotland is of particular significance as it marks not only the 450th anniversary of the reformation in Scotland but the 100th anniversary of the world missionary conference, which was held here in 1910. Both those events will have been reflected on by some of the 200 or so delegates from across the world who have been attending to discuss the theme of this year's meeting—continuing the reformation: a missional theology for the 21st century global church. I see that some delegates are here this evening and I welcome them to the gallery—I trust that they have had a successful conference. I imagine that others will recount the events of the reformation crisis in Scotland of 1559-60. I have no doubt that there will be a discussion of the consequences of those reforms. I would like to address the issues that preceded those days. My theme will be the availability of the Bible in accessible translations. By way of general introduction, I note that the process of the reformation must have involved two distinct steps: first, the questioning of papal authority to interpret the Bible and, secondly, the rediscovery of the significance of personal faith within it. The books of the Bible were written in many hands over a significant period, but it is clear that almost all the New Testament must have been written in the first century. It appears that St  Athanasius, the bishop of Alexandria, listed the now accepted 27 books of the New Testament in 367. Not long after, in the early fifth century, Jerome produced the Vulgate Bible in Latin, which was to be the standard edition for a millennium. During that period of the dark ages, the faithful were dependent for teaching on their priests, who might or might not understand Latin. It will come as little surprise to any student of human nature that the church of that period, often uncorrected by reference to scripture, increasingly resembled a monopolistic corporation well interested in storing up treasure on earth. We can perhaps chart the decline in papal authority from 1305, when a French pope decided to base himself away from Rome, in Avignon. His successors stayed in France for the next 70 years or so, with the result that, by 1378, there were three rival popes—and it took a while to pension them off and restore some order. Political machination was endemic. In 1492, Rodrigo Borgia quite simply bought himself the papacy, no doubt accompanied by the occasional threat. Never inclined to forgive or forget, his family seem to have preferred to poison their enemies, and quite possibly, themselves. He was followed by Pope Julius II, who seems to have modelled himself on his namesake, Caesar, waging war on anyone who opposed his ambitions for an Italian empire. His successor Leo X had 76 relatively peaceful years in which to rebuild the church's balance sheet and St Peter's through the sale of indulgences. Whatever one's background, it was not difficult at the time to see that there was scope for reform of one sort or another. One other significant event must be noted. Around 1450, Johannes Gutenberg developed the printing press. His most famous production was of course the Gutenberg Bible—as it turns out, one of the Paris versions of the Vulgate. Against that backdrop, I will briefly call the roll of those who spread the biblical text across Europe to such great effect. By 1384, John Wyclif had translated the Vulgate Bible into English, not only preparing these isles for things to come but influencing, in particular, eastern Europe, where the cause of questioning papal authority was taken up by Jan Hus at Prague university. I note in passing that Hus's martyrdom in 1415 sparked one of many episodes of serious bloodshed, as the questioning of papal authority over biblical interpretation stood opposed to established political power. In 1440, one Lorenzo Valla, generally recognised as a very fine scholar but a pretty disagreeable kind of man, demonstrated that the donation of Constantine, under which the Roman church claimed much political power, was an eighth-century forgery, rather than a fourth-century  original. If that could not be trusted, what else might be false? His greater contribution, however, was his work on annotating the New Testament, which exposed many errors in the Vulgate and was to be crucial when, in 1516, Erasmus produced corrected Greek and Latin translations. Matthew, chapter 4, verse 17 no longer read "Do penance" and instead read "Be penitent"—the more modern New International Version now reads simply "Repent". In 1526, William Tyndale completed a fine English New Testament translation from the Greek. By 1534, Martin Luther—of whom I have no doubt we will hear much in the next few minutes—had translated both the Old Testament and the New Testament into vernacular German. His legacy also includes comprehensive reformed liturgy and hymns that reinforce the biblical truth. To that list of translators we must surely add Jean Cauvin—or John Calvin, as we would prefer to have him in the English-speaking world. His great literary achievement was not a translation but the "Institutes of the Christian Religion", which was first produced in Latin in 1536 and in French in 1541, with final versions—appropriately—in 1559 and 1560. It was translated into English the following year, by which time—as I am sure we will hear—Scotland had entered a new era.

Jamie Stone made the point that we need public engagement with the process, and that will depend on where we are in Scotland. I represent North East Scotland. Doric has had an impact on the area in which I live and work, and we need to be careful that we do not try to impose a language, which I accept Gaelic is, where there is already a dialect, which is what I suggest Doric is.

Members will not be surprised to learn that I will address an issue that has not been covered in the debate so far. In doing so, I propose to quote pretty extensively from the Scottish Law Commission report number 218, which we all have available to us. In particular, I want to highlight the issues that are raised by what the Scottish Law Commission describes as the third application under English law, namely the case of Regina v Andrews of 2008. For those who may not recall the details, let me quote: "In R v Andrews, the respondent had been acquitted of indecently assaulting and then raping SN, a girl of 15 who assisted at a summer camp run by his company. Thirteen years had passed between the alleged offence and the trial. The evidence of SN, who also gave evidence of having suffered sexual abuse in other unrelated incidents, was largely unsupported. Andrews presented himself as a man of good character who had a long and unblemished record of working with children. The jury acquitted on all charges. Following the acquittal, Andrews' ex-wife read of the case and went to the police, informing them that he had  been arrested, many years previously, in connection with the indecent assault of three children at the school at which he then worked. Following an extensive police investigation, a further indictment was laid against Andrews, charging 17 counts of offences relating to sexual offences against a number of youths in relation to whom he had enjoyed a position of responsibility and trust. The Crown Prosecution Service sought to have Andrews' acquittals of indecent assault and rape quashed, and a retrial granted on the charge of rape, on the basis of this new evidence." That would seem to be a situation that would be covered by the legislation that we are discussing. The Scottish Law Commission report goes on: "The Court of Appeal held that the relevant question was, rather, whether the evidence was admissible to prove that, contrary to his evidence at trial, Andrews had raped SN: 'What matters is that the evidence should be admissible to prove that, in accordance with her complaint, and contrary to his evidence at trial, the respondent raped her. It would be contrary to the purpose of the legislation for new, compelling, highly probative, admissible evidence that he did so to be disregarded. [Otherwise] we should end up with a new concept, that is two compartments, both containing evidence admissible in law to prove guilt if deployed at a second trial, but with evidence from one compartment excluded from consideration when addressing the question whether the acquittal should be quashed and a second trial ordered. In the context of the legislative purpose such compartmentalisation would be remarkable.'" The point of that statement is that the court quite clearly saw that it had to look at the new evidence in the context of all the preceding evidence in order to decide about its compellability. That makes sense. The Scottish Law Commission report continues: "The Court of Appeal also quoted with approval the DPP's statement that 'he would only proceed in cases where, as a result of new evidence, a conviction is highly probable and any acquittal by a jury at a subsequent trial would be perverse,' characterising this guidance as 'entirely appropriate, and consistent with the relevant legislative framework.'" Again, I think that we are talking about legislation that is fundamentally consistent with what is proposed for Scotland. Therefore, I am concerned by this last paragraph: "In the course of allowing the application, the Court said: '[The CPS] rightly contend that the new evidence shows that SN's allegation was not an isolated complaint against a man of good character who spent his adult life blamelessly working with children, but as now appears, one in a series of independent allegations forming a pattern of abuse of those in his care or for whom he was in a position of authority and trust. Even if not "direct" this provides strong supporting evidence for SN which was not available at trial, and the evidence that the respondent was guilty of the rape of SN is now significantly more powerful than it was. In our judgment, if it had been available at the first trial, or if it were now to be deployed at a second trial, the high probability is that the respondent would have been or will be convicted.'" On reading that, I struggle to agree with the English Court of Appeal, as I think that it points to a failure to distinguish between what might be likely and what is compelling. In this case, I do not see that that evidence of consistent abuse of children is of itself evidence of rape. I have to say that the Court of Appeal's statement worries me. If it were a Scottish case, I would not be speaking in those terms. I do not mind criticising the English courts, given that I am speaking from the Scottish jurisdiction. I did not mind telling the House of Lords that it got it wrong in the Johnston case on pleural plaques. My point is that when we draw up our legislation, we need to be extremely careful to ensure that we do not finish up in the position in which a court can say, "Well, it seems reasonably likely, so we'll have another go." In my view, there needs to be a compelling case for holding another trial. It needs to be clearly written into whatever legislation we put together that it must be more than just reasonably likely that the new evidence would affect the verdict in a second trial. That evidence needs to speak to the root of the crime, and in the case that I have cited it did not.

It seems to me that, in principle, it should. I think that we are talking about a matter of principle, so there should be no shades of grey. It seems to me that the new evidence should be compelling—there need not be 100 per cent certainty, because we do not live in a world in which that is terribly likely—and I find the case that I have referred to worrying. I want to pick up the issue that Hugh Henry had a dialogue with Robert Brown about. It seems to me that any pre-trial assessment by the Court of Appeal or the High Court of whether a second trial would be acceptable will get into the public domain, one way or another. Sure, it could be reported with sensitivity, but it is inevitable that if there is to be a second trial those who will be engaged in it will know fine well that that is the case, so it will follow that a second trial has been allowed by the High Court in an assessment. We cannot duck that. Not publicising the pre-trial assessment will not avoid people knowing that there will be a second trial. We will simply have to live with that.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to review translation and interpretation services across public services. (S3O-9836)

I encourage the cabinet secretary to consult not just service providers in the national health service but those in councils and at many  other agencies that provide services to the public. I base my question on the experience in Aberdeen, where a very large number of people do not have English as their first language. I would like progress to be made throughout the public service, if that is possible.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many businesses in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire will benefit from the extension to the small business bonus scheme after 1 April 2010. (S3O-9739)

In the context of the general payment of rates in Aberdeen, will the cabinet secretary outline his thoughts on tax incremental funding, perhaps for projects in Aberdeen such as the Union Terrace gardens project or combined heat and power plants?

I will return to the issue that Mary Scanlon raised. As members will recognise, there are two different areas to the subject: how flatted accommodation is factored and how external, commonly owned parts of a housing estate are factored. I will concentrate on the second area. Planning advice note 65 generated a desire for estate builders to ensure that their external land—the common areas—was owned and managed by somebody. Two ways emerged in which that could  be done. The first was to get the local authority to take it over, although at a cost. The second was to sell the land or, possibly, to give it to a land management company, which would have the right to receive payments from the house owners. That is where the problem to which Mary Scanlon and Jim Tolson referred has arisen. If the factor does not perform, there are a couple of things that the house owners can do. They can engage with the contractor and try to get it to get it right, or they can withhold payments with the expectation of being sued—and some are doing that. However, we have heard many times that our constituents want a quiet life. Although withholding payments and waiting to be sued might appeal to the average MSP, it does not appeal to the average constituent. The Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 was designed to deal with the problem. Section 3(7) states: "Except in so far as expressly permitted by this Act, a real burden must not have the effect of creating a monopoly". It is quite clear that that statute was designed to deal with the situation that I have described and enable the owners, in one way or another, to change the factor under those circumstances as well as many others. Unfortunately, it appears that it does not do so. Section 63 relates to manager burdens, which one would have thought to be relevant, but it turns out that it is essentially about the temporary situation during the first five years when the aim is to sell the property. Section 33 allows a majority of the landowners to change community burdens. However, the factor will be one of the land owners and will have a right to object and to take the matter to the Lands Tribunal for Scotland. Section 122 of the 2003 act defines "service burden" as "a real burden which relates to the provision of services to land other than the burdened property". Facility burdens involve the maintenance of areas such as common areas for recreation, private roads, private sewerage and boundary walls. However, any application to discharge one of those burdens must also be heard by the Lands Tribunal, with consequent risk and expense to the house owners. The 2003 act affords other ways of changing or removing a factor. Section 28 allows a majority of the owners to dismiss the property manager, although that can be overridden by a clause in the deed of conditions. Section 64—"Overriding power to dismiss and appoint manager"—looks more promising. It states: "(1) Where a person is the manager of related properties, the owners of two thirds of those properties may—  (a) dismiss that person; and (b) where they do so, appoint some other person to be such manager". Unfortunately, time does not allow me to go through section 66(2)(c), which relates to various issues about what is a related property, but the net result is that I have seen an advocate's opinion that the section does not apply to the situation that concerns us. The result is that an act that was intended to cover this situation apparently does not, or it is at the very least uncertain. We know that uncertain law is of no use whatever to our constituents; it may appeal to academics, because they can wind-up their students, and it has some appeal to lawyers, because it keeps them in business, but it is no use whatever to our constituents. We should do something to change that uncertain law and provide some certainty. I have consulted the Property Managers Association Scotland and individual factors, as I am sure many other members have done in preparation for this debate, specifically on this problem. We are clear that home owners who are paying for land management services should have the right to decide who provides that service. I think I hear Patricia Ferguson saying that she feels that the matter will not be covered by the proposed bill. Given that it could have been, and I think was intended to be, covered by the 2003 act, it seems at the very least to be within the Parliament's competence to address the issue. Whether it should be annexed to the bill is not for me to say, but I seriously ask the Government to consider whether that is possible and to find a way of resolving the problem. I think that we are clear that it requires legislation.

We are aware but tend to forget that the police are the backstop providers of public order. They are the people to whom we look to keep us safe when we walk down the street. We know that there are some dangerous folk around, so it is entirely obvious that the police will come into close contact with violent criminals and the emotionally disturbed. We have heard this morning about the use of Tasers and the risks involved, but I suggest that the issue is all about balance. I am grateful to Stewart Maxwell for mentioning research from Canada. I have in my hand the report of an inquiry carried out by one Thomas Braidwood QC following a fatal incident in British Columbia. The first conclusion that Mr Braidwood drew was that, even in the case of people with healthy hearts, there is a risk of the Taser interrupting the regular heartbeat. One has to recognise that there is a risk. He went on to say: "Police officers are called upon, with increasing regularity, to deal with emotionally disturbed people who display extreme behaviours, including violence ... Such emotionally disturbed people are often at an impaired level of consciousness; may not know who they are or where they are; may be delusional, anxious, or frightened; and may be unable to process or comply with an officer's commands." This is the important point: "The officer's challenge is not to make a medical diagnosis, but to decide how to deal with the observed behaviours, whatever the underlying cause." That brings us back to a point that has been made already: officers have to understand when to use a Taser and when not to use one. Mr Braidwood went on to say: "The unanimous view of mental health presenters was that the best practice is to de-escalate the agitation, which can be best achieved through the application of recognized crisis intervention techniques. Conversely, the worst possible response is to aggravate or escalate the crisis, such as by deploying a conducted energy weapon and/or using force to ... restrain the subject." Finally, Mr Braidwood says: "Several studies have attempted to determine whether the use of conducted energy weapons—" which is his word for Tasers— "reduce injuries and deaths to subjects and officers. I concluded that the results are, to date, inconclusive—it is notoriously difficult to isolate a particular weapon's impact on injuries and deaths, when so many variables are at play."

The answer is yes. I suggest that the member considers the numbers. My information is that, at the moment, Strathclyde Police have 197 authorised firearms officers. If the chief constable of Strathclyde Police had decided to turn that number into 227, that would have been an operational matter and we would not have been having this debate. As far as I can see, all that the chief constable has done is say, "I don't need 30 more firearms officers fully trained in all the weapons. These 30 officers need to be fully trained on the Tasers. They don't need to be trained in the use of all the weapons." As I understand it, what he suggested is that a fraction of his officers should be able to use Tasers properly.

I suggest to Robert Brown that the answer to that is given by Chief Constable Stephen House. If there is a difference in his policy, that is a change in his policy, for which he will have to answer. He could quite cheerfully have decided to have 30 more firearms officers without any apparent change in policy; it would merely have been a matter of numbers. Evaluation of the pilot is likely to be extremely difficult. We are dealing with very small numbers. It is likely that there will be no incidents whatever; one or two discharges will probably be the size of it. If someone gets hurt, that will be exceptional. There is a real risk that single figures will skew the evaluation of the pilot. As is the case with anything involving small numbers, the pilot will be desperately difficult to evaluate.

I congratulate the Government on doing what it absolutely needed to do, which is to take a long-term approach. Other members, such as Dr Richard Simpson, have referred to that. It is entirely clear that there is no simple answer and that even the answers that we have will take an awful long time to work. Targets to reduce the rate of increase of something are realistic—it is good to see that the issues are recognised. We have to start dragging things in the right direction.  I could talk about a large number of issues, but I will not concentrate on anything that other members have spoken about. Frankly, we could all be here for half an hour talking off the cuff. However, I note that the issue has three structural aspects. We have the collective problems in the environment in which we live, there are the economic consequences of obesity, and then of course there are the individual health problems for those who are affected. The economic issue affects us all, because at the end of the day we all pay our taxes one way or another to deal with the problems and we all live in that single environment—we are largely connected and we all look at the same things. Gil Paterson asked why the poor are most affected. The answer is desperately simple: because of commercial power. One way or another, the poor are more likely to succumb to marketing pressure to do something that, by and large, is not good for us. I do not hold it against the industry but, on the whole, it wants to sell us things that are highly calorific. That is what it knows we will buy, given half a chance. The real issue here is that while education helps us to know what we should do, it requires a good deal of nous, determination and aspiration to stop ourselves doing the things that the commercial world is, largely, trying to get us to do. All the things that have been mentioned, such as exercise and portion size, are the correct approach—I do not want to stand against them—but no Government is going far enough until we as a society understand that we have a societal problem, and until we get our industries and commercial organisations to understand that it is not in our collective interest to generate products that are bad for us or to advertise those products. I am not sure what the Scottish Government spends or could spend on healthy living advertising but I am sure that it is a minute amount compared with the amount of money that the food and drink industry in general spends on its products. We recognise that an awful lot of those products are not especially good for us, although they are good for the industry because they make the industry money. That is the nut that we must crack; everything else that we can do is around the edges of that. We have least control over the commercial reality, but it has the largest influence.

Dr Simpson makes an excellent point. Having worked in a big industry—although not the food industry—in a previous career, I can say that while people in industry and commerce may be very well intentioned and are not stupid, at the end of the day they work in the way in which accountants tell them to work, which comes down to numbers and money. If we are going to get any commercial enterprise to do the right thing, we have to make it cost effective for them. That means either enabling them to make a profit by doing the right thing or simply prohibiting them from doing the wrong thing. I would like to address that issue briefly. I do not believe that voluntary codes work, other than at the margins. The strategy document mentions voluntary codes and then says, "If they don't work, we'll do X and Y." With respect, the minister may as well take out the "If they don't work"; they will not, except at the margins. The minister may as well work out what X and Y are going to be; in fact, she might as well do X and Y from the beginning because it is only when people see some obstruction to what they want to do coming down the track that they will respond. In fact, because they are intelligent they will respond before it gets there—the train does not have to get to the station before people decide that they want to do something different. However, they have to believe that something will happen or nothing will. I could have talked about a vast number of issues but I will pick up on one that Mary Scanlon mentioned. What on earth does "healthy" mean when we see it on a package in the supermarket? I have no idea what it means; it means what we want it to mean. As long as the advertiser can justify it somehow or other—it is better than the unhealthy alternative—we will buy it. Is 2 per cent less saturated fat good? It probably is, but 98 per cent saturated fat is too much, if saturated fat is the wrong thing to have. I quote briefly from Sir Terry Pratchett's latest novel—wonderful stuff—in which he talks about the game of football. I will change the quotation slightly because it started life as a conversation. "Central to the game is the pie, which is generally of shortcrust pastry containing appropriate pie-like substances. I collected half a dozen and tested them on them"— the students. "They said they were pretty awful. Not a patch on the pies here"— at the university. "They finished them off, however. Examination of the ingredients suggests that they consisted of gravy, fat and salt, and insofar as it was possible to tell, none of the students appears to have died..." We recognise that instantly as part of our culture.  That is the problem: it is our culture and we need to change our culture.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps are being considered to increase support available to male  victims of domestic abuse and their children. (S3O-9413)

The minister will be aware of the recent discussion on the matter at the Public Petitions Committee. Will he comment on developments elsewhere in the United Kingdom?

I congratulate Richard Baker on securing a debate on a very important issue. I welcome our visitors in the public gallery. As a lifelong trade unionist, I welcome the involvement of the Community union. My first experience of Remploy was when I did business with it. In my first career, in the detergents industry, I bought production and packaging services from the organisation. At that point, I formed a strong and positive impression of  the business—albeit that that was somewhere south of here, as members will appreciate. I agree with Johann Lamont that, across society, the level of employment of people who have disabilities is deplorable. We must acknowledge that. We can understand how we got here—I will come back to that—but it is not acceptable. As a society, and as leaders in society, we must do something about it. We must also be clear that it is no good expecting private industry suddenly to come along and do all the right things, particularly in the present environment. That is unrealistic and will not happen. We need to look to other models. I am, therefore, delighted that there may be an opportunity for Glencraft with PSN in Aberdeen. I note this afternoon's decision of the finance and resources committee of Aberdeen City Council, which, as I understand it, is to do something about Glencraft's rent. That move goes very much in the right direction but, as the council has yet to set and complete its budget, we should perhaps hold our breaths. I congratulate everybody who has got involved. The First Minister has been involved, and Aberdeen City Council has taken the issue very seriously, led by Sue Bruce. I return briefly to the economic background. We must be careful not to point the finger in the wrong direction. As I understand it, Aberdeen City Council has been supporting this worthy and worthily supported organisation at a level of about £470,000 a year over many years—about £7 million over the past decade. We all know the difficulties that Aberdeen City Council is facing—I am not here to rehearse how we got here—but when there is pressure on the existing budget, never mind next year's, with no reserves worth speaking of, we have to take a long and hard look at what is being subsidised. It is no surprise that the council has had to change its position.

I thank the member for making that point. In addition to what I said about the economic background, I point out that Aberdeen City Council has been subsidising—from the Scottish budget—an organisation whose work reduces the DWP benefits that are paid out by Westminster. This is not an argument about independence; it is simply a recognition that, given that the council is saving Westminster money that would otherwise be paid in benefits, we might ask whether Westminster  should provide—throughout the country—the subsidies that are required. I do not want to get lost in the numbers, but the sums involved turn out to be roughly the same. We should consider who benefits from Aberdeen City Council subsidising supported employment, and we should be prepared to return to the issue. On article 19, experience has taught us that the issue is difficult. I read the report of a Westminster Hall debate a couple of years ago, in which it was clear that the UK Government had thought that Remploy could be restructured and could take on article 19 work. However, that has not materialised. We must acknowledge that it will be difficult to make that happen.

I am grateful that other members have picked up the issues around organisation. They are important, but I do not want to spend my time on that. I will talk about chapter 6 of Paddy Tomkins's report, on public awareness and accident prevention. I will pick up points that other members have made about water being dangerous and consider how it is that we forget that. A wise man once said to me that the best way to be safe in the mountains is to understand how dangerous they can be. A similar principle must apply in respect of water. The trouble is that, in our youth, we may be fooled. I suspect that our first contact with water is in the bath—which one hopes is warm. Thereafter, it is to be hoped that one learns to swim in the local swimming bath, where the water is nothing like as cold as it is in its natural state. If we ever get into the sea on our summer holidays, as I did as a lad, we find that the  water can occasionally be warm, but we will be fooled by the fact that seawater is denser than fresh water and we float more easily in it. The net result of all of that is that, if we find ourselves in an inland body of open water, we will encounter something that is much colder than we expect it to be and does not have that density that helps us to float in the sea. In practice, we do not float in inland water; we struggle hard and use a great deal of energy to tread water and, as others have mentioned, we get cold very quickly. It is not an environment in which we are safe, but I suspect that, as youngsters, we do not understand that, unless we have had an experience that has pointed it out to us. In chapter 6, Paddy Tomkins talks about the use of signage. I am sure that there are many signs around our environment that are useful, but I fear that we might be getting to the point at which we expect there to be a sign, and we might be breeding a generation that thinks that, if there is no hazard warning sign, they must be safe. People can forget that they must use their brains. The recent experience of ice on our pavements has resulted in some people saying, "I slipped over, and it is somebody else's fault because the pavement had not been gritted," rather than saying, "I slipped over because the pavement was icy and I did not take enough care." If we are not careful, we might end up marking as hazardous—purely because all water can be dangerous—water that does not need to be marked. That might lead people to conclude incorrectly, when they come to one of our 27,000 bodies of water that does not have and never will have a sign, that they will be safe if they go in. We must ensure that we signpost only exceptional or unexpected risk and do not fool people into believing that everything will be marked. We must acknowledge that people have a personal responsibility for their safety around water, and that parents also have responsibility. I have with me an aide-mémoire—a bobble hat that I will, with your indulgence, Presiding Officer, wear briefly. Members will note that it is a great deal brighter than the man who is wearing it. This hat was knitted for me by my mother when I went off sailing as a teenager. She recognised that sailing would probably be good. She also recognised that she could not stop me from falling into the water and that, if I was wearing the hat when that happened, I would be visible in a way that most other people who fall into the water are not. I never fell into the water, so the hat was never put to the test, but I am grateful to my late, lamented mother for thinking of that, and I have brought the hat along today as a visual aid to demonstrate that parents have a responsibility to ensure that their youngsters are sensibly kitted out.  I commend the efforts to educate that I have been able to find, and I am sure that there are many others. I found some colourful leaflets from Safe-Tay. I think that the theory is that leaflets that are generated by children, as these were, will be more beneficial to children who look at them. I am not sure that that is true, but I am sure that they are beneficial to the children who create them in the first place. I also found some beneficial information from the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, as one might expect. However, on page 44, Paddy Tomkins says: "The consensus among those who were generous enough to share their views and expertise with me was that current efforts to educate and inform are praiseworthy but often too localised, specialised or otherwise fragmentary, and need to be brought under an over-arching national water safety communication strategy." I have no issue with the idea of a national communications strategy, which might very well be appropriate, but I must ask how we will get the message out. Of course, we will do so through schools—I entirely understand that—but I will leave the minister with a thought about story placement. I am told that a vast number of our fellow men and women spend a large amount of time watching programmes on television that, once upon a time, were called soap operas—I am not quite sure what they are now called; that might be a good enough title. I have always despaired of those things. I do not watch them; I could not be brought to watch them—not all the way through—but I am told that businesses get their products placed in such a way that they get some advertising out of it. That seems to me to be very sensible. I cannot help wondering whether Governments should do a little bit of story placement, not at a political level, because I am sure that people would rapidly see through that, but safety messages about messing about on water and falling into water could be got across to the public through appropriate storylines in such programmes. I do not know whether the Government has ever considered that and I do not know whether television producers would ever contemplate it, but I suspect that there is a mechanism there and I wonder whether we should try using it.

What discussions did the cabinet secretary have with the organisations that were mentioned about harassment and stalking? What does he propose to do to improve the law in that area?

To ask the First Minister what the outcome was of the keep Scotland working jobs summit. (S3F-2133)

What does the First Minister think the impact will be of the announcement of £34 million to support jobs across Scotland, particularly in the north-east and, more particularly, for those not at present in education or employment?

I congratulate Dave Whitton on bringing the motion to us and I note its urgency. I pass on the apologies of my colleague Joe FitzPatrick, whom members might have been expecting to speak but who unfortunately had to disappear to his constituency on urgent business. His constituency is in Dundee, which is also part of my region and which is home to one of the United Kingdom's largest generalist investment trusts—the Alliance Trust, which was founded in 1883 and is one of the 10 largest companies based in Scotland, as well as being listed in the FTSE 100. It currently manages more than £2 billion and employs about 300 people. In 1982, my home city of Aberdeen generated the previously mentioned Aberdeen Asset Management, which employs about 1,800 people in 31 offices across 24 countries. I mention those businesses partly to localise them in my region but also to make the point, if it is necessary to do so, that Scotland has major players in international finance. I will discuss briefly the draft alternative investment fund managers directive, as it is important that we put a little flesh on that. As drafted, it will cover all non-UCITS funds. For those who are not familiar with the issue, UCITS stands for undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities. The draft directive covers investment trusts, private equity funds, hedge funds and property funds. As the previous speaker pointed out, that is a pretty wide-ranging set of institutions with different characteristics. A single draft directive that is designed to cover all those is absolutely bound to fail. It is therefore not surprising that the issue demands our attention. My friend and colleague Alyn Smith MEP is on the case. He is a member of the European Parliament committee that is considering the fall-out from the financial crisis. His view is that the issues are now being understood and worked on and that the necessary amendments are being  brought forth. I sincerely hope that that proves to be the case. However, it is important that we keep our eye on the ball and that we ensure that our colleagues in Europe do everything that they can to protect what is an extremely important part of the Scottish economy.

There is still time.

I welcome the AWPR on behalf of the citizens of Aberdeen. I wonder whether I heard the cabinet secretary aright. As I understand it, he suggested that scheduling would depend on what the contractor wanted to do. Will there be input from us and others locally? It seems to me that the ring road should be well ahead of the fastlink, and the faster we can get the bridges into use, the better.

I do not know whether I shall manage to continue the football analogy, but one image springs to mind. In stage 1 debates, the contributors are usually the members of the lead committee. For those of us who are not on the lead committee, it is a good thing that the team has turned up. I am in the grandstand, watching it all and trying to reflect on what is going on. I have been left very little to contribute to the detail, as other members have been playing the ball for some time. I will, therefore, offer a few thoughts on the edges of what we have been talking about. Human nature is much to do with the problem that we have been addressing. A lot of what is in the bill and what has been talked about is the provision of information. I remind the chamber that many people are not very good at reading; therefore, the written information with which they are provided can be pretty useless. I am not making a point about the education system; I am simply asking members to recognise that sending people the appropriate advice in written form may not work and is less likely to work for those who have already got their affairs in a muddle, as they are probably less organised. It is therefore important that, when people get into an economic mess, they know where to turn—CAS would be one such place. They must also be convinced of the need to do so and must be empowered to do so. I wonder whether we have given enough thought to ensuring that the people who are least likely to interact are given the right way of interacting. Are we dealing with the vast majority of people, who can read and look after themselves, to the exclusion of those who are most vulnerable? A second thought is about the nature of the bill. I will not go back over the party politics of it, but there was a call for swift legislation. There has also been a call for later legislation on the basis that we could have carried out more consultation. It seems to me that the ministers on the front bench today will be damned if they do and damned if they do not—they have taken a middle road and will be damned at both ends. That is just life. The committee should not be terribly worried about being forced to go to stage 2 with quite a lot  to do. Most members have been in the Parliament for a lot longer than I have and will not need to be reminded of that. Nevertheless, that has been my experience as a member of the Justice Committee. The Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill, which we passed fairly recently, and the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, which we are currently working through, involved a huge amount of discussion with ministers at what I might call stage 1.5, so that what we got at stage 2 was agreed, further amendments were lodged and stage 3 was relatively straightforward. I do not think that anybody should be the slightest bit worried about the amount of work that will be involved—I am sure that the committee is up to making the modifications that are required, and I look forward to the end result. Nevertheless, I worry slightly about part 2. Members have articulated the problems with it. I have in front of me a letter from ICAS, which I am sure that all members have seen. Paragraph 14, on protected trust deeds, states: "ICAS believes that the proposal seeks to address a problem that does not exist." I could continue the quote. It makes me wonder why we have received very different opinions from different parts of the landscape. I wonder whether there is a bit more work to do to get the right people into the room and around the table to work out what they are saying and where the compromise can be made. The idea of lay representation affects everything to do with the justice system. Nobody has yet pointed out that, although lay representation may be entirely appropriate when the facts are the only things at issue—as, by and large, they will be in this case—we should be worried about lay representation when the law is at issue. We must recognise that, although it can sometimes be an ass, the law is usually complicated and that to allow lay people to pretend that they know the law on a subject is a dangerous route to go down. We must ensure that we separate those two circumstances.

How on earth does one follow that?  I assure members of all parties that they can keep their gloves on for just one more speech, as I want to address an issue to which Charlie Gordon and Ted Brocklebank have alluded: the potential for concessionary fares on our railways. I think that such fares could be provided in a way that would not cost the Government one cent. As we heard during Margaret Mitchell's members' business debate on 19 November, those in our community who are deafblind, who suffer dual sensory impairment, are people who struggle with life. If members care to consider the prospect of walking around our world with the ability to hear very little, they will appreciate that that would be difficult; walking around our world with the ability to see very little would also be very difficult. If those two things are put together, one's world is very restricted. Obviously, one's mobility—the ability to get from anywhere to anywhere else, regardless of how well one's legs work—is seriously impaired. We do not even know how many deafblind folk there are in Scotland. The most recent total for registered deafblind folk is 2,863, but it is generally believed that that number should probably be multiplied by two. In addition, of course, there are degrees of impairment, so the number will always be fairly rough anyway. Not all our trains are the same, but the train that I hope to get back to Aberdeen this evening should have a public address system that will tell me the stations on the way, which I will be able to hear. I am not old enough to have a bus pass, but I am certainly old enough to remember when the announcements on the railways seemed to be in a foreign language. The announcements have improved, but those who cannot hear at all have a problem. My train tonight will also likely have that overhead moving-text message that says where the train is and where it is going, which is enormously valuable. However, we need to put ourselves in the position of those who cannot read such messages. This may seem strange, but such an impairment is not particularly uncommon. If we put those two impairments together, we can appreciate why those unfortunate folk who suffer from significant dual sensory impairment need a companion to move around the country. I have explained that at some length in order to enable members to understand the problem. Mercifully, we do not suffer from that problem, but several thousands of our compatriots do. Those folk will be eligible for free fares—that is not the issue—but their companion, by and large, will not be eligible. That is the issue. It should be pretty obvious from what I have said that deafblind folk need a companion to travel. It should be equally clear that, like the rest of us, deafblind folk would choose to travel off peak.  Travelling during peak time is not much fun anyway, and anyone with such problems who had to take a companion with them would, I think, choose to travel off peak. Therefore, it should not be terribly difficult for us to find a way of persuading train companies to use the spaces that, as Jamie Stone pointed out, are usually available during off-peak times to allow such folk to travel for free along with a companion, who ought to be able to travel, I suggest, for not very much. I argue that the train companies should make such travel free. That would not cost them a huge amount of money at all. I would be reluctant for us to tell them to make it free, but I have written to the managing directors of First ScotRail, East Coast, Virgin Trains and CrossCountry Trains to make precisely that argument. I also put to them the point that they currently accept a £15 marginal fare even from the likes of me, because everyone over 55 can get a return fare to anywhere for £15. I understand that that offer is not supported by the Government in any way. The train companies have already established that that is an acceptable marginal cost for an extra passenger. The challenge for the train companies—as I said, this is nothing to do with the Government—is to explain why it would not be acceptable for the companions of people who have dual sensory impairment to be charged that marginal fare. I would like such travel to be free, but surely the rail companies could provide it for £15, which is a number that they came up with. I hope that that idea receives cross-party support; we will generate a motion to that effect very soon, I think. There are a few other issues that need to be considered. The first concerns access to the bus station for people who have to get there by taxi or in a car because they are disabled, which I am aware is an issue in my home city of Aberdeen. Such access has apparently not been thought about. That must have been a simple oversight; sadly, it is a rather obvious one, and I hope that the people concerned will address it quickly. I am sure that those of us who have a local interest will ensure that that point is impressed on the appropriate people. Secondly, I add my name to the list of those who are aware of the fact that bus companies seem to issue tickets for journeys that are longer than the journey for which the concessionary fare has been charged. I understand that the Government is working on that issue, which has arisen as a result of reasonably recent anecdotal information from the cities of Aberdeen and Dundee.

Here comes the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, stage 1, part 2. I shall watch the clock and try to avoid all the areas of contention that were well covered this morning, because I want to cover one or two other areas. However, I cannot help reflecting that we had one or two interesting comments this morning. The most interesting one that I recall from before lunch was the accusation that the Liberals are sitting on the fence. First, to be fair to them, I do not think that that is true. Secondly, my observation on the Liberals' policy is that they are very good at finding the gaps in the fence and have never found any need to sit on it. Let me look first—

No. Let me look first at the sentencing council. The issue of consistency, or the perception of consistency, has been raised in that regard. The sentencing council is a good idea because it could lead on sentencing policy as things develop. For example, I am conscious, as other members will be, of the internet's effect on our world, and I am not entirely convinced that common law will necessarily be up to the mark on internet offences. The sentencing council may well provide a useful way of sorting out how offences that arise in that environment should reasonably be addressed, rather than waiting for the bench to find its way there. The sentencing council will also have a value in relation to knife crime. I suspect, too, that a sentencing council would have been useful in the discussion on drink driving. I flag up an issue that Rhoda Grant introduced this morning in relation to non-harassment orders, which are in section 15. I simply note, with pleasure, that the process is being changed so that an order can be granted after what is in effect a single event, rather than a stream of events being required. That is a significant step forward.  I turn now to the issue of disclosure, because there is a major issue that will affect much of what will be put in place on disclosure. Lord Coulsfield, who provided an extensive report on disclosure, expressed concerns to us about how the bill deals with the subject. It seems to me—I think that this was the Justice Committee's general view—that, when we deal with a subject such as disclosure, we should set out the principles. If there are more than a couple of principles, there should clearly be a hierarchy so that we know what the overriding one is and what the subsidiaries are. Below that, there will necessarily be a set of rules, which I suspect will primarily lay out duties and responsibilities; it is clear that those should be in the statute. Below that, there will be a set of procedures and processes, and things that might go into a code of practice. I think that that is the way in which we are encouraging the Government to go. I take it from the cabinet secretary's comments this morning that the Government has already got its mind round that issue, but I think that that is the structure to which it should work. I note in passing that this is a huge bill, which will require a significant amount of time at stage 2. I hope that it is being timetabled appropriately. Further, who knows how long it might take at stage 3? I draw members' attention to the large number of areas where the Justice Committee was not sure what the answer was. There is a surprisingly long list: section 62, on witness statements; section 63, on spouse compellability; section 132, on antisocial behaviour reports; section 94, on defence statements; section 82, on compensation for miscarriages of justice; and section 38, on the prosecution of children, which was referred to this morning. I highlight those merely to make the point that, although there is a lot of good stuff in the bill and a lot of good thinking has undoubtedly been done—I do not criticise those who drew up the bill—there is a huge amount of discussion, rationalisation and reconsideration yet to come. I want to ensure that we have time and space to ensure that that happens properly. Finally, on the bill's proposed modifications to the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Act 2007, I merely repeat the Justice Committee convener's remarks from this morning—

Again, the provisions involve an area of huge confusion, but we think that the Government has got them about right.

In the light of what Ross Finnie said, would the cabinet secretary care to give us some of the counterbalancing aspects of NHS Grampian's overall performance?

I, too, congratulate Margaret Mitchell on securing such an important debate. It is customary to congratulate members on securing debates, but the issue is hugely important and I am delighted that we are debating it. I am also delighted to see in the gallery those who have travelled here. It is interesting that we talk about the travelling problems of people who have dual sensory impairments, but some of us have travelling problems anyway with the wretched rain that we are having. I suspect that some people who might have come from Aberdeen have not made it here. However, it is good to see those who are in the gallery, and it is particularly good to see Drena O'Malley again. I acknowledge the work that she does and her contribution to the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on deafness, which Cathie Craigie and I support. Members have said that travel is one issue for deafblind people, but most of what happens for deafblind people is uncertain. Last year, I asked an intern to do some research on the subject. Getting good answers not only about how many people are deafblind, but about where they are, who pays them, what services there are for them and who provides those services was extremely difficult. I have continued to do some work in the area, but it is desperately difficult. Deafblind people are so marginalised that we are not even sure how many of them there are and where we can find them.  I will pre-empt the minister by saying that, by and large, the Government does not tell people what they have to do. We know that local authorities have single outcome agreements and are expected to come up with answers that are appropriate for their local area. As a former councillor, I must say that that is basically right. The challenge for the minister and the Government is to say what the Government can do to encourage consistency in how services are provided for financially by local authorities—or nationally, if that can be done. Can it be done? I came to Edinburgh this week on a £15 ticket—it is on the public record that I have reached the exalted age of 55, so I do not need to say that. The fact that I came to Edinburgh on that ticket suggests to me that the rail companies in general reckon that it is all right to have a marginal passenger for £15. I suspect that most deafblind people would not choose to travel at peak times—indeed, most of us would not travel at peak times if we could avoid doing so. It seems to me that the railway companies have already established that providing £15 marginal tickets to anywhere represents fair economic sense. I put it to the minister that that approach might be a way forward that is apparently already on the economic landscape. It might be better than having no top-up at all. The challenge for the minister and the Government is to see whether they can get local authorities and others who generate funding to provide a level playing field and consistency for desperately unfortunate people who need as much help as we can give them. I take the point that Cathie Craigie made—that the general public would support the proposal. I am pretty sure that, if they were aware of the issues, the public would be behind putting a little bit of money into it, and it would not cost a fortune.

Like me and many others, the minister will know of the anecdotal view that obtaining a banning order is easier in some places than it is in others. Given that, will he assure me that, when the monitoring group evaluates what is going on, it will consider the current law's adequacy and how it is being implemented?

Like other members, I thank Brian Sweeney for his extensive report. I also thank the Fire Brigades Union for its extensive response to the report. We have now seen both sides of most of the arguments and are, therefore, in a good position to discuss what the issues might be. Let us consider the statistics, which can sometimes get in the way. I will make a couple of observations. Sadly, fatalities are the easy thing to  count. They are also, as all parties recognise, the very small numbers in the statistics and show a variability that is sometimes confusing. It would be useful if, in the future, we had statistics not only for the tip of the iceberg, but for the iceberg itself. Having statistics within a comparable timeframe for the number of injuries, rescues and fires would allow us to focus on the general trends of such things instead of having to concentrate on the small numbers, which might be going in the other direction. The report suggests—we encounter this suggestion often in our statistical analysis in the Parliament—that smoothing out the data over a number of years would remove some of the inconsistencies. I fear that, by and large, that is an illusion. If we were to decide to look at the data on a cumulative basis over a three-year period, we would get a reliable number only every three years. If we were to look at the data over a three-year rolling period, we would merely substitute the variation between 2006 and 2009 for the variation between 2008 and 2009, which would not help much. We need to be careful about the numbers that we quote and what they mean. Yesterday, like some other members, I had an interesting discussion about sprinklers with Chief Fire Officer Sweeney and Chief Fire Officer Hunter. The clear conclusion that I came away with is that the present specification for sprinklers is probably an overspecification as far as household use is concerned, for the good reason that most sprinkler systems are used in industrial premises or large buildings such as hospitals, where a much higher specification is undoubtedly appropriate. It is entirely clear to me, as a chemical engineer, that there are some interesting engineering challenges involved: there are pressure issues, substantial backflow issues and major issues of bacterial growth in stagnant water. However, it ought not to be beyond the wit of man or woman to overcome them. It would be a good idea for the Government to encourage the engineering profession in all its manifestations to look at ways of coming up with a pretty cheap standard system that could be installed in households, because it is quite clear that such a system would offer substantial benefits to our communities. It seems clear to me, as it does to others, that RIP cigarettes have major benefits, but I am sure that members such as Stewart Maxwell will speak about those, so I will not dwell on the issue. The main issue that worries me is the information technology that is available to public services. We have talked about the need for cross-departmental working and partnerships, of which we are all aware. People try to work across borders, if they can. By now, we should be getting  to the point at which public service databases are interactable—if that is an acceptable word. I am talking about databases that can be accessed by other services so that information that is relevant—a lot of which the report that we are discussing points to—is sharable. I do not know to what extent that is the case, but I am mighty sure that the extent to which it is not the case is no longer acceptable. That brings us back to the relatively recent but important concept of best value. I have a suspicion that every public service thinks that it must install a computer system that offers best value for that service but completely overlooks the fact that how best value can be achieved would best be looked at on a national basis across all public services. That, of course, is a function of Government—it is not something that we can expect individual public services to do for themselves. It requires Government to decide to standardise its IT systems—or at least the databases within them—over a period of time. That is a challenge for Government. Another issue is the need for the development of a common language to cover terms such as "risk"—which has at least three meanings in the English language—and "deprivation". If we do not yet have such a common language across the public service, we must address that issue rather quickly. I turn to alarms. Like others, I was concerned to discover that in a large number of cases, fire took hold without the smoke detector having the desired effect. I do not find that terribly surprising because I have a suspicion than a lot of smoke detectors are still sitting in the cupboard in their box and that quite a number of the ones that are on the wall are in the wrong place on the wall. Moreover, I suspect that an even larger proportion of the ones that are in the right place no longer have a working battery. It would be interesting to know what the statistics are on that. I would prefer some right answers to my guesswork, from which I draw the conclusion that hard-wiring is the only way forward. The challenge—again, it is a challenge for Government, which must lead—is to determine to what extent it is sensible, prudent and good value to insist that, in the right circumstances, hard-wiring be included in building regulations.

I endorse entirely the member's suggestion but—it is not the first time that I have had this conversation, even today—the lesson of  life, which we well understand, is that the people who are most at risk are those who do not listen to education. Part of the problem is that they do not care. The only way of coping with people who will not look after themselves is to provide a fail-safe system.

Of course there is a fraction of the population for whom money is the real issue. Some square batteries are not cheap, so I can see why people might decide not to replace them. I fear that time is against me, so I had better stop at that point.

When I looked at the motion, I wondered not what it meant, but what environment I might have other than a historic one, given that today is the product of what came before. I cannot see how we can operate in anything other than a historic environment. The rest of the motion left me thinking that I must use some imagination, so I did. I thought that there would be no better place to start than Aberdeen, which is where I start the week. I did some research on what we have in Aberdeen, apart from a lot of Aberdonians. I asked myself why people come to Aberdeen, other than to live there. What wonders are there in Aberdeen for visitors? There are many. However, when I discovered the statistics, I found that the most visited part of Aberdeen is not the football ground but the David Welch winter gardens in Duthie park, which receive 300,000 or so visitors per year. That is well ahead of the number of visitors that Aberdeen's other attractions receive. Behind the David Welch gardens were Aberdeen art gallery, then the maritime museum and Provost Skene's house, which is in the lee of—and overlooked and almost overwhelmed by—St Nicholas house; I will return to that issue. The fact that the four top attractions in Aberdeen, apart from the football ground, turn out to be a gardens, an art gallery, a museum and a house sums the issue up. We are talking not just about castles or mountains and streams, but about the wonderful environment in which we live. Although Aberdeen is spoilt, it is, by and large, still a staggeringly good place to live. The minister's motion mentions community involvement, so I went to find out what we had been up to in that respect. I found a fascinating recent example. The Old Town House in the old city of Aberdeen—the University of Aberdeen—was restored in 2005, but the chime on the clock was not. Members' excitement on hearing a chime probably depends on how far away it is from where they sleep—I would not want a chiming clock under my window. The members of the local community decided that they wanted the clock's chime to be restored, so they formed the Old Aberdeen Heritage Society, sold cards, worked with the community council and raised a few thousand pounds. Earlier in the year, the chimes began working again. Although that was a small-scale project, it characterises what I think the minister was talking about and what I am quite sure we need to do. It is no good expecting the Government—or whatever body had the big pot of money that no longer exists—to come and solve  our problems, because it is plain to all of us that that will not happen. I then did a little more research and considered hotel occupancy in Aberdeen and Grampian, which I discovered is roughly 60 per cent a year. Even bed and breakfasts and self-catering accommodation are only 65 per cent to 75 per cent occupied at the height of summer. I thought to myself, "This indicates that there is scope for getting more folk along—there certainly wouldn't be any problem in getting them somewhere to stay." That leads me to the second thought, about the visitor approach, and VisitScotland and the other organisations that work around it. The challenge for the minister—I am afraid that there will be a few challenges for the minister, because that is what back benchers do—is to ask, "To what extent are we pulling all this together? To what extent could we just manage this better?" There is not the slightest doubt that the environment and the visitor attractions exist. Overall, the bed spaces are there, although of course they might not be in quite the right places. What is the Government doing to try to maximise the number of folk who come to the north-east and, by extension, elsewhere in the country? I am grateful to the minister for telling me that together, the National Trust for Scotland and Historic Scotland will work better, because that was going to be one of my pleas. I note Iain Smith's comment about the marginal costings on Leith hall. I well remember the visit from the National Trust to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee—I was there on that occasion—and I confess that I was concerned that the marginal costing decisions were not altogether what they might have been. However, I was also concerned that the National Trust was saying, quite sensibly, that it needed to rebuild its balance sheet. That is a pretty familiar tale throughout the business world. As I recall, the trust suggested that it needed to get from reserves of about £4 million to £17 million in three to five years. I thought to myself, "Historic Scotland has a £50 million budget. Surely the resources might be in there to help to protect the activities of the other organisation it's going to work with." That is another little challenge. Returning to Aberdeen, I hope that that the partnership to preserve Marischal college for the new council buildings proceeds to a successful conclusion. It is costing an absolute fortune. I cannot help reflecting that the issue came to the boil when the old building, St Nicholas house, was no longer serviceable and possibly uninsurable. That perhaps proves the point that, sometimes, needs force people to come up with sensible answers.  I draw the attention of the minister and members to an issue that is bang in the middle of Aberdeen—the Broadford works, which is a major industrial estate in the centre of Aberdeen, of which the minister may be aware. The works has planning permission and has been through a series of proposals. My understanding is that it is still waiting for listed building consent. I do not want to get into the detail of that, or to point fingers at anyone and assert that they are dragging their heels, but I do want to say that the faster we get something done, the better. I encourage the minister to consider that issue and whether we can do anything to push it along. The suggestion that it would be good if we could celebrate our listed buildings is absolutely right, but to state the totally obvious, we cannot celebrate a listed building if doing so feels like an imposition. We will only celebrate it and not feel like it is an imposition if the system for developing it appears to be on our side.

We are well aware that police are involved in MAPPA. Will the cabinet secretary confirm who else is routinely involved, and how that involvement is managed?

Given the previous discussion about patients who are overweight and the prevalence of diabetes that being overweight generates, will the minister confirm whether she is happy that the national health service is doing enough to assess individuals' weights and give them the advice that they need?

Will the member take an intervention?

I echo others' comments about the shortness of time available to us for this debate. I do not blame the Tories for raising the subject in a short debate—it is an important matter that we need to discuss—but I am not alone in believing that we do not have enough time to do it justice today. It is a subject to which we will have to return. I agree with other speakers that minimum pricing is not a magic bullet. I will address some of the points introduced by Murdo Fraser and then draw in some facts from elsewhere. I endorse entirely the view that we need better enforcement of legislation, and I take the point that much of the relevant legislation is recent and will take a while to bed in. I also endorse the point that we need education, but I echo the comment made by my colleague that education is not enough. Esteemed professors tell us that education is not enough—it just does not change a culture.  I note that the Conservatives suggest that we should ban sales below cost price. That approach might have the same effect as minimum pricing, although it would not have the same characteristics. The Conservatives assure me that their proposal is legally competent. At some stage, although not through an intervention, I would like clarification as to why that approach is legally competent when minimum pricing is not. The Tories make the point that minimum pricing would penalise moderate drinkers. That must be absolutely clear: anybody who buys a drink at a set minimum price will pay more for the drink. That is frankly inevitable, but it does not necessarily mean that it is not worth doing if we are clear that most of the people who are going to be penalised will change their behaviour for the better. I will not talk about illegality beyond saying that of course we do not know what the European court will rule. We do not know until we get there. That is precisely like every other legal decision and it should not surprise us. The Conservatives made the point, which was put to us originally by a certain part of the industry, that there will be immense damage to the export trade if we have a minimum price in this country. However, a minimum price is not a restraint on trade; it raises the bar for every importer and gives them more scope for offsetting their transport costs in order to import into this country. It does not act as a restraint at all on international trade. I would be enormously grateful if somebody could explain to me the mechanism by which it causes huge damage to export trade.

I am grateful to the member for that explanation. Perhaps he could further explain at some stage how it is that a sovereign state needs an excuse to impose taxation, as it can do so anyway without the health requirement. [ Interruption. ] I stand by my question. Sovereign states can impose taxes, which is undoubtedly what the Tories will do if they take over running the United Kingdom next year. That takes me to my final point. I would like to read what Scottish Health Action on Alcohol Problems has said about minimum pricing—I can  give members a reference for these comments. SHAAP has said: "It is claimed that minimum pricing for alcohol will do little to tackle alcohol abuse, however, the evidence points to the contrary. A recently published study exploring the drinking habits of patients referred to alcohol problems services in Edinburgh in 2008/09 found that the lower the price a patient paid per unit of alcohol, the more units they consumed." That is unremarkable. It continued: "Most of the alcohol the patients consumed was bought from off-licences where the cheapest alcohol can be accessed." We know that. SHAAP also said: "The study concluded that because the average unit price paid by this group of chronically ill patients was considerably lower than the average for the rest of the Scottish population, then it was likely that the elimination of the cheapest alcohol sales would result in reduced overall consumption by this population of drinkers, with a fairly immediate reduction in serious alcohol-related illnesses in our community." That is the real point about minimum pricing. Its effect will be on those who drink far too much and can ill afford to do so. We cannot stop those who can afford to drink themselves to death, but minimum pricing will have a considerable effect on those for whom money is significant.

The minister has already been reminded about her previous expectation that the high point might be experienced soon. Can she give an idea of the current expected profile for the development of the disease?

I would like to address the wider issues that the report raises. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for also mentioning Lord Philip's report, because it is important in the wider context. There are, of course, two areas of civil justice. In one area, a citizen disagrees with another citizen; in the other, a citizen disagrees with the state. Both are within the civil jurisdiction. However, I would like to concentrate on citizen versus state issues and what we regard as administrative law. Public servants now make a vast number of decisions on many matters, including entitlements to state benefits including pensions, our tax liabilities, education placements, property valuations and immigration matters. That would probably have seemed extraordinary to people who looked at the system 100 years ago. In discussing civil justice, we naturally tend to look at the pathology of the system—the times when it breaks down and people finish up in court,  arguing with each other. However, we should not forget the preventive medicine, which is about having good systems so that people learn. Lord Gill makes some mention of that, as Lord Philip does. We need to consider not the way in which the local tax office organises its business, but the way in which it deals with a complaint if the taxpayer's unhappiness goes beyond the natural desire not to part with his hard-earned money. So, although I congratulate Lord Gill and his staff on the review, I also refer to Lord Philip's tribunal review of June 2009 and point back to Sir Andrew Leggett's 2001 review of United Kingdom tribunals. We must ensure that, whatever administrative system we have, it picks up the decided points from its appeals system. We must ensure that those who go to tribunals to complain about administrative systems get their decisions fed back into the administration so that the administration learns and does not go on making the same mistake. We must also ensure that the civil claims that get to courts—especially in matters of personal injury, to which one or two members have referred—are subject to feedback. I am well aware that, as has also been alluded to, very small claims can have an enormous positive impact on the place of work. We must ensure that the system works back. In the same way, we should worry about accessibility. It should not be necessary for me to go and find a lawyer in order to work out how to deal with an administrative failure. It is essential that our citizens have access to that kind of basic information. Equally, the small claims process should ensure that I do not have to go to a lawyer in order that I can deal with a small claim. The small claims process exists, but I doubt whether the current limit of £5,000 is the right sum. It seems to be too small by a considerable distance, but Lord Gill did not suggest that we should change it. In drawing together those two thoughts, I say that I believe that we need to reflect on the whole system and consider what we are asking the tribunal or court to decide. We should allocate business on the basis of the model that is appropriate for deciding the right thing. I suggest, on the basis of Lord Philip's comments, that courts are better at determining the law when the facts are, by and large, not in dispute, and that tribunals are better at determining the facts and then applying the law, which, by and large, is not in dispute. Oh, that life were so simple. Of course, it is not. There is some need for us to think about the way tribunals interact with what I might describe as the lower end of the courts system, in order to  ensure that we have a complete system that deals with all the cases in the best possible way.

To ask the First Minister what assessment the Scottish Government has made of the problem of illegal drug use. (S3F-1947)

I encourage the Government to put recovery at the heart of the services that it provides. I am pleased to be able to welcome a drop in the number of those waiting for 26 weeks for treatment in my home city of Aberdeen, which has fallen from 500 to 117 in the last quarter. That is a dramatic improvement. Can the First Minister confirm the Government's intention to continue to invest in the drugs strategy, both in the health service and, of course, in policing?

I congratulate Mike Rumbles on securing another debate on an important issue that needs to be discussed periodically. However, before I come to the railway itself, I want briefly to work round the subject and develop Nanette Milne's comments on cars. According to all sorts of data from Transport Scotland and Nestrans, car ownership in the north-east is higher than in comparable places, with 57 per cent of Aberdeenshire residents using their car every day. That figure is quite high and indicates that, in rural communities, car ownership is almost essential unless one happens to live on rail or bus corridors. I should also mention in passing that 42 per cent of Aberdeen's residents use their car every day, which seems to me to be far too high. I have to wonder why people who live in a very small conurbation have to use the car so much. The answer, of course, is the buses. I seriously suggest that, in discussing the railway, we should recognise that there is an issue with Aberdeen's bus service. After all, buses should form the mainstream transport system in any city. I am quite prepared to accept that we should talk about the railways—and, indeed, the crossrail route—but we might be aiming at the wrong target if we  concentrate wholly on rail and do not sort out the buses. Social inclusion is about getting from A to B; A might be very close to B, but one needs to be able to get around and the bus service is crucial in that respect. I will swiftly pass by the Aberdeen peripheral route, noting only that it will present more park-and-ride opportunities and will therefore, I hope, help the situation in Aberdeen city centre, and move to the projects in question, which are set out in the Nestrans document. We all agree about the reopening of Kintore station. The date is yet to be agreed, but the proposal is in the document and the intention is that it will happen. Is it important? Of course it is, not least because it provides an opportunity for those taking the north-west route to park at Kintore, take the train to Aberdeen and, now that the bus station has been put in the right place, connect as necessary with the city's buses.

I have no difficulty agreeing with the member. However, I am grateful to Alison McInnes for pointing out that she now accepts that an incremental process is necessary. If we can all see that, it is a step in the right direction. The vision is fine, but it is some way away. Things will change as we go along. I will comment briefly on some of the points that have been made about crossrail and on the reasons why the project was not picked up quite as much as people hoped. First, we know that more stations means more stops—correctly—which increases journey times. That is one of the issues that will never be resolved. Unless there is enough track space to run the main line and the stoppers, it is not possible to get the timetable right. Secondly, the model did not predict modal shift on to the railways from cars. As far as I can tell, it predicted that most transfer would be from buses to the railways. That may just be welcome, but it is not really what we want. It may now be possible to challenge that conclusion, given that the minister has indicated that the model will be re-examined. I encourage the minister and his staff to look at the issue.

I repeat the point that every chemical engineer has to repeat occasionally: when we run a thermal cycle power station, two thirds of the heat is not lost or wasted; it is simply a necessary by-product of that cycle, although we have to accept that it can be used in CHP processes.

The SPCB generally accepts—if I heard the member correctly—that such technologies are a good thing. Does it support the ability of the cross-party group that I run, for example, to link to somewhere on the other side of the country?

As I expected, other members have considered the processes of engaging with the public. In the brief moments that I will have this afternoon—my speech might well be constrained by my throat rather than by the clock—I want to consider some of the processes whereby we investigate the petitions that come to us. I share Marlyn Glen's thought that we usually feel that we have had enough by the time that 5 o'clock on a Tuesday afternoon approaches, but the reality is that we would like to do more. We would like to receive more petitions and we would like to speed up the process of considering them. If we are to do that, we need to look at the system whereby we investigate petitions. I am grateful to a lady by the name of Sybil Simpson for her suggestion—in an early written submission—that, instead of bringing every petition straight to the committee, a "senior person" from the committee should first look at each petition to see whether it might be pointed in the right direction and to make some initial inquiries. I am not sure who she thought the senior person might be. Clearly, the convener and deputy convener would fit the bill, although I am not sure that they would thank me for suggesting that they consider all petitions before we consider them. I suggest that one way in which we might operate is to have a pair of committee members—possibly on a rotation basis, but we could surely sort that out—consider each petition. They could consider the issues and do the obvious things, such as writing to the appropriate health board or Government and the various other things that, from considering petitions over the years, we know that the committee automatically does. I suspect that, if a couple of us did that, we would not miss much—although we might miss something—and we would be able to start the process earlier. We would also be in a position to ensure that most petitions were investigated personally, because scheduling a couple of us to talk to the petitioner would be very much easier than trying to get everyone along to a meeting, which we have already established is impossible. I commend that suggestion as a way forward for the committee. I am concerned that, if we are successful in attracting more petitions, we will be making a rod for our own back. Therefore, I suggest that we need to examine how we deal with petitions. Finally, like Nanette Milne and others, I pay tribute to the work of the clerks. It is probably fair to say that every parliamentary committee is dependent on its clerks, but I am very conscious that the Public Petitions Committee is  extraordinarily dependent on the good work that is done by our clerks, first in trying to knock the public's views into an acceptable petition and then in steering the petition through our hands. I am grateful to them.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps are being taken to tackle drugs in Scotland's prisons. (S3O-7825)

Our prisons have historically faced drug use problems, so Craiginches prison in Aberdeen will be no different from most. What plans are there to implement the lessons learned from the work that is being done in Saughton prison? What progress is being made on the introduction of mobile tracing machines for detecting drugs?

The approach that the member has just laid out is not the way in which a company is expected to operate if it is worried about its balance sheet. Does the member accept that such an approach would require a fundamental change to our accounting principles?

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to support tourism in the north-east. (S3O-7708)

As the minister will be aware, recent figures show that Scottish hotels have enjoyed a 5 per cent increase in occupancy over the summer, although Aberdeen suffered a 5 per cent decrease. Surprisingly, that largely correlates with the oil price—the Aberdeen hospitality industry relies heavily on the offshore sector. Events such as Offshore Europe, which is currently taking place in Aberdeen, can provide much-needed boosts, with about 40,000 visitors this week. What steps will the Scottish Government take to work with the business and tourism sectors in Aberdeen to compete successfully at this challenging time?

Like colleagues, I pay tribute to the work and dedication of the fire service. The untimely death of Ewan Williamson reminds us that some of the jobs that are done in our society are hazardous and occasionally fatal. We should never forget that. I also pay tribute to the recent work of fire and rescue services during the floods. We do not need to have been up north or anywhere near Fochabers to have discovered that floods can arrive. The sight of floods in the middle of Aberdeen came as a surprise to many, not least the owners of the cars that suddenly disappeared beneath the floods. I, too, have visited my local fire brigade. I was interested to see what it does, and it was a fascinating visit. However, I did not sample a local hat. I was not offered one because, I suspect, it was felt that the brigade might not have one that was big enough. I note on reflection that the fire station is only a mile from my home. I think that that is a good place to have a home. As has perhaps become my wont in the Parliament, I will discuss some of the issues at the periphery of the main topic of discussion, which has been amply covered by others. I start by looking at what I might describe as end-of-valley arrangements. I have addressed before the ability of ambulances to reach people who live at the end of the roads up the valleys that go from Aberdeen into Aberdeenshire, but there is a link to the issue of fire and rescue services. It seems to me and others that, if we are to have satisfactory arrangements for such things, integration is needed. We need to think carefully about how we integrate emergency services of one sort or another away from major conurbations in order to reach people who live at the end of valleys where there is no access from the other side. In such situations, we have to do what we can to get to people as quickly as possible. Standard response times become meaningless when the start point and end point are 15 or 20 minutes apart. We must also continue to make efforts to reduce the number of fires. Quite simply, a person will not get hurt in a fire that does not start. I notice that the trends are in the right direction, which suggests that the right things have been done in the past. I am glad that Stewart Maxwell commented on fire-resistant cigarettes, as I was going to mention them. If we had a mechanism for reducing deaths  on the road by a factor of a third, we would grasp it without having much of a discussion about it. I suspect that the introduction of seat belts in cars had a rather greater effect than that, and it did not require much discussion once somebody had worked out the statistics. I am not sure what the statistics are on RIP cigarettes—I am not sure that we have heard them yet—but it is entirely clear that we are going in the right direction. If it is clear that RIP cigarettes will make a substantial difference, we should emphasise that. I appreciate that the matter is reserved, but—

That is my very point: we should not have to wait very long. After all, good ideas do not necessarily need to come with too many statistics attached. Although the issue is reserved and decisions in that regard have to be taken elsewhere, it is important that we place some emphasis on it. As always, time will rush away from us. There are many things that we can do to help the situation. Members have mentioned smoke detectors, but there is no use having one if it does not have any batteries—and it is no use at all if it is sitting in the cupboard, even if it has batteries. We must ensure that the right things are being done in the right places. Yet again, we have to think about cigarette lighters and, indeed, electrical equipment, which I believe is still the most hazardous element in our old building stock. My point is not so much that such hazards exist and must be dealt with, but that we should not expect the fire brigade to deal with all of them. For one thing, our children should be educated in such matters in our schools; for another, we are all educated through our media, but I have to say that do not recall any recent advertisements highlighting the importance of and sense in having smoke detectors and not leaving lit cigarettes lying around. I certainly remember such ads in the past and, in that respect, we should explore other such routes in other media. In all of this, we need to strike a balance. For example, I am very grateful to the minister for having discussions on the effect of new regulations on bed and breakfasts. As originally  drafted, the regulations seemed unduly onerous, would have been ridiculously expensive and would not really have helped the situation. However, it seems that, as a result of those discussions, the regulations might be relaxed, which is a sensible move. That shows that one can swing too far and that, in all such matters, one must strike a balance. On the issue of fatalities, I should at this point put on my ex-factory engineer hat and suggest that the biggest hazards in our country are industrial ones. Outside of a plane crash or terrorist incident, the most likely cause of an event incurring a large number of fatalities will be the build-up of explosive materials, almost inevitably as the result of an industrial problem. I realise that that issue, too, is reserved, but we simply need to keep our eye on the ball and ensure that industry does everything possible to prevent the egress of flammable and dangerous materials.

The debate has been interesting and has got more interesting during the afternoon. I have been making notes and if I were summing up I would have quite a lot to say—I am not doing so, of course, and I will stick with my original script. I will consider issues to do with a couple of pieces of proposed legislation, which I think that members will agree are needed. The proposed legal services bill has arisen probably largely as a result of a complaint by Which? to the Office of Fair Trading in May 2007, as I am sure that members are aware. I reread the OFT's response  in part yesterday, which was interesting, because although I think that the OFT had an understanding of how solicitors work in Scotland I have a sneaking suspicion that it knew little about how advocates operate. For that reason, I think that the OFT's recommendations might not have been terribly well thought out. The OFT suggested that we must find alternative business structures. In essence, that means ending the situation whereby solicitors can be in business only with other solicitors and, in recognition of the need to be competitive, enabling lawyers to form business alliances with, for example, surveyors and accountants. I suspect that in some specialist areas lawyers will want to join up with, for example, engineers and quantity surveyors. What has emerged is that such structures should be allowed. The central issue is how the new entities would be regulated, because it is clear that the Scottish public must be protected from people who would use those structures unscrupulously. The difficulty will lie in how we regulate lawyers when they are working in partnership or in some other commercial relationship with surveyors. A mechanism appears to have been devised—a fix whereby lawyers would still be regulated by the legal fraternity and quantity surveyors by their body, and another regulator or group of regulators would regulate the entity. Difficulties will arise when there is a conflict between the people who regulate the entity and the people who regulate the individuals. We will need to work through a bit of detail on that. It is clear that such regulation cannot be done by the Government. Quite a lot of people will want to sue the Government, one way or another, so we cannot have Government ministers regulating the new structures. Therefore the regulation must be done in the name of and with the approval of the Lord President. I look forward to seeing the details on a matter that will be tricky to get right. The proposed children's hearings bill has been mentioned—I am sorry that James Kelly has left the chamber. I enjoyed yesterday evening's reception and I enjoyed talking to the chairmen of some of my local children's panels. I acknowledge that they have concerns about the original draft bill, which the Government has said that it will re-examine. It seems that what has happened means that we have a better opportunity. If people had thought that the draft bill had got things about right, not many people would have engaged with it. When people think that something is not right, they are much more likely to engage in the process, so we will probably have a much better and wider-ranging debate. This morning I was heartened to hear Adam Ingram, the Minister for Children and Early Years, say that the bill must be  "right, not rushed." That is absolutely correct. In many ways the children's hearings system is the most significant part of Scotland's legal heritage. It is renowned the world over and we need to preserve it and get it right. Many issues to do with the proposed referendum bill have been mentioned. I continue to be surprised that members cannot see that it is totally obvious—it is to me—that the long-term economic opportunities for Scotland depend on our having the normal economic powers of an independent country. There may be a hiatus on the way from where we are to where we are going but surely it would be better if that is where we got to. Richard Baker—who, sadly, is no longer in the chamber—commented on the body of work that the Scottish Law Commission has done. It has produced a number of draft bills that, by and large, could be introduced by consensus. I have been concerned, as he has been, to bring that to the attention of Government ministers. We need to try to find ways of getting that work through the system—it covers important areas that could be addressed, and they are not political—and it would be extremely good if we managed to do that. I point out to members that, if the legislative programme is light, it is because the Government is fundamentally about using legislation to change structures. As far as I can see, government is mostly about using existing powers to do things better, and many of the complaints that I have heard about the lack of legislation have ignored the fact that the Government can and will do that. Today's debate is about the legislative programme.

Will the member take an intervention?

When were the compassionate release rules first established and where are they derived from?

Only one of the witnesses who gave evidence called for a time limit. In the end, they were outvoted by the rest, the reasons for which I understand. I am aware that the proposal that I am about to make was not tested in evidence—indeed, I think that it was not suggested at any stage. However, there might be merit in devising a banding system. In such a system, the arbitrator's first job would be to work out roughly how much was at stake. If the amount was less than £50,000, a time limit—and perhaps a cost limit—could be applied. If the amount was in the range of up to £1 million—I am making up the numbers as I go along—another  band, timetable and costing would apply. If the amount was beyond £1 million, the process would be completely open-ended. That might be a way of getting sanity in terms of small-scale cases and providing an open-ended position for larger ones.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being introduced to encourage engagement between the public and NHS Grampian. (S3O-7522)

Given the range of folk in the Grampian area who could contribute to such a pilot, what specific steps might be taken to ensure that it will involve the widest possible range of people?

I echo the congratulations to Christina McKelvie on bringing this timely and important discussion to the chamber. I am looking at a document entitled "A Career In Social Services [A Job Like No Other]", but that description is not quite true. We do a job that is remarkably like social work. By and large, we do not receive much praise and we are jumped on when something goes wrong. The document lists the attributes of social workers. I will leave out a couple, but some of them are to "be committed to working with people and helping them to solve their problems ... be able to make difficult decisions ... be non-judgemental and not tolerate prejudices in others ... have excellent listening skills ... be supportive and considerate ... have good negotiating skills ... be able to work well with colleagues and other professionals ... be able to prioritise their workload ... be able to build relationships ... be able to act quickly and calmly in difficult situations" and "be able to work under pressure and to timescales". That list simply reminds us what a constantly difficult job social workers are asked to do. I agree with Karen Whitefield that the recorded information tells us that the vast majority of social work is done well by dedicated people. We must be careful to correct perceptions about that. We talk in the chamber about the problem of young people being stereotyped by the press and about their being given a bad press. MSPs and social workers face exactly the same problem and we must do something to counter it. It is easy to criticise somebody who has made a judgment and got it wrong. We make judgments every day of the week, but social workers make them every hour of the week. Nothing is risk free. Any judgment involves the risk of being wrong.  People are wrong every now and again. I wish that the press understood and recognised that sometimes. As normal human beings, most of us understand that we get it wrong. Do we need a national inquiry? I confess that I doubt it. In recent years, Government inspections of education departments, health services, social work departments and other organisations have monitored the situation. The statistics tend to confirm that much is done well. Inspections quickly point out local authorities and care homes that are not up to standard. Ministers have robust responses to that, which help to sort issues out quickly. I am not at all convinced that we must have a national reassessment of that. I have observed that problems with local authority social work departments seem to coincide with indecisive political leadership. Although it is undoubtedly right to criticise the professionals, it is also worth bearing in mind that problems are likely to arise if councillors and Administrations do not lead, guide or monitor them. The job that we ask our social work folk to do is difficult. They are always being asked to balance resources—which, of course, are always limited—and make judgments on interventions, not all of which they will get right. Clearly, we need to have experienced professionals and to encourage folk into the profession. I am pleased that the profession has taken the opportunity to represent itself in a positive way. I endorse that.

I want to examine a number of issues in the bill, the first of which is, as Robert Brown has just highlighted, the time bar. I am grateful to Patrick Harvie for emphasising the Law Society of Scotland's point that there is a difference between the usual time bar for damages and injury claims and the one-year time bar in human rights legislation. We simply need to get our minds around that difference, which, I should add, is recognised throughout Europe. Of course, the question whether that is right is an interesting one, but perhaps not to be debated today. However, I reiterate the question that Robert Brown posed: if a person is subject to certain conditions day after day for a year and, six months later, brings a claim under human rights legislation, can they claim for the whole year or only the last six months? That might seem like a legal technicality, but it is a significant issue, given that prison is all about serving time. I would be grateful if I could receive an answer to that question and be told the authority for it. As I reflect on how we have reached this position, I cannot help but notice that even though the decision on the Somerville case is not substantive—the House of Lords was split on it—it has nevertheless produced a significant change in the law. Indeed, what comes to mind is the Donoghue v Stevenson case a couple of generations ago: although the House of Lords was  split on the matter and was never able to reach a substantive decision on the mythical snail, the decision changed consumer law out of all recognition. That highlights the interesting way in which our law can sometimes proceed.

I am not sure that it is worth commenting on whether the decision was good, given that everyone involved is now dead and buried. We certainly have reason to be very grateful for the way in which it changed the law, although it is not obvious to me whether the change had to happen then or would have come about later. The point is that, sometimes, changes in our law are precipitated by the most ridiculous things. That is the way it goes. Clearly, we need to pass the bill. I entirely respect the point that people's human rights need to be looked after—they are, after all, our human rights as individuals—but I do not think that there is any serious desire among the public to pay significant sums of money to prisoners. The best way not to have a problem in prison is not to be put there in the first place. That is what I intend to do and I am sure that everyone else will be well advised to do the same.

What potential is there for additional employment in the north-east as a result of the project?

I would like to comment—briefly, under the circumstances—on the process of getting to where we are today. I reflect that anybody who has picked up a book on Scots criminal law knows that it is particularly unsatisfactory in the area that we are discussing this afternoon. The Lord Advocate's reference of 2001 and McKearney v Her Majesty's Advocate in 2004 made it clear that the law was unsatisfactory, and at that point the Scottish Law Commission got involved. The commission was mentioned earlier, but I pay particular tribute to it because, despite the huge number of small amendments that have been made to the bill, it is by and large the bill that the commission proposed after serious consideration of the issues in 2007. We should congratulate it on a good piece of work. I am sure that it will be pleased that the bill has gone through the Parliament, and I am sure that the authors of standard textbooks will also be delighted with what has happened today. I reflect on the principles, as enunciated by the Scottish Law Commission, that the law should be clear; that it should respect sexual autonomy, which is the basis on which consent came into the bill; that it should recognise the protective principle and those in our society who need to be protected by the law because they cannot protect themselves; and that there should be no distinction on the basis of sexual orientation or gender, which is, of course, where we have got to in the 21 st century. I too thank and pay tribute to my Justice Committee colleagues. Our consideration of the bill was an extraordinary bit of teamwork and, as a relative new boy to parliamentary politics, I found it a great pleasure to witness the way in which the committee worked so well together.  That said, certain issues outwith the scope of the bill still have to be addressed. First, the bill does not change the fact that women in particular remain unlikely to report rape. Not only will the Government will have to continue its work on this issue but, as others have mentioned, society itself will have to work on such attitudes. Secondly, during its consideration of the bill, the committee reflected on the way in which reported cases were dropped while being investigated by the police and considered for prosecution. I believe that we agreed to call for an attrition study on the matter. In any case, it is hugely important that we understand the process that cases go through; otherwise, the passing of better law will not necessarily lead to better results. Finally, we do not know very much about how juries work. The committee realised that it could not address that matter immediately, but it is a real issue and work really needs to be carried out on that part of the process.

I understand the member's point, but does he not accept that, with the law as it was, the only alternative would have been an admonition?

I echo members' comments and I applaud Patrick Harvie's determination. I would not go so far as to say that he made a nuisance of himself—he did not.

Mr Harvie pushed the bill through, which is a significant achievement and should be applauded. I do not want to repeat what members have said, but I will talk about the consequences of the legislation that we are about to produce. Police forces in general will have to consider the processes for reporting crimes. They will have to pick up on matters that they were not required to consider in the past. The evidence that the Justice Committee received contained the message that the police need to be a little more open to the difficulties that people—particularly if they are disabled—face in reporting crime. The police need to ensure that they take the matter seriously and find the right processes. I was concerned to read in the briefing from the RNID that there is evidence that disabled people are not regarded as reliable witnesses. That might or might not be true, but the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service should at least consider the issue. Members of the Justice Committee realised early in the process that nothing in the bill should be necessary, because at common law such aggravations can be and no doubt sometimes are taken into account. However, the problem is that the aggravations might not be taken into account and are not necessarily reported. The huge benefit of the bill, apart from its ability to send a message, is that it will provide boxes to be ticked. We do not normally regard ticking boxes as a good thing, but in this context it will be a good thing, because it will force the police and the prosecution service to consider prejudice. However, it seems to me that there is unfinished business, because, in the process of interrogating the issue, we had to consider, as did the Equal Opportunities Committee, prejudice regarding gender and age. The Justice Committee decided that it would not progress with those areas. I do not wish to reopen that issue at this point, but given that women are far and away the most likely victims of domestic abuse and that men are, by and large, the victims of homicide, we must reflect that there is unfinished business on the agenda. Our legal system will not be right or complete until the possibility of prejudice against someone because of their gender or because they are above a certain age—I do not even know what that age might be—is covered in the same way as the issues in the bill are covered, as far as reporting and possible prosecution are concerned. I accept that prejudices regarding gender and age are on a different level, but it seems to me that the bill is incomplete. At some stage, we ought to come back to it and try to complete it.

The minister will be aware that significant sums of money go towards programmes to treat those who suffer as a result of drugs, which will undoubtedly reduce antisocial behaviour. I am conscious that this question crosses portfolios, but can the minister assure me that he will encourage those who are responsible for drugs rehabilitation programmes to ensure that their success or otherwise is assessed mathematically?

The cabinet secretary will be aware of efforts in Braemar to re-establish a volunteer ambulance service in the village. Will she update me on what progress is being made?

I come to the debate knowing very little about anything medical. Basically, I know that people should keep themselves as fit as they possibly  can, as doing so is probably the best defence against most of the things that might come their way. As I tend to do quite often, I would like to follow Ross Finnie in developing some thoughts about civil contingencies and what we have to do as a society. I will come at those matters by reflecting on what NHS Grampian has been up to, as it has been good enough to tell me. I have a report that I think will be considered by its board—or its operational management team, at least—this afternoon. I detect several things in the report that I would like to share with members. It states: "At Phase 5, Health is lead agency." It is known who is in charge. The strategic co-ordinating group is chaired by the board's chief executive. The individual concerned—Richard Carey—knows that he is in charge. The report says: "The responsibility for the overall tactical coordination of the response is delegated to the Director of Public Health". Again, it is entirely clear who is responsible. The report continues: "In the weeks since the implementation of the Pandemic Plan, a high level of activity has resulted from the need   to respond to reports of possible and probable cases;   to establish control room functions;   to communicate across the NHS ...   to respond to and communicate guidance developed by Health Protection Scotland;   for all sectors and cross Grampian services to implement and review the readiness of their plans;   to review plans for antiviral distribution."    NHS Grampian has done those things. In other words, it has stopped and thought about what it will have to do in the future. The board has also considered the risks and recognised that the risk aspects "include:-   Communication      Public Health management ...   Travel and Port Health   Operational preparedness of NHS Grampian Sectors   Monitoring stock and access to antivirals   Patient Pathways   Infection Control".    It has considered the control room and—crucially—NHS Grampian workforce issues. I would like to develop that point. It seems to me that, over the past few weeks, the health professionals have got themselves organised. I do not say that in any disparaging sense. They have seen that they not only need to respond as health professionals, but need to know how to respond when life gets tough. I have doubts about whether the wider community is getting on board. I am pretty sure that the NHS knows how to respond if 20 per cent of its staff are affected and off work, and I am quite sure that people in the public emergency services—the police and the fire brigade, for example—have thought about the same issues. They will have an emergency plan. I am also pretty sure—although I would not guarantee this—that every one of our 32 local councils has at least thought about the same things, although they may have thought that they will worry about them when they get there. It would be nice to be reassured that local councils really have thought their way through such matters, although it is hardly fair to ask the cabinet secretary for reassurance on that wider issue. How is the business community responding? That is not the Government's problem, but it could quickly become a collective problem. The point has already been made that quite a lot of parents will be at home if a school has been closed or a couple of schools have been closed, and that that will have a knock-on effect in other areas of public service. I am grateful to Rhoda Grant for making the point that those in the transport business are more likely to have contact with the general public. What will happen if half the buses are not running? What will happen if the drivers or conductors are simply not available? Somebody somewhere needs to be thinking about those questions. What will happen if the trains simply cannot run because there are not enough signalmen to keep them running? I am not scaremongering; I am talking about contingency planning, which is quite straightforward. People in businesses are probably thinking about such things. However, is the wider business community thinking about what will happen if the post does not arrive, the goods that have been ordered from suppliers simply do not get to people, or a third of the staff simply do not turn up for work because they are ill or cannot get in? I wonder how many businesses have seriously thought through such matters. I suspect that the really big businesses have probably done so—I used to work for a really big business—and that one-man bands probably have done so. One-man bands know that they will simply have to soldier on.  However, I suspect that most of those in the middle are too busy trying to survive the downturn in business to give thought to the matter. Therefore, my question for ministers—this is not quite the portfolio of the health ministers, but I ask them because they are in the chamber, on the front bench—is whether the Government is taking the opportunity to communicate to the wider community, and the wider business community in particular, the need to carry out some contingency planning. All businesses need to think this through. We all hope that this one will go away—we have heard all sorts of comments about whether phase 2 will be worse, although the truth is that we do not know—but we know that the current outbreak might be a trial run for an epidemic or pandemic of some proportions at some stage. Therefore, all the contingency planning that people can do would be well done now. Given that life might get quite difficult through the winter—although we all hope that it will not—now would actually be a very good time for small and medium-sized businesses to carry out the contingency planning that they might not have done so far.

As is customary, but also right, I thank Cathy Jamieson for bringing this debate to the chamber. It relates to the sort of important issue that we can overlook if we do not ensure that we pick it up periodically. The perspective from which I approach the issue is very different from that of Cathy Jamieson. I do so from personal experience, partly because I have some genetic make-up that suggests that I will become deaf, and partly because I managed to damage my right ear, so I use a hearing aid regularly. That has one huge advantage. Everyone should have a hearing aid, because it has a radio setting. If one is outside in a place where the radio loop is working, the eddies work, too, and it is often possible to hear things that people do not realise one can hear. People need to be aware of that. Those who suffer from mild deafness lose out socially, as they tend to withdraw. Everyone has some experience of family irritations. We know that parents are good at selective deafness, but there is a different kind of deafness that leads people not to engage. I put on record for those who are not aware of it that, when people become just a bit deaf, they lose not the ability to hear but the ability to distinguish—what suffers is the signal-to-noise ratio, if I may use that term. People know that someone is saying something but, if there is any kind of background noise, they find it much more difficult to distinguish what is being said. That is not understood by people who do not suffer from the condition. It is wonderful that we now have hearing aids that are minor computers and are capable of at least trying to distinguish signal from noise, instead of just amplifying everything, which does not help much. Some are better than others. I have a sneaking suspicion that the one that I use is not terribly good; we may have to work on that. We now have universal screening at birth, and the RNID is seeking routine screening for those who are over 55. I can think of reasons why that may not be the correct answer; I suspect that the minister will have words to say about the matter. However, I do not take issue with the RNID about it. When, in their communication with older people—55 is not old—those in the health system recognise there may be a hearing problem, which is not terribly difficult to pick up, they should do their level best to encourage the folk concerned to go to their GP and to get themselves referred. Perhaps that is the message that we really need to get out in the health profession. It may be a more practical answer than screening.  It is true that stigma is an issue. Self-deception, to which the human animal is particularly prone, is also an issue. People say, "I may be a little bit deaf, but not much." Whatever we do, we need a joined-up approach. I am looking forward to meeting NHS Grampian tomorrow to discover how audiology is progressing in the Grampian area, where I live. There are a couple of other issues that I would like to raise in the seconds that remain to me. First, in a recent answer to a parliamentary question, I was told that the number of British Sign Language translators is rising and that more are in training. I encourage the minister to ensure that that trend continues, because there are many people who need them. It would be good to have a universal service. Secondly, I recently had an intern do some work for me on the funding of services for people who are deaf and blind, to at least some extent. There are about 2,000 such people in Scotland. I must tell the Parliament and the minister that the funding for them does not seem to be well co-ordinated. That issue is perhaps not for tonight, but it is one to which we should return.

To ask the Scottish Government what benefits there will be for the north-east from the proposals to develop carbon capture and storage as part of the European Commission's strategic energy review plans for a North Sea offshore grid. (S3O-6944)

How soon will Aberdeen city and shire benefit from the proposals?

I can tell members that the answer is about 20 police officers. What other steps are being taken by the police to speed up justice?

To ask the Scottish Government what steps are being taken to promote Scottish fish and shellfish. (S3O-6844)

The cabinet secretary is aware of the trade credit insurance situation that faces the seafood industry. He is also aware that some exporters' premiums are being increased considerably and that some exporters are being refused insurance. What action is the Scottish Government taking to support Scotland's seafood industry as it struggles with that matter?

Despite the rhetoric, it is clear that—perhaps unsurprisingly—there is a great deal of unanimity among members and that we agree that a community court would be a good thing.  Experience around the world would seem to indicate that such a court works. We agree fundamentally that the point of such courts is immediate justice. Those of us who are privileged to be parents will understand me when I reflect on this. Let us suppose that my son and heir has just done something that he should not have done and that he knows he should not have done. I say to him, "Aye, lad. You shouldn't have done that. We'll talk about it in a week and a half's time." The absurdity of that as parental discipline makes the point that we all agree on: if our justice system is to have any reasonable effect on those who come before it, it needs to act swiftly. As far as I can tell, the court that was proposed for Glasgow was about trying to get all the services in the same place so that the whole process could be fast. However, at the moment, alternatives to custody are not being implemented quickly, and there is no point in spending money on a building to put people in if the system is not yet working fast. We need to get the system to work fast. I therefore agree with what I think is the minister's central point, which is that the money for the building is not the issue. Where we need to spend money, and where we need to change things, is in the systems around the court so that whatever penalty or community disposal comes up can be implemented quickly. That is not specifically about the building, although the building might help us to get people in the right place to do that.

I do not think that that is in dispute, although if the support services were a few miles away it would not really slow down the process. That is why I commend the Government's insistence on continuing to work with the project board and the council to speed up the process of justice. That is what is important: it is not about a building, whether it is £3 million or £5 million. I have heard members saying that the community court would be a good thing and that the Government should spend the money. In the current circumstances, with a fixed budget, we need to adopt the discipline of asking, "If we're going to spend more money on this, where's it going to come from?" It is not fair on any Government to ask it to spend more on something without telling it where the money will come from,  although I have heard some suggestions from members. In my remaining seconds, I will talk briefly about the coherence of the strategy. To be fair, the Government has a strategy and is trying to make it work. The strategy is that the people in prison should be the people who need to be in prison—either for the protection of society, as is usually the case, or for their own protection—and that the people whose imprisonment would not benefit either them or society should be kept out of prison. That is very much the cheaper option, and in the long term it will be far better for society. We need fast systems in place. Whatever non-prison disposals we come up with, they will have to work quickly or they will not work at all. I will stop now because I have come to the end of my time.

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the concerns that care home directors have expressed about the implications of the European working time directive for the costs involved in employing live-in staff to provide care. How will the Government tackle those costs over the long term?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps have been taken to ensure that adequate business support and advice is available to companies in the north-east. (S3O-6643)

As the minister will be aware, since the management of business gateway contracts was transferred from Scottish Enterprise to local authorities, concerns have been raised about the use of local contact details. Scottish Enterprise precludes the use of local phone numbers by contractors who wish to advertise services. As a result, the contractor that delivers the enterprise service in Grampian and Tayside has reported a 75 per cent drop in first inquiries, which makes it extremely difficult for them to hit targets. I have no objection to challenging targets, but will the minister address the issue of using local telephone numbers?

I, too, apologise for being a few seconds behind the parliamentary timetable. The minister mentioned a national event on Monday 28 April. Could he provide us with a few more details on that?

As I look at the notes that I have made for my speech, it occurs to me that I do not recall ever seeing a  page quite as cluttered—perhaps I need some help from Jim Mather. However, my cluttered notes show just how complicated the debate will be. I am very glad that we will have the debate in the context of a health bill, rather than having a perhaps shorter debate in the Justice Committee. I also think that the Justice Committee is overworked, despite our wonderful convener's attempts to keep us in order, and I am therefore absolutely delighted that some of its work will disappear to the Health and Sport Committee, which I am sure will bring wisdom to it. We are talking about two very different issues and we will help ourselves if we separate them in the debate. The first issue is the alcohol misuse that is evident on our high streets and in our town and city centres on Friday, Saturday and, increasingly, Sunday nights, when people respond in public to their overdrinking. The police, and all manner of other folk, including our A and E departments, have to deal with that. Most of the folk who have been overdrinking have come out of pubs and clubs and, therefore, the comments that Bill Aitken made about enforcing the licensing laws are entirely to the point. We must ensure that everything possible is done to minimise the difficulties that such behaviour causes. However, in the meeting of the cross-party group on drug and alcohol misuse, which Mary Scanlon, Richard Baker and I attended yesterday evening, it became clear that the vast majority of the health problem relates to those who are in middle age and who probably do most of their drinking at home. I sense that that is the essence of the health issue. I respectfully suggest to all parties that we must separate that issue from the public order issue. If we allow ourselves to confuse the two, we will not have a sensible debate. My plea is that we distinguish between those issues, so that we recognise which issue we are trying to address and where measures are targeted. Unlike some others, I congratulate Robert Brown on his performance. I thought that it was a wonderful tribal dance; he managed to dance all the way round the subject without getting anywhere near it. It was a wonderful example and I will look up his speech later to learn the lessons from it. The wonderful thing about the Liberal Democrat amendment is that it uses the phrase "evidence-based", which I have not found in the motion or the other amendment. I point Robert Brown and his colleagues to the evidence that was presented yesterday evening. As it happens, no one from the Liberal Democrats was at the meeting; I know how busy we all are and I do not mean that as a criticism. A lot of the evidence was produced by Petra Meier at the University of Sheffield last year.  We have to look at the academic evidence on which of the various interventions will have an influence on drinking and its consequences. I will persuade the Health and Sport Committee to look at that evidence, although I do not think that it will require much persuading. I do not think that it will be terribly difficult to work out what we should be doing. There are a few other issues to pick up. Bill Aitken referred quite properly to policing issues around St Neots. I suggest that those who are not familiar with East Anglia look at the map. I had to check this, but I found that St Neots is 10 miles from anywhere. I have nothing against St Neots, but I think that it is relatively straightforward to police somewhere that is 10 miles from anywhere on not-very-good roads. I question the lessons that our larger cities can learn from the St Neots experience, although I recognise entirely that it might be relevant in the Borders and other remoter communities.

I am delighted that, despite what Mr Butler has just said, he does, in fact, support Kenny MacAskill's amendment. He notes that police numbers are at a record high and welcomes—grudgingly—the findings of the police force projection study, which show that police officer numbers will increase by 1,000 to between 17,275 and 17,484 officers. To be fair, I do not think that he commended the Scottish Government for its investment in 1,000 additional recruits, but I am sure that he had it in his heart to do so, particularly for the sake of the recruits and the forces that they will work with. Furthermore, he commends the eight Scottish police forces for delivering additional police officers and calls on the Scottish Government to continue to maximise the numbers of police officers through a combination of recruitment, retention and redeployment. That is what I have just heard, and I welcome it.

I know what I have just heard, what I see in front of me and what that means—and in know that it is exactly what everybody wanted it to mean. That is why we are struggling to find other things to say. I point out to Mr Butler, and others who have spoken about the rise in police numbers over the previous eight years, that the numbers of police officers on the streets did not significantly increase. Indeed, it is possible that they did not increase at all, as the Justice Committee has been told many times, because the police unfortunately had to do a good number of other things in their back rooms. That is not a criticism of the police or of those who produce the work for them to do. It is clear that the number of police officers on our streets dropped significantly in the public's perception, and that problem is now being addressed.  I would like to address a few other issues in my remaining minutes. When Mike Rumbles made an intervention earlier, I thought of the distribution of police officers among the different forces. As a North East Scotland regional member, I would of course like to see the maximum possible number of police in Grampian and Tayside—other members would make cases for their regions—but I say to the cabinet secretary that we need perhaps to reflect on the distribution of funds among the forces over a period of time to ensure that it is consistent with what we are asking the forces to do. That is not a criticism of the current numbers, which may be perfectly right. However, we need to check periodically that funding and, therefore, police officers are reasonably distributed. We also need to reflect on the additional resources for community wardens, albeit that they are within the control of local authorities, because we need to ensure equity and fairness throughout Scotland. I draw members' attention to operation Lochnagar. That major Grampian Police operation will remind us why we need policemen. According to the latest data that I can find, which are a few days out of date, Grampian Police has, over the past few weeks, pursued 102 drug search warrants, taken 151 folk into custody, visited 150 addresses, seized £77,000-worth of drugs and 15 weapons, visited 88 licensed premises and detected some 35 other crimes. That reminds me why we need police officers. I will give examples of other things that are happening in the Aberdeen area. An intelligence-led operation on four break-ins to houses in the Rosemount area of west Aberdeen has led to a man being taken into custody. There was a sudden death in Mastrick—such events are always sad, of course, but they happen—and there has been a case involving reckless conduct with a firework in which a youth was taken into custody and eventually charged. I mention those examples simply because such things happen pretty much every day in our cities and towns. Who do people want to see when a house has been broken into, there has been a sudden death, or there has been an incident involving assault or violence? They do not want to see a local council official—however well meaning that official might be—but a police officer. That is why it is important that we maximise the number of police officers in our forces, and especially on the streets and facing our communities.

I, too, congratulate my friend Joe FitzPatrick on securing the debate, which is about an important but often overlooked part of our economy. It is interesting to reflect on the fact that in the industrial city of Dundee the old has passed away to be replaced by things that our grandparents would have been unable to imagine. As we heard from Joe FitzPatrick, Dundee and Scotland have an impressive list of global names in the industry such as Rockstar North and Realtime Worlds, with the latter employing 250 people in Dundee. However, I would like to focus on smaller businesses that exist throughout Scotland and to remind members that every new business starts as a small business.  Chris van der Kuyl, who is well known in the industry, started his first company, VIS Entertainment, out of his bedroom in Dundee. He now heads up a small company, 4J Studios, which has achieved worldwide success with the Elder Scrolls series. Chris Sawyer is another name in the industry—he works largely independently but has produced million-selling titles such as RollerCoaster Tycoon and Transport Tycoon. Those examples show that individuals and small companies can have a global market impact. However, in the past both developers have reported problems in financing development of their new titles. If they have problems, surely the same is true of plenty of others. The dare to be digital competition that is run by the University of Abertay is a good example of what can be done to support people who are starting in the computer game business. The competition has been run each year since 1999 and challenges teams of five or six recent graduates to work together to produce a functional game prototype in 10 weeks, which is judged on the basis of its creativity, market potential and use of new technology. The university recognises how difficult it can be for graduates to enter the market, so the dare to be digital competition helps them to gain real-life working experience and includes the provision of mentoring support from games companies. That creates a link between students and potential employers that helps to ensure that the next generations hit the ground running. This afternoon I had the opportunity, along with colleagues, to try out last year's winner, Ragnarawk. For the benefit of those who were not present, Ragnarawk is a role-playing game that enables one to explore a music-themed world. The music in the game is not, I hasten to add, the kind of music that I used to play, but if people play the guitar they are fine and can chase folk around the screen. Gavin Brown made the point that the technology has applications apart from games. Those applications are not limited to health—I suggest that there are enormous educational opportunities to be derived from software that has such real-time applications. The benefits will extend well beyond games. It has long been understood that we must support the UK film industry to ensure its growth and success and to ensure that projects are not stalled because of lack of funding. Each year, the film industry contributes £1 billion to the UK's gross domestic product—roughly the same as the games industry. However, unlike the games industry, the film industry receives £100 million in tax breaks every year. If we can see the links between tax breaks and a growing market for films, why cannot we see them for computer  games? A VAT exemption for games development for both large and small firms would allow the industry to flourish and ensure its continued success and growth, even in these difficult economic times.

It seems that war has broken out where peace should reign. I will try to draw together what I understand the crossrail project to be about. We are arguing about trains that carry passengers from the north-west of Aberdeen, through Aberdeen, to the south of Aberdeen and back again. The only issue is how many stations they should stop at and how frequently they should run.

I thank the member—I am delighted that there is some consensus on the issue. We could go down to the toy shop, take out a new railway, put it down where we want it to go, clear all the furniture out of the way and say that we have done it. The trouble is that the furniture is buildings, hills, valleys and rivers, so we cannot do that. What should we do? As you and other members are aware, Presiding Officer, we must start where we are and see where we can get to. We cannot get a new railway from the toy shop. We cannot even get one from the train shop—we must start with what we have. As I understand it, the Government's policy is to start with what we have and to add a station every time that seems to make sense. Laurencekirk has already been mentioned, but I recognise that it is probably beyond the area that members want to talk about today. A station at Kintore is certainly a possibility: I understand that there is a large amount of political momentum behind that. A station at Newtonhill might be viable, but I doubt it. The same applies to the proposal for a station in Altens, as I do not think that it would ever be viable. However, if it can be proved to be viable, why not build it? Alex Johnstone has already answered that question. He made the point that  the more stations trains stop at, the longer journey times will be. If we insist on putting in more stops, journeys will take longer and the service will become less attractive. I point members to Transport Scotland's detailed appraisal of the crossrail project, which suggests that there would be some modal shift from car to rail but that the majority of the additional passengers would come from buses rather than cars. There would be no benefit to road safety, and journey times would be slower as a result of additional stops. I suggest to members that Transport Scotland's findings are entirely consistent with what we would expect for this kind of transport project. It is therefore no surprise that the best way forward is an incremental approach. There is no point in our spending significant amounts of money on putting in more stations and changing the timetable until there is some evidence that people will use the service and make it cost effective. That is why I support the Government's line on crossrail. Change must be incremental and must take place as fast as we can sensibly make it work. It does not matter what we call it, the point is that we should make progress. Surely we can agree on that.

I echo everything that has been said. This late in the debate, there is not much to say, and I do not want to repeat everything for the sake of it. I take members back to the House of Lords judgment in the Johnston case. The judgment gets a bad press, but we should recognise that the law was not satisfactory and that their lordships knew that the whole basis on which people had been proceeding had been wrong for a long time. As I  did in the stage 1 debate on 5 November last year, I will refer to the judgment, in which Lord Rodger stated at paragraph 84: "The asbestos fibres cannot be removed from the claimants' lungs. In theory, the law might have held that the claimants had suffered personal injury when there were sufficient irremovable fibres in their lungs to cause the heightened risk of asbestosis or mesothelioma." The implication is that that is what the law should have held, which would have been good English law. However, as Lord Rodger went on to say, "the courts have not taken that line." I wonder whether their lordships might take from this debate a cautionary tale about the way in which they have developed the law. That will be history in a few minutes' time, because I am sure that we will pass the bill. It is easy to blame their lordships, but they could have got it right earlier if they had thought about how the law should develop. However, one way or another, they did not do so. I want to address the uncertainty about costs, by pointing out that costs are always uncertain. The numbers that we have heard about today are a salutary reminder of the uncertainty of costs in the real world. I do not think that that is particularly unusual. We sometimes flatter ourselves by thinking that our estimates are more accurate than they are. Bill Aitken is no longer in the chamber—although I am sure that he will be back to vote on the bill—but I remind the Tories that the estimates that we have are estimates of a cost that would have been borne had the law not been changed by the House of Lords in the Johnston judgment. I accept that we do not know what the numbers are, but we did not know what the numbers were before the judgment and they are still the same numbers that they would have been. By putting the law back to where it would have been, we are not changing the numbers—and we still do not know what they are. Comment has already been made about the legal costs and about the fact that, once the bill is passed, the insurance company will have nowhere to hide. The next step for the insurance company—whose rights I am perfectly prepared to defend, although it does not have any rights because of things being put back to the way that they were—should be to find ways forward that reduce the legal costs in what should be, by and large, incontestable cases. I appreciate that some cases are contestable on the facts, but where they are incontestable, there is absolutely no sense in the company continuing to pay large sums of money to lawyers—although I love lawyers dearly when they have a good case to argue. In that way, the costs to the insurance company can be reduced and the process will be speeded up, which will be good for the victims who need to be  compensated. I hope that the ABI will take that on board. I come to a more substantive point about the European convention on human rights. This might seem a slightly tangential point, but members will find out where I am going. We generally accept that, although the ECHR has some interesting and, occasionally, unfortunate side effects, it basically gives us a good way forward when we are considering people's rights and how we set up, interpret and use the law. This very afternoon, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice commented on the costs to the Government of paying for slopping-out cases, on the basis that slopping out is—apparently—in breach of the ECHR. That money flows from the public purse and goes directly to convicted criminals. As far as I can see, the Conservative party supports that—although I am sure that it acknowledges that it is an unfortunate result of the ECHR. I note that Government policy, which is endorsed across the Parliament, is to try to support drug addicts out of their addiction. As I understand it, the Tories support the expenditure of public funds to help those who have chosen to become addicted—or who have chosen to risk becoming addicted, at least. They are prepared to support the expenditure of public funds to help those who, in principle, could themselves choose to stop. Is it not strange to hear the Tories say that they do not support the recovery by those who have been the victims of negligent employers of compensation, either from the employers directly or from those who stand behind them, be they Government or insurer? I have to join the growing list of members who feel that the Tories have quite simply got it wrong. The argument is wrong, and I suggest to Bill Aitken and his colleagues in all seriousness that they should change their position in a little over half an hour's time, because it is faulty and it will not be defensible in the long term.

Can the cabinet secretary—[ Interruption. ]

Can the cabinet secretary confirm the process that he is asking us to go through? My understanding is that the second step would be emergency legislation in the Scottish Parliament. We know all about that process, as we have just been through it with the budget. My understanding from what the cabinet secretary said is that all that the UK Government would have to do would be to lay an order. Would that simply be a statutory instrument that would be typed up and formally laid before Parliament, and some time later the job would be done?

To ask the First Minister what progress the Scottish Government is making in reducing the impact of overconsumption of alcohol. (S3F-1515)

If I may, I will quote: "Alcohol has cost Scotland dearly. Through its significant contribution to violence, it has placed an immense financial burden on this country. ... Fundamentally, if you want to reduce violence then you need to reduce access to alcohol. We know that the group most at risk from violence is young males aged 10-29, so if you limit access to alcohol in certain areas then it can only be a good thing, especially as it is done with local agreement and is locally relevant." Those are the words of Detective Chief Superintendent John Carnochan, the head of the violence reduction unit. Does the First Minister agree with that view?

I thank the Scottish Law Commission for its original piece of work. We have talked about a great number of the details, and the bill largely sticks with the commission's original text and most of its meaning. Although we disagree on one major point, on the criminalisation of consensual sex between older children, I am grateful to the commission for giving us a framework within which to work. It has been acknowledged that the subject is not easy to discuss, and a good framework is a very good place to start from. I note that the bill is largely a consolidating one. Paragraph 9 of the policy memorandum points out that the bill will, largely, "improve the clarity and consistency of the law." Specifically, the bill includes  "the definition of consent as 'free agreement'" and makes provisions about "'honest' belief in consent". However, paragraph 10 of the policy memorandum says: "despite such improvements, reform of the substantive law on rape and other sexual offences will not, on its own, be sufficient to improve Scotland's low conviction rate for rape. That is why work is underway on a number of other fronts". It is important to recognise that that other work must continue. The Scottish Law Commission is examining the law of evidence, and of character evidence in particular, as well as the Moorov rule. I encourage the Scottish Law Commission to proceed with its work as fast as is reasonably possible. I am not suggesting that it is slow, but the faster we can amend the law and, in particular, the faster we can get the Moorov rule back before the courts as a working hypothesis, the better for those rare occasions when that consideration is really important, which tend to be very serious cases. Like other members, I wish to address issues around older children. It is in that area where we seem to have disagreed with the Scottish Law Commission's report, for one simple reason: we have inherited a law that states that boys who have underage sex are committing a criminal offence. Had we not started from that position, I am not sure that we would have finished in the present one, but that is where we started. We have not wanted to decriminalise such activity simply because that would have sent entirely the wrong message. I am not sure whether, if we started from a position where that activity was not criminal, we would want to criminalise it—that, too,  would probably send the wrong message. We need to be very careful about where we are coming from when we consider what it is that we are suggesting. We heard evidence from the British Medical Association and from Barnardo's and other organisations that represent children that, one way or another—I take Robert Brown's point on this—we should decriminalise. Those organisations should understand that uppermost in the minds of Justice Committee members was the point that I just made about where we started from. The committee also made a recommendation on oral sex, and I note that the cabinet secretary's response is that he will consider the issue, which I understand and respect. I add my personal voice to the suggestion that he should consider it positively. Some medical evidence supports the recommendation and, if we are making a law that is essentially a backdrop against which our youngsters will conduct themselves and which we know will not normally be pursued rigorously through the courts, it is important that we send the right, complete message. Putting oral sex back into that backdrop seems to be part of a consistent message about what is wise and what is not. There has been some discussion of section 39 and the defences for people involved counselling. I know that some are concerned that section 39 might provide a defence for those who would incite underage sex. However, it is clear from the text of the bill that that is not the case. That might be one of the good reasons for retaining the criminal offence of underage sex. In the by-going, it means that inciting underage sex is a crime, and we, as a Parliament, would want to support that. There is far too much pressure on our youngsters to become sexually active. I think that people in the media take a cavalier attitude. If they reflected on the fact that incitement is a criminal offence, will remain a criminal offence and will be a gender-neutral offence, they might also reflect on what they sometimes suggest in the messages that they give our children.

I have no evidence at all, and I suspect that there might have been no such charges. However, extending the law and making it gender neutral makes Parliament's thinking clearer and clarifies the law of the land, and is therefore what people in the media should reflect. Perhaps that is part of the message. We should also recognise that the law is not going to change what our youngsters do: we all know that, and we might just as well say so. If we  are to change youngsters' attitudes to the risks that are inherent in early sexual activity, education is the key. I am quite clear that, in itself, education does not change behaviours, but educating young people is essential if we are to make any progress at all. I leave members with the thought that we need to change the law. I could have discussed many other things, but we do not have time. Educating youngsters appropriately is the key; without that, we will achieve very little by changing the law.

I, too, congratulate Karen Whitefield on securing a debate on a hugely important issue that offers a timely reminder to us all. I also congratulate the people in the public gallery, whom I do not recognise, but I am sure that they do a great deal of work on the subject that we are discussing, because that is what brings people to members' business debates. I am extremely grateful that they are here and for their efforts on diabetes. I say that because I have personal experience of the condition. As I get older, I am more and more surprised that I am here. Members will be well aware that I was surprised to be elected, but I am even more surprised that I am alive, because I understand that my father, who was born in the early 1920s, was diabetic more or less from birth and was therefore probably fairly fortunate to survive. It is interesting to reflect on the fact that when he died in the 1970s in his 50s—forgive me, I do not remember how old he was—one of my sisters did not realise that he suffered from diabetes. As an adult, he had got so good at managing the condition through insulin injections that he appeared to live a perfectly normal and active life without any complications whatever. I am sure that there must have been a few, but the fact that he managed to hide them from his children shows just how well diabetes can, in some circumstances, be managed. I am sure that that is thanks to those who have done the research and understood the subject over the years. I am extremely grateful for all that. Like all members, I am conscious that we must ensure that our health service copes with and provides the best possible care to those who suffer from diabetes, and from other illnesses. Like other members who have spoken in the debate, I come at the issue from a slightly different angle. As the convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on obesity, I am increasingly aware that the nation's expanding  waistlines will cause more type 2 diabetes. That is not a possibility; it will happen. There is a clear correlation between the incidence of obesity and the incidence of type 2 diabetes, and it will not go away. The other point that I must make, therefore, is that although we must treat the people who have already been diagnosed as suffering from the condition, and must diagnose those who are already suffering from it but have not yet been diagnosed with it, we must do everything possible to ensure that we do not continue to expand our waistlines and that we prevent the problems in the first place. That is a delicate balance to strike, and the Government cannot possibly do it on its own. Although we sometimes expect ministers to have magic wands and bottomless pits of money, we know that that is not the case. We have to recognise that tackling diabetes is about prevention as well as treatment. We have to tackle both sides of the equation. I thank those who are listening and those who are involved in the diabetes field for their hard work. I congratulate Diabetes UK on reaching its 75 th anniversary. It would be wonderful if, by the time it reached its 100 th anniversary, it was redundant and everything had been dealt with. However, I fear that that will not be the case and that the work will have to carry on. It is our task to ensure that treatment is funded and balanced properly.

I would actually like to talk about the budget. I will start my survey of the many areas that the budget covers with education and lifelong learning. What is that budget about? It aims to "focus classroom practice upon the child" and on the four capacities of education. The investment is in there. We want to "ensure all children and young people have the best start in life and promote early intervention to protect vulnerable children and families at risk". The budget will "support implementation of Skills for Scotland " and it will support students. It will invest £1.5 billion in further and higher education institutions in Scotland. I say that because it addresses the point that was made about the small changes that are made to any budget when it is discussed. Those are long-term measures, most of which involve fixed costs. That is the way it should be, because if we do not have the general trend of travel right in the first place, everything will be wrong. The health and wellbeing budget states: "The portfolio is responsible for developing and implementing effective policies and programmes that: • protect and improve the health of the people of Scotland; • tackle health inequalities; • promote equality, and tackle discrimination, prejudice and disadvantage; • provide high quality health care ... • promote social inclusion and reduce poverty; • increase the supply of good quality, affordable housing ... • regenerate communities; and • promote physical activity and participation". Once again, we are talking about long-term measures. James Kelly told us that the budget will not protect the health service. I warn him, as he does not seem to have noticed, that if the budget is voted down, that budget heading will lose £500 million. I recall that, when we last had an election, the Labour Party told us that all the spare money would go into education, so I take it that that £500 million would not have been there anyway.

No, because I want to move on to justice. I am sorry, but I have issues to cover.

Under the justice heading, there is "capital investment to support the ongoing development and modernisation of the Scottish Prison Service". If members would like to know what condition the service was in when the Cabinet Secretary for Justice inherited it, please ask him. There is the best part of £10 million "to deliver Firelink, a modern digital radio communication system for our fire and rescue services." Yes, we need them. There are funds to get the courts up to date and to make "an additional 1,000 police officers available in our communities". There is about £30 million for better drug treatments as well as increases in legal aid funding and centrally funded police costs. If the budget is not passed, there is another £40 million under that heading for which somebody in the chamber will have to be held responsible. The Government is trying to get that kind of thing right. I refer members to the local government portfolio. I ought to declare an interest in that, like the rest of us, I actually live somewhere—in Aberdeen. I will come to my council tax in a moment. The key spending priorities include "freezing council tax rates", as well as "making additional police officers available" and  "reducing or removing business rates for all small businesses", of which I will say a little more in a moment. The priorities also include improving the learning experience through the curriculum for excellence; expanding pre-school provision; providing allowances for kinship carers of looked-after children; and providing carer support. If you have not done the numbers—sorry, Presiding Officer, you probably have done them. If members have not done the numbers, £500 million will be lost from that budget heading if the budget is not passed. I am sure that members would like to know what the implications are for their local community. I would like to tell my local community about that.

Why not?

The member will notice that the efficiency savings that this Government has introduced are being kept by local authorities, whereas they would have been grabbed back by a party that did not get itself elected. I remind the member that local authorities make their own decisions according to their local needs. That is called democracy. I will spend my remaining minute on the figures for Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council—I have already declared my interest in that. For those of us who stay in the north-east, there will be a 17 per cent increase in council tax, which amounts to the best part of £200 per annum for a band D property. I also point out to those who live in that part of the world that the small business bonus in this budget alone—never mind last year's budget—is worth £18 million to that community. If this budget is not passed today, I hope that the folk in that part of the world will understand that it is not the SNP or the Tories but the Labour Party and the Liberals who simply do not understand what they are doing.

I, too, congratulate Lewis Macdonald on securing this extremely important debate, in which I am happy to take part. Nevertheless, I would have been much happier if we had not been having the debate for the good reason that the SPSA had carried out a good consultation and had justified what it was saying. Some of my colleagues have referred to a consultation that, to be honest, I have not seen. I have seen documents saying what the SPSA wants to do. I understand that those who manage businesses are entitled to a view on what they want to do; however, I have not yet seen a consultation. In the document that the SPSA produced, there seems to be a hope. I cannot give the page number, as the document does not have page numbers. It states: "In addition to retaining the full team of crime scene examiners in Aberdeen and Inverness, we will also ensure a scientific input in Aberdeen. Under our current proposals we will embed a forensic scientist in the Grampian 'forensic gateway' to support the force"— and so on. I question whether one scientist is enough to do that. Nevertheless, the germ of a way forward is in the statement that the SPSA will retain "a full team of crime scene examiners".  I do not know quite what constitutes a full team of crime scene examiners—no doubt, those who are in the public gallery tonight could tell me—but it seems that the SPSA recognises that it needs to retain something in Aberdeen. We have all agreed that that is right, and it is certainly the case that what is retained should be retained in Aberdeen because some 60 per cent of the Grampian region's crime occurs in Aberdeen, despite the fact that it has only 40 per cent of the population.

I do not wish to disagree with the chief constable, whose view I endorse. I accept that that is what Colin McKerracher is saying. I am not in a position to disagree with him. It seems to me that, if the SPSA recognises that it must leave a resource of whatever size in Aberdeen, it should also ask what facilities it would be economically possible to put beside it. It should look at the argument that way around. If it does, I think that it will end up with extremely different numbers from the ones that it has come up with, because it is not going to close the resource at all, which means that it is not going to get the savings that it says that it will. I suspect that the back-of-a-fag-packet calculations that have been used internally are totally spurious. I think that we are already beginning to see that. The cost structures for the proposals have not been made available for scrutiny. They could have been made available to MSPs on a confidential basis—we see plenty of confidential information—but, as far as I am aware, no one has seen anything. Equally, the analysis of the extremely expensive analytical machinery could have been provided. I have seen no costings or any other justification for having bits of machinery in one place or another. I suspect that that information would not even be private, as I am pretty sure that those who are skilled in the art know perfectly well what those numbers are and could provide them. Overall, it seems to me that the SPSA has failed to take the issue seriously. It has simply decided what it wants to do. I must add that nothing that is being said this evening—I hope—is to derogate from the fact the Dundee facility needs to be revitalised. No one has anything against Dundee, least of all me, as the city is part of the region that I represent. We have seen no serious analysis of the situation and, until we have seen that, we will not believe that the SPSA is trying to make the right decision.

I will return to the issue that Robert Brown introduced and remind us who we are talking about being in prison. The McLeish report tells us that people in prison are mostly men, are 13 times more likely to have been in care as children and are more likely—I will not repeat the numbers—to have been truants, to be unemployed or to come from families with criminal backgrounds. They have poor writing, numeracy and reading skills. They are more likely to be on drugs and are seriously more likely to have mental disorders. If that is an accurate description of the people who are in prison—and I think that it is—I respectfully suggest that it is a pretty accurate description of the fraction of people who are on the margins of prison. They are the ones we are talking about—people who might finish up in jail, who might be given a community disposal or who might not be in front of the courts at all if they accept a fiscal fine. They are at the margins of our criminal world and are all seriously deprived. We must be absolutely clear that some of them are evil, for want of a better word, and that we will have to treat them accordingly, as they will not take much notice of interventions from our society, but most of them reach their position due to their backgrounds, about which they had little choice. Our judicial process is about trying to punish criminal behaviour, and society is quite good at defining what is criminal. However, as I think we all accept, the judicial process should also be about trying to rehabilitate offenders so that they do not reoffend. Those of us who are parents, and most of us who have observed parents, know that that is what we do with our children. In their early years, they do things that we think are bad and we tell them not to. We use every mechanism that comes to us to change what they do so that they  understand that it is not the way to make friends and influence people. It seems to me that the people about whom we are talking, who we do not want to go to prison, are at the margins and need interventions that, if I can put it crudely, their parents failed to provide—I realise that some youngsters' parents try hard, so I am not blaming parents across the board. If those are indeed the people whom we are talking about, sheriffs need disposals that, first, punish, because we must send that signal; secondly, provide meaningful payback to society as part of the punishment, which contributes to changing people's behaviour; and thirdly, provide support that returns to the young criminal's life missing elements that have contributed to the criminal behaviour that we want to change. We should not be arguing about the length of sentences; we should be ensuring that sheriffs have available to them disposals that are appropriate to the youngster who is not evil but has simply gone astray.

I ask the member to forgive me. I do not have time to take an intervention. There are resources out there. I am a citizen of Aberdeen and I am aware that Aberdeen Foyer, which provides social enterprises in the city, has just been awarded £1 million over 10 years to provide programmes such as lifeshaper, which helps youngsters from chaotic backgrounds to develop life skills that will keep them out of trouble. I could say much more, but time is against me. We should support the cabinet secretary and the minister, who are trying to divert people from a life of crime at as early a stage as possible. That approach will not change what sheriffs do with hardened petty criminals who appear in court for the 20 th time—we are not talking about such people. The people whom we can hope to deal with are the youngsters—they are always youngsters—who are at the margins of becoming criminals and who will probably become criminals if they are sent to prison. We need to ensure that all the extra effort is put in at that stage, to try to divert such youngsters from crime and to educate and rehabilitate them. If that happens, over time we will reduce the prison population. That is why I am not quite as worried as other folk are about resources. There is not the slightest doubt that the disposals that we are talking about need to be resourced, and I know fine well that the cabinet secretary understands that. Although we need to ensure that everything is covered, that is not the big issue; the issue is that, over time, we will be able to divert youngsters towards those disposals. The approach to hardened petty criminals is likely to remain the same as it is now,  because there is not much more that sheriffs can do with them. I have a moment to take an intervention from Robert Brown, if he wants to intervene.

I entirely accept that adequate resources are needed. I remind folk that it costs more than £30,000 per year to house a prisoner and that the community service disposals that we are talking about are very much cheaper—by a factor of 10, at least. We do not need huge sums of money; we need money and the right people in the right places. The Government has got its mind around that. We simply need to ensure that resources are put in the right places.

The cabinet secretary will be aware that, following the transfer of an ambulance station to Ballater, the local community in Braemar has become involved in developing an ambulance service for the area. Will the cabinet secretary urge the Scottish Ambulance Service to take the same approach in other parts of the country? Does she agree that it is important for the service to evaluate what it is doing in Braemar?

The other day, I was contemplating what it is that Governments do. I did not do so in a desperately  philosophical vein, given that I am not a desperately philosophical man but, at a practical level, I thought about what Governments can actually achieve. My conclusion was that, in the general run of things, Governments should try to smooth out the perturbations that come along in life, in recognition of the fact that they cannot resist trends. Recently, we have discovered a substantial perturbation in our economic system. If we had seen it coming—a few did—more proactive actions might have reduced the perturbation, but the trends, including long-term economic trends and the effects of technology, are irresistible, and we know it. The same thing applies to the North Sea and all our marine waters: we cannot resist the trends, whether they are climatic, technological or ecological. We may never understand much that goes on in our seas, but Governments should try to smooth out the perturbations as we go along. Today is the first time that I have taken part in the annual fisheries debate. Clearly, the problem in debating the issue is the fact that the negotiations are held on an annual cycle. That is simply far too short a timescale within which to debate the kind of things that we are discussing today. I am not being critical; I understand that that is what we have to do and that the cabinet secretary has to work with the timescale, as was the case for his predecessors. However, although I understand it and agree that it is right, an awful lot of what has been said is too short term. I encourage the chamber, the cabinet secretary and his advisers to think more about the longer term.

Yes. I recognise that that is how folk see it. If we are prepared to look that little bit further ahead, we should be able to envisage, somewhere in the future, a more stable fisheries environment. I am talking not about having an environment in which the numbers are the same every year—that is not what stability is about; everything in the natural world has its oscillations—but about taking the longer-term view. Surely by now, Government and its scientific advisers should be able to say, "If we sort it out on the way, perhaps in 10 years' time, these are the kinds of stock levels that we could have." I do not know whether the timescale will be five, 10 or 20 years—the people who know about fisheries will know that. All I know is that, by now, we should be able to look forward to the time when we have a relatively stable environment. The projections may  not be desperately accurate, but if we can do the numbers, we will start to see how many fish we can pull out of the water, how many boats will be needed and what the economics of that will look like. In that way, we can see what the total industry that is sustainable for the long term will look like. All of that is simple maths. I see no evidence that anyone has the numbers. I assume that people have started to do them and that they have started to do the modelling. In calling for that, I am neither asking for the unimagined nor expressing any particularly imaginative or far-ranging thoughts. If we can do the numbers, in future we should start to see where we are, what short-term changes need to be made and where we expect to go to. All of that will, of course, be modified as time goes by. Instead of talking annually about the disaster that scientists are predicting, about the stance that the EU is taking and about this or that fishery—all of which is relevant, of course—we ought to be saying, "This is where we are, this is roughly where we think we are going and this is the kind of chart we could plot." Is that asking too much? I do not think so. The only other member who said that was Ross Finnie. Perhaps it is because he was the fisheries minister in the past, but he was the only member to say that we have to look to the longer term. I agree absolutely with John Scott about the need for research into plankton levels. Other members have mentioned the need for research. When we put together a model of how the seas work—which is surely not beyond our scientific communities—and put numbers into that, we ought to be able to see where we could go and be better at plotting how to get there, instead of having annual negotiations at which everyone throws in numbers. I commend Scottish fishermen on what they are doing. I also commend the cabinet secretary and his predecessors on getting us into a position where Scotland is leading the way, through all the schemes that have been mentioned—I have no desire to repeat them, as I normally would. However, as members will have understood, I am concerned that we should find a longer-term model to which we can work.

Will the cabinet secretary reassure me that, with all the emphasis that is being placed on science, the background that engineers require in later life will not be overlooked at school?

To ask the Scottish Government what action ministers are taking to support businesses in the north-east, given the current financial climate. (S3O-4931)

Tomorrow, I shall be at the annual general meeting of the north-east branch of the Federation of Small Businesses. Can the minister give me guidance on what the Government is doing specifically for small businesses in that area?

To ask the First Minister, in light of the recent report by Barnardo's regarding the increased stigmatisation of children, what action the Scottish Government can take to help reverse this trend. (S3F-1200)

I share the Deputy First Minister's belief that the vast majority of children are not involved in the activities that they are often presumed to be involved in. This morning, we had an interesting debate about looked-after children. What steps is the Government taking to ensure that the necessary services are in place to deliver early interventions where they are required by that group of children?

As usual, I am batting well down the order, so I will not rehearse things that have already been said. In passing, however, I commend Robert Brown's point that children do not suddenly change at the age of 16. Those of us who are parents know fine  well that change goes on for a considerable time thereafter, and it seems to get more expensive. The point is that our relationship with our children continues to develop. The idea that a looked-after child can suddenly be shown the door at 16 and all will be fine is obviously nonsense. I will address several issues briefly. First, I remind members of a few statistics on prisoners. Of our prisoners, 80 per cent have the writing skills of an 11-year-old; 50 per cent have the reading skills of an 11-year-old; 65 per cent have the numeracy skills of an 11-year-old; and 70 per cent used drugs before they entered prison. That is relevant to the debate because, compared with the general population, prisoners are 13 times more likely to have been in care as a child. We can do the maths any way we like, but that is a significant issue. The figures show that there is a cycle. We know that children of prisoners are more likely to come into corporate parenting; that children of teenagers are more likely to come into corporate parenting; and that those teenagers are more likely to become prisoners and so on. We must accept, as the Government has in principle accepted, that we have to break that cycle. My second point is about Aberdeen. As a citizen of Aberdeen who lives within walking distance of the city centre, I recently tried to find out what is going on there. To be absolutely clear, I am not here to defend the indefensible. However, the measures that I will mention were in hand before the HMIE report that members have mentioned was published. Aberdeen City Council is spending an additional £170,000 this year on six qualified social workers for the children's social work fieldwork team. As I said, the decision on that was taken long before the HMIE report came out. The city is spending capital moneys on bringing looked-after children back into the city, which will significantly improve cash flow for the service. The city's adoption and fostering service has recently been inspected and received a very high rating, so it is not all doom and gloom. The council is trying and is doing its best, although that is not to pre-empt what the minister might say. My third point is about the children's hearings system. Members may be aware that a consultation is being carried out on the future of the system, which is a significant part of the looked-after children process. I quote from the consultation document to make a point about the reason for the consultation: "When local government was reorganised in 1996, the structure of the Children's Hearings system was partially reformed. The Children's Reporters were taken out of local control and placed within a Non-Departmental Public Body—the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration. The children's and Safeguarder panels however moved from a regional basis"— under which there were 12 of each—  "to 32 Children's Panels, 30 CPACs and 32 Panels of Safeguarders. This caused a considerable increase in bureaucracy as each children's panel required a chairman and at least one deputy". Members will understand that there was reduced flexibility all round. I am not in the business of blaming people for the changes in 1996, but that explains why the Government is anxious to clarify the system and reduce the bureaucracy. The three overarching principles governing the operation of the children's hearings system are that the welfare of the child is the paramount consideration, the child's views must be taken into account when major decisions are made about his or her future, and no supervision requirement should be made unless doing so would be better for the child than making no supervision requirement. In all those processes, an element of legal advice is involved. One issue in the consultation document is that the same lawyer may advise a panel—which is proper—and one of the parties, which may be the council social work department. It is entirely clear that that is not good legal practice. It is a basic legal principle that those who advise a tribunal should be independent of those who take either side in the argument. However, as the consultation document points out, that is not always what happens. Although the issue is peripheral to the debate, it is important that we get the system right, because it is important that youngsters are represented properly. I will extend the argument by pointing members to a recent article in the online Journal of the Law Society of Scotland that was put together by cl@n—the Community Law Advice Network. "Jack's story" takes us through an education appeal committee process in which exactly what I described happened. In the case, which was anonymised, the appeal committee was advised by the council's lawyer on matters of law, but the same lawyer took the council's side. Had the child not been represented independently by the group that wrote the article, it is obvious that he would not have been well represented and the result would probably have been different, for reasons that members will understand. That adds a little more to the argument. I encourage the minister to examine the way in which appeal systems operate and to try to encourage people to ensure that we follow the correct legal procedures. In part, that is because we do not want challenges in European courts, which is a complete waste of everybody's effort, but it is also because it is important that children are represented properly. They have a view and are entitled to have it taken into account in such processes. By definition, when someone gets to  an appeals tribunal, they have reached an important stage.

I thank the wonderful audience for tonight's debate. It is not the best of days to come to Edinburgh, so I hope that the people in the gallery have not come desperately far on such a dark and dismal evening. On behalf of members who are not here, I apologise for the very small attendance which, as Nanette Milne has explained, has to do with political activities elsewhere rather than with the significance of what we are discussing. I congratulate Nanette Milne on securing this debate on an important issue. What makes it so important is that as we grow older—my increasingly grey hair reminds me that time moves on—we develop two important characteristics: experience and patience. Those characteristics are hugely valuable in the voluntary activities that CSV and many other voluntary organisations carry out. As other members have done, I have done some research into what the RSVP does. Among the activities that caught my eye was provision of a talking newspaper in Glasgow. There must be hundreds of folk in Glasgow who benefit from that and there must be many more around the country who wish that they had such a thing. I also picked up on the work that is done in Lanarkshire, in particular, on storytelling and reading aloud. Many people would benefit from having a good story read to them instead of having to put up with what  is, sadly, mostly drivel on the television; in general, radio programmes are rather better. Time marches on, so let me bring myself to the point, which is about funding. I know what the minister will say about how funding has changed—we all respect, I think, the way in which ring-fenced funding has largely gone—and how local authorities are expected to work in other ways.

Mr McConnell makes a perfectly valid point. Of course, some things are done locally, so working through the local authority is entirely appropriate. Plainly, other organisations work nationally, so it must be right to say—the minister will surely agree—that requiring them to submit 32 applications must be crazy. I do not think that anyone will fall out with the member over that. It is incumbent on Government to ensure that the balance of funding sorts that out. I have not the slightest doubt that that is the Government's intention, but whether it always works is a question that the minister will need to answer. Moving on swiftly, I want to mention the energy challenge in Aberdeen. I welcome the involvement of Exxon Mobil in that project, but I recognise that many other corporations with significant roots in Aberdeen and in other parts of the country—I do not want to be too parochial about this—could provide funding to local initiatives without that even being measurable on their balance sheets or profit and loss accounts. Without wanting to rehearse the familiar problems with funding at Aberdeen City Council, given that life is difficult all around the country, I encourage any corporate listeners to consider how they could make a significant difference by providing, as we have seen, relatively small sums of money for organisations such as RSVP in their local communities. Businesses need to be encouraged to consider that.

What solutions does the minister envisage for charities that need to appeal OSCR decisions, given that he has decided to eliminate the Scottish charity appeals panel?

It may come as little surprise—at least to some members of the Justice Committee—that I will take a slightly different tack. We all agree on the principle of the bill. We defend what we are doing as a matter of policy—other members have done that, and I am happy to endorse it—but the committee has struggled to rationalise it as a matter of law. Because we can rationalise it as a matter of policy, that has not worried the committee. I shall try to  find a basis of law in the most unlikely place, namely the House of Lords judgment in Johnston v NEI International Combustion. It will come as a surprise to discover that within their noble lordships' judgments lie the bones of an analysis by which they could have arrived at completely the opposite answer. By assembling some of those bones, I hope that I shall be able to provide us with a skeleton that will give us a satisfactory basis for the bill. I am not suggesting that the noble lords got it wrong. I am not even qualified to stand in front of them and put that case. It is of course axiomatic that a unanimous decision of the House of Lords is law. However, my analysis considers what might have been, on the basis of what their lordships said in their judgment. Because the analysis must be brief, I will say at the outset that nothing I say is intended to be critical of their lordships or of the counsel who brought the case. If anything that follows appears to be critical, please take what I have just said as my statement of intent. An important point about anxiety also comes up in the case, but I do not think that I shall be able to cover it this afternoon, so I shall not try. My fundamental point arises from the fact that the cases covered by the judgment were brought in England under the law of tort, for which, in Scotland, read "delict". I will quote from Lord Scott, omitting a couple of phrases that do not alter the sense. In paragraph 74 of the judgment, he said: "In my opinion ... a cause of action in tort cannot be based on the presence of asymptomatic pleural plaques, the attendant anxiety about the risk of future illness and the risk itself. It cannot be so based because the gist of the tort of negligence is damage and none of these things, individually or collectively, constitutes the requisite damage. But the conclusion that none of the appellants ... has a cause of action against his negligent employer strikes, for me at least, a somewhat discordant note. Each of the appellants was employed under a contract of service. Each of the employers must surely have owed its employees a contractual duty of care, as well as and commensurate with the tortious duty on which the appellants based their claims. It is accepted that the tortious duty was broken by the exposure of the appellants to asbestos dust. I would have thought that it would follow that the employers were in breach also of their contractual duty. Damage is the gist of a negligence action in tort but damage does not have to be shown in order to establish a cause of action for breach of contract. All that is necessary is to prove the breach." The fundamental point is that, to sue successfully for breach of contract, one does not need to prove damage, only that there was a breach of contract. Those of us who have been exploring these issues will appreciate that the accepted medical evidence is that pleural plaques are not injurious in themselves. Because they are internal and hidden, they are not a disfigurement and are thereby not actionable. The biggest legal problem derives from the fact that the leading cases at first instance  proceeded on the basis that plaques were the injury. In his summary in paragraph 3 of the judgment, Lord Hoffmann pointed out that, in the case of Church v Ministry of Defence in 1984, Judge Peter Pain had said that there was damage caused "by the asbestos passing through the lungs and causing the plaques to form." A month later, in Sykes v Ministry of Defence, it was enough that there had been a "definite change in the structure of the pleura". Three years later, in Patterson v Ministry of Defence, plaques, the risk of future disease, and anxiety became the basis of the action. Lord Hoffmann said in paragraph 6: "Since these decisions, claims have regularly been settled on the basis that pleural plaques are actionable injury." However, Lord Rodger said in paragraph 84: "The asbestos fibres cannot be removed from the claimants' lungs. In theory, the law might have held that the claimants had suffered personal injury when there were sufficient irremovable fibres in their lungs to cause the heightened risk of asbestosis or mesothelioma. But the courts have not taken that line." It seems to me that the courts could have arrived at the solution that we now to seek to impose by statute as a matter of policy, first, if they had recognised that the relevant damage is the presence of asbestos in the lungs and not the presence of plaques—plaques are merely evidence of asbestos, and, incidentally, the only evidence that we can get—and, secondly, if they had considered the cases as breaches of contract of employment. The presence of foreign bodies in the lungs would surely have been adequate evidence of a breach of the common-law duty to provide a "safe system of work", which was the legal formula in English law that preceded legislation on health and safety. The minister and I have referred to Lord Scott's discomfort. I cannot help feeling that their noble lordships could see the unsatisfactory nature of the decision that they were required to reach. Lord Mance had the last word in the final paragraph: "In agreement with both Lord Hope and Lord Scott, I also note that the scope of an employers' contractual liability might require examination in another case, but it has not and cannot be examined in this case." It seems to me that their lordships understood that, if the case had been brought under contract law, they could have reached a more satisfactory answer. They could see that the answer that they produced was unsatisfactory. I hope that my analysis will provide some comfort to members that we are legally doing the right thing.

There seems to me to be a serious case to show that younger adults—the 18 to 21-year-olds and perhaps those a little older—are likely to be pressured by youngsters in their community to buy alcohol for them. They are committing an offence, but are likely to get away with it.

I cannot help reflecting that, in generations ahead, people will wonder how on earth it took us so long to get here. The notion of the separation of powers seems to have been in our literature for centuries, yet only today—assuming the bill is passed—will we reach the point at which the separate institution of our courts, and the power of the Lord President to control them, is enshrined in statute; and only now are we clearly establishing that the people who are appointed are appointed by an independent Judicial Appointments Board that is outwith the control of the Government. We will finally have enshrined in statute the fact that it is not only ministers' and the First Minister's job to uphold the independence of the judiciary, but the job of MSPs. It has taken us an awful long time to get here, but we have probably reached the right place. I reflect that we have reached the right place in peaceful times. That is the right time to legislate  on such matters. We have a pretty robust system set down now, which will stand us well if, in what are unthinkable times to many of us, we arrive at constitutional crises. We have, in times of peace, laid down the way in which things should be done. Like other members, I look forward to the publication of the memorandum of understanding—or whatever it is going to be called—between the Lord President and the cabinet secretary. It will be an important document, and we will have to consider it carefully. It is a very good thing that the training of the judiciary is now clearly in the Lord President's hands. I am glad that he also has the power to enforce that, as I think Mike Pringle said. I pay tribute to the workings of the Justice Committee. I confess that before I came into Parliament I thought that the committees were battlegrounds. It is a joy to reflect, after almost 15 months of this session, that the Justice Committee has not worked like that. We have shown that we can address issues, including those on which we do not agree, in a constructive fashion. The substantial work that went into scrutinising the bill has demonstrated that. I pay tribute—I do not think that anybody else has—to the work of Margaret Smith and John Wilson, who are no longer on the Justice Committee but who contributed to the scrutiny process. I thank them for that contribution. I notice that they have not said very much this afternoon, although I was not expecting them to.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made towards the target of generating 50 per cent of Scotland's electricity from renewables by 2020. (S3O-4353)

I thank the minister for his encouraging reply. Does he think that the takeover of British Energy by the EDF Group and the United Kingdom Government's drive to build more nuclear power stations will have a negative impact on Scotland's reaching its renewables targets?

What steps is the Government taking to improve recruitment of teachers into rural areas, where there are occasionally difficulties in getting the required number of staff?

I welcome to the debate members—I am grateful to see so many—and interested visitors in the public gallery. The motion is about how parents are allowed to resolve their differences when a family breaks down. I will highlight issues that cause huge resentment and describe an area in which the law and the courts are in danger of being ignored. When families break up, I am glad to say that most parents agree on the care of the children, visits by the absent parent and all other matters that concern residence and contact. However, in a minority of cases, the situation is different. Extreme animosity or allegations of violence and abuse might be involved, or the parents might have such different ideas about what is best for the family that they cannot reach a settlement. That is why we need a proper family law framework and the means to enforce it. The Children (Scotland) Act 1995 and the Family Law (Scotland) Act 2006 define parental responsibilities and the right of parents who do not live with their children to have contact. The 2006 act deals with unmarried fathers, but only those whose children's births were registered after 2006. The unmarried fathers of children who were born before then still have no automatic parental rights. That is a consequence of the difficulties in drafting acceptable retrospective legislation. However, an unmarried father has the opportunity to ask the court to acknowledge his parental rights. I think that we would all agree that contact orders should be in the best interests of the child, which is what the law requires. We might not,  however, agree what the best interests of the child are; it takes a skilled and experienced sheriff with a good understanding of family law to reach the best decision. A recent study showed that sheriff clerks did not see the enforcement of contact orders as a particular problem. However, I suspect that I am not the only MSP to have been contacted by non-resident parents—usually fathers—who say that enforcing a contact order can be difficult. If the parent—often, but certainly not always, the mother—simply refuses to comply, it is hard to find effective remedies. The same study quotes a sheriff clerk who says: "Sheriffs are reluctant to take action against a mother who flatly refused to obey a court order, with the case continued in the hope that she will eventually do so." I am told that legal practitioners commonly hold the view that contact orders are difficult to enforce, and I find the conclusions of the research frankly surprising. I acknowledge, for the record, that there are cases in which it is the absent parent who is negligent in carrying out their part of the contact order. There is no question of wrong always being on one side in such matters. It is also not unknown for separating parents to ignore the law. I wonder whether, sometimes, solicitors and courts are so fixated on the phrase "the best interests of the child" that they deny parents who have done nothing wrong natural justice. This week, my constituent—I refer to him only as my constituent in order to preserve his daughter's anonymity—won a stunning victory in the Court of Session. Seven years ago, my constituent's wife unlawfully removed their child and took her to England. She did not let my constituent know her address and, worse, she falsely accused him of domestic violence and obtained the help of the local police and social work department, who seemed all too ready to believe her allegations. An English court then granted my constituent's estranged wife the right to live, with her child, in England. My constituent was not even told about the hearing. However, he found out where the child was going to school and went to see her, only to be arrested at the school gate. No one wished to believe that my constituent was the person who had suffered the wrong. No one seemed prepared to accept that uprooting the child from her home in the north-east and denying her contact with her father and the extended family might not be in her best interests. My constituent has now demonstrated that the English court acted without jurisdiction, that sheriffs erred in law, that his daughter was unlawfully abducted and that an unlawfully abducted child does not become resident in  another country simply because she has been kept there for a year or longer. His divorce proceedings will now return to Aberdeen sheriff court, which will have some very difficult decisions to make. I hope that there is no difficulty in persuading English courts to relinquish jurisdiction, but that is yet to be seen. One of the most remarkable things about the case was that my constituent represented himself before three judges in the Court of Session. He had to, because he could find no advocate able to take the case on. His persistence and—yes—his burning sense of injustice have helped to clarify the law, and I think that he deserves our thanks. I also give my personal thanks to Councillor Jimmy Black, a member of my staff, who has been assisting my constituent in the matter. Sadly, my constituent's case is not unique. I met a distinguished family lawyer who told me that taking a child across a border can be an effective tactic. She said that although she would not advise someone to do that, it seems to work—at least, until now. I point out that it happens the other way around, as well. A glance at the internet turns up cases of parents in England complaining that their partners have come to Scotland to avoid the reach of the English courts. How do we learn from my constituent's experiences in relation to cross-border jurisdictions and the ready presumption against fathers? I hope that the minister will address those issues in his closing remarks and, perhaps, subsequently. If we do not want more such cases, in which there is a complete breakdown of the relationship, early resolution of family disputes is essential. I recognise the Government's commitment to family mediation, and I commend the solicitors in Scotland who are developing the new concept of collaborative law, under which solicitors for the parties sort things out on the strict understanding that neither side will go to court. The position regarding legal aid for collaborative law is unclear. Perhaps that should be clarified, as the approach will save money overall. I also note that mediation services are often funded from several different sources and are particularly vulnerable to fluctuations in funding, which is hardly the basis on which to build such an important part of our social service. If it is true that the contact orders that courts make are widely ignored, we need to address that. It is not acceptable for one parent to make an unfounded accusation of violence or abuse against another and simply ignore a court order. I recognise that such cases are always difficult, and there will be circumstances when court action  is inevitable because animosity is persistent. The way forward is to promote methods of securing agreement between separating parties as early and as swiftly as possible. That is what mediation and collaborative law are all about.

I am sorry that the Presiding Officer stopped Richard Simpson in full flow, as I enjoy listening to him. I also gratefully acknowledge Robert Brown's speech, which succinctly put a great deal of the subject in context. I am sorry that he does not like alliteration. Apart from that, I tend to go along with what he had to say. I find myself at number 12 in the batting order—I made it on to the subs bench. I am not coming on with the drinks, however. I will try to draw together one or two issues that have arisen during the debate before the minister gets his go. First, the reduction in prisoner numbers must be seen not as a target but as a consequence. I think that that is the point that Henry McLeish and his colleagues are making. If we do all the right things and remove people from the prison sausage machine who should not be there, we will end up with a smaller number of prisoners—we can argue what that number might be. However, to suggest that we start by finding ways to get those people out of prison is to get entirely the wrong end of the stick. Secondly, I reflect on previous experience from the days when I used to do musical things. In Gilbert and Sullivan's "The Mikado", the aspiration is that the punishment should fit the crime. No—I am not going to sing it for members.

It came as no surprise to me when I discovered that Mr Gilbert was a lawyer, as there is an interesting legal point in almost all the operettas. It seems to me—I respect Gavin Brown's repeated intervention on the subject—that the definition of what is appropriate comes down to the criminal, the crime and, in particular, the environment in which the criminal finds himself or herself. Therefore, I do not think that we will finish up with a list of crimes that may or may not give rise to imprisonment. The sheriff should be able to consider the person who has committed a crime and ask what is appropriate for them in their individual circumstance. I presume that the same crime committed by a serial offender would give rise to a very different disposal from that which would be considered appropriate for a first-time offender. So, we cannot have a clear set of absolute guidelines that tell sheriffs to do this, this  or this without including many caveats about how they should handle individual situations. I say to Pauline McNeill that one's view on whether one wants to go to jail depends on who one is. I absolutely agree with her—she and I do not want to go to jail, and we see the threat of that as a serious deterrent. However, as we know, the vast majority of people who finish up in jail do not regard it as a deterrent, or they would not go back so often. There are, after all, different kinds of folk in our society. A few months ago, for example, a sheriff sent a speeder to jail for two weeks. That might not have been the only penalty that was given out, but I thought at the time that the sentence might teach that individual—who was rather more like us than the average jailbird—that speeding is not a good idea. They will probably not lose their job as a consequence—they might well lose two weeks' holiday and, of course, their licence—but they will be able to go back out into the world and carry on with their lives, having learned their lesson. We simply have to be careful not to be too pointed in what we prescribe. As for the proposed sentencing council, which is at least relevant to those who will finish up in jail, why is it needed? Judges seem to know what they are doing and, as other members have pointed out, they need to have confidence in the various alternatives to prison. We are beginning to get that message and realise that the issue needs work. However, the public also need to have confidence in the sentences that are being handed down. I take the point about creating yet another quango, but I suspect that if the sentencing council comes up with a sensible set of guidelines within which judges are happy enough to operate and outwith which they are happy to explain their reasons for handing down a particular sentence, that will do a great deal for public confidence. The council should have a wide remit that includes research, but it must be well managed so that it does not turn into another large quango that provides jobs for the boys. In that regard, I note the suggestion that council members should be appointed for only a non-reappointable five-year term. Such a model will ensure that no one can gain anything from tweaking the system. Each appointee will do his or her bit for a while and then have to find something else to do. Quango or not, the sentencing council should be under the ambit of another organisation for its bed, board and rations. It has been suggested that it could be part of the Scottish Court Service, but I do not think that it matters where it sits. Anything that can be done to reduce the council's costs and eliminate human resource issues and the other  bits and pieces that tend to become overheads would be a very good idea.

I welcome the report. It has been interesting to listen to members' speeches, given the wide nature of the debate. We can all talk about different things and still leave cracks between what we are saying. As usual, I will try to pick on areas that have not been discussed thus far. The cross-party group on obesity has been mentioned. I am grateful to the members who enabled it to be established. Mentioning it gives me an opportunity to plug the next meeting on 17 September at 6 pm, when some professionals will give their responses to the report. Although we face many problems, the issue is not the numbers, but the trends. We can discuss levels of obesity and what it is to be overweight, but the worrying bit is not those numbers but the fact that every trend is an upward trend. I attended a presentation by a respected figure in the health world who said that there is no earthly reason why all the graphs should not reach 80 or 90 per cent in a couple of generations. If all our grandchildren's generation reach 70-odd, they could all be obese. That is where the trends are going; we are not immune to them. We all recognise that the problem is one for society. There has been some interesting banter about individual responsibility, which is undeniably a factor, but it is clear that even an individual with the best of intentions can have a problem with weight gain. One issue that we have to address, which the report does not really highlight, is the commercial world—the suppliers and manufacturers. We are bombarded with adverts to buy foodstuffs, particularly high-density foods that we probably do not need to eat. An Olympic swimmer who swims 50 miles a day or an Olympic cyclist who cycles the equivalent of halfway round the Himalayas  each day can burn off the calories that they consume, but most of us simply do not need a diet that is high in calories. Today, I walked to the Parliament, as I always do. It takes about a quarter of an hour. During the day, I walk around the building, which—as members know—is not that far at all. I also walked up the stairs to the fifth floor of the MSP block three—perhaps four—times today, which I suspect is considerably more than most members have done. At the end of the day, I hope to walk to the station and I will walk from the railway station in Aberdeen to my home. Overall, I think that that adds up to about three quarters of an hour's exercise. If time allowed, I would read an article from Obesity Reviews in its entirety, but I have time only to quote briefly. It says that "There is compelling evidence that prevention of weight regain in formerly obese individuals requires 60-90 minutes of moderate intensity activity", such as walking, but that "Although definitive data are lacking, it seems likely that moderate intensity activity of approximately 45 to 60 minutes per day ... is required to prevent the transition to overweight or obesity." In other words, that is what is required of us all if we do not want to become overweight, never mind obese. As I have outlined my exercise regime today, members can see that I will struggle to achieve that target. If that is the case for someone who likes walking, as I do, the extent of the problem is clear. We are going to have to change the way in which we live and work. I will now consider why we put on weight. An article in The Medical Journal of Australia talks about people's average weight gain during their lifetime: "The current rates of weight gain, varying perhaps from 0.5 to 2kg/year in the very susceptible, amount to about 10-40kcal ... in the average daily discrepancy between input and output"— in other words, a small additional energy turnover is involved— "However, we need to walk briskly for 80-90 minutes daily ... about 350 kcal" to maintain a healthy balance. The disparity between the two numbers—the 350 kilocalories-worth of exercise and the approximately 20 kilocalories-worth of fat that someone puts on—relates to the fact that, when we overeat, most of the foodstuffs are not absorbed. It is only a small amount of the overabsorption that leads to weight gain over a period of time. When we understand that, we begin to realise how difficult it is to stop it happening. The little bit that we absorb needs to  be countered by a very large amount not going in—in other words, we are all overeating quite significantly. To make a difference, so that we do not put on weight, we must eat a lot less. I suspect that, by and large, people do not appreciate that problem. As always, time is against me, but I will raise one other issue. I ask the minister to be prepared to put some money into science. I am sure that the counterweight programme is well intentioned and has produced good results, but if we are to roll it or anything else out on a large scale, we must do some longitudinal research. It is easy for any intervention to have an effect over a year or two, but 10 years later we may find that it has made precious little total difference. That does not mean that the intervention is of no value, because it will have improved life in the trough, but there is a risk that we will institute measures that do not have long-term benefits. We should concentrate on interventions that have long-term benefits; we will find out whether they have such benefits only by supporting good science.

To ask the First Minister what measures the Scottish Government is taking to bolster the Scottish economy in the current economic climate. (S3F-981)

I thank the Deputy First Minister for that extensive reply. Yesterday, the chief economist at the Bank of Scotland, Martin Ellis, said: "despite facing substantial economic headwinds, the Scottish economy is expected to expand through 2008 into early 2009". Does the Deputy First Minister agree?

My remarks will concentrate mainly on some of the outcomes from the Scottish cashback for communities scheme. Important lessons have come out of that, some of which have already been touched on. Five projects are being supported in Aberdeen, using money that has recently been announced. The first relates to a youth cafe in Torry, in the south side of the city, which operates on Wednesday and Friday evenings during term  times and offers other activities during the summer holidays. The cafe organisers have been approached by youngsters from Kincorth, which is no great distance away. However, the organisers feel that they do not have the facilities for so many youngsters. It would be a very good idea if facilities also existed in Kincorth. We know that youngsters are territorial, and we must acknowledge that when we provide facilities. For the second project, I turn to an area of the city known as Fersands and Fountain—the name is a corruption of road names in the area—in which a wide range of work is done in a community project. Recently, a graffitied wall was repainted, and it seems to me that that work incorporated several useful aspects. First, it was creative; secondly, it was a group activity; thirdly, it built confidence in those who took part; and fourthly, it improved the environment. It would be appropriate to consider those four aspects for any activity. Thirdly, Transition Extreme Sports offers activities on a very large space near the waterfront. The sports have to be confined to their own space, and some youngsters find them great fun; I am talking about skateboarding, BMX biking and that kind of thing. There are also climbing walls and other relatively mad music and art activities. We must allow our youngsters to be creative and to go off in their own directions, and we should ensure that they have opportunities to do so. A great deal can be done creatively with graffiti; it just needs to be done in the right place. I make that comment drawing on my experience as a trustee of the Hot Chocolate Trust in Dundee, which continues to offer such projects very productively. The fourth project concerns Befriend a Child. It is a very different type of project, which provides an opportunity for a relatively young person to work one to one for a few hours with a younger person—subject, of course, to all the checks that we would expect—who suffers from a lack of social skills and confidence, which can happen for all sorts of reasons. During a few hours of such work, the younger person's self-confidence and skills can be built up. Such work is very valuable in its place, and when we consider group projects and national projects, we should not forget one-to-one work, which can be crucial. The last project that I want to mention is Apex Scotland, which is a national charity that works with offenders. There is work to be done with people who have failed—people who have gone through the sausage machine, come out the other end and are seen to be offenders. The work of the charity is to try to make them employable—not to tell them that they are bad boys, or possibly girls, but to say to them, "Right, we need to move on  from here. What skills do you need?" We all know something about prisons and offenders, and we know that offenders' skills are usually pretty low. The ability to put together a curriculum vitae might be beyond most of them, but that is the kind of skill that we must help them to acquire and use. Recently, I went to a community policing meeting in Westhill, to the west of Aberdeen, and found that the community police officers rarely take things as far as an ASBO. Cases go through a system that involves an informal warning, a letter to parents, and an acceptable behaviour contract. I am very glad that the legislation on ASBOs is not going away. I entirely take the point that ASBOS are not the right answer, but there is value in the whole process of helping youngsters to understand what they are doing. I finish with a quotation from an Audit Scotland report from last August, "Dealing with offending by young people": "Most councils have found it difficult, both strategically and operationally, to overcome the differences between the child-centred focus of youth justice under the children's hearings system and the community-focused design of the antisocial behaviour legislation." That has been described as a philosophical difference, and I have heard it widely commented on in social work departments. We must understand that if we are going to be child centred, the community-focused antisocial behaviour legislation is perhaps not quite perfect.

Does the member agree that the problem is not what we believe but what the press portray? With respect, that is why the first line of the motion was included.

I welcome the opportunity to debate an issue that is of considerable concern to the citizens of Aberdeen, although it is probably not of much concern to many other people. I acknowledge the problems that the situation in Aberdeen has created for its citizens. I am a member of the Public Petitions Committee and I was present at the meeting on Tuesday, as were Lewis Macdonald, Brian Adam and Richard Baker. Richard Baker is right to point out the human issues that result from cuts in services, which we all acknowledge, whatever party we represent and wherever our experience lies. That is the nature of things. As I said at Tuesday's meeting, anything that the Government can do to improve the financial situation in Aberdeen must be welcomed. I will take issue with a few comments that Labour members made, but first I accord Lewis Macdonald the opportunity of answering the question that Brian Adam asked him. Will he please say how much money he wants to be transferred from capital to revenue and where it will come from?

I thank Lewis Macdonald for his response. I understand the point, but the response clarified that he has no particular number in mind, which is what I wanted to demonstrate. I take issue with Richard Baker. There might have been reserves at the time, but overspending started on his party's watch, albeit that it has continued thereafter. I also take issue with the Labour Party's insistence on highlighting the situation in schools. It is abundantly clear to anyone who stands back and considers the numbers that if there are 30,000 school places  and only 22,000 pupils, modification of what goes on on the ground is needed. We can all argue about which schools should have been closed or merged, but such arguments have gone on since schools were built in the city and are no different this time round. The Labour Party should be a little more careful about backing that particular horse. The process of providing schools where the people are must go on. We must ensure that we maximise funding for teaching and pupils rather than funding for buildings.

Forgive me, but I am struggling to keep to my time. There is much that we could say. Aberdeen City Council has already created a budget monitoring board, which I understand has had at least one lengthy meeting. I have been told that opposition councillors were not present at the end of the meeting. If that is true—I think it is, because I have it on good authority—we need to send a message to the opposition parties on Aberdeen City Council that it is time to stop complaining and start contributing to discussions at council level on how to sort out the problems. I acknowledge that the finances are not in our hands, but the cabinet secretary might have helpful things to say, although he might not—that is in his gift. The organisation of Aberdeen City Council is in the hands of councillors of every party. We must encourage councillors to pull their weight.

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to reduce the damage caused by alcohol and drugs by 50 per cent before 2025. (S3F-889)

The target that I mentioned is an aspiration that is expressed by Scotland's Futures Forum in its report "Approaches to Alcohol and Drugs in Scotland: A Question of Architecture", which was published this week. The report highlights the need for us to tackle problems in Scotland associated with alcohol, which have grown in recent years. Last month, Scottish Government figures revealed that alcohol misuse  is costing the Scottish economy about £2.25 billion each year. What action will the Government take to reduce the impact of alcohol misuse?

I am sure that the cabinet secretary agrees that changing business structures will undoubtedly greatly benefit large businesses and those that aspire to be large. However, does he agree that there is a risk that small businesses, which are crucial to some of our smaller communities, might lose out in the process?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The minister will be aware that the north-east region—in which Dundee lies—has a problem with high use of crack cocaine. In the light of that problem and of the fact that the vast majority of seizures of crack cocaine are carried out by Grampian Police, what steps are being taken to tackle the rise of crack cocaine in the north-east region?

I will begin by taking the opportunity to correct what I said on 22 May, when we debated the ambulance service in remote areas. I quite incorrectly said that the ambulance service in Braemar had been moved to Aboyne when, in fact, it has been moved to Ballater. I was well aware of that; I simply made a mistake. I apologise. That does not change the thrust of my argument, but it means that what I said was factually wrong. As is usual at the end of a debate, I will pick up on issues that other members have not picked up on, starting with demographic change. Someone pointed out that our rural communities are getting older, which is partly because more older folk are choosing to stay in rural communities and they are living longer, but also because there is still, to an extent, the historically inevitable movement of younger folk to the cities for employment and training, and the tendency for them not to return. That brings me to a central point that I do not think that anybody has mentioned. Whatever we and the Government are doing now, we need to remember that it will be different in five years, and different again in 10 years. We must therefore  have mechanisms that allow us to continue to look ahead rather than rest on where we have got to. We have talked briefly in the debate about telemedicine, and I would not dream of telling doctors how they can do that. However, as a layman, I am conscious that I have access to a computer and the internet and that we are moving to the point where many folk in rural communities will have access to the internet. If they do not have access, their neighbours may well have it. I wonder, therefore, whether we need to look ahead and consider whether contact with the health service could be made in the first instance through the internet. For example, if someone's bairn was crying at 2 o' clock in the morning and they did not know what to do about it, why on earth could they not switch on to something called, say, nhshelp.com and say, "Hey, guys, what do I do with this?" That would be swift, reassuring and cost effective, and it would surely eliminate many problems the following day. I encourage the health service to look further ahead from what we can do now. In preparation for the debate, I spoke to some rural GPs. I asked them generally what they thought about the situation. As members can imagine, they told me many things that, frankly, I do not have time to pass on. However, I asked them clearly what their top priority was and what the biggest issue affecting them was. The common theme was transport. It is not all about ambulances, although that issue has been well rehearsed; it is also about buses and the long miles between places. In that context, I urge folk to think about how they build their transport models and to recognise that, although we sometimes want the patient to go to the health professional, it is sometimes better for the health professional to go to the patient. I encourage folk to think outside the box of specialties and all that kind of stuff, which the health service naturally thinks about because that is its stock in trade. I want the health service to engage more with the model of thinking that says, "Where do these people need to be? What is the best way of getting good contact time between patient and professional?" I want the health service to acknowledge that travel times are inevitably involved in that, and to consider whether the right person is doing the travelling at the right time.

I preface my remarks with the observation that we are very proud of those who work in the Scottish Ambulance Service and very grateful for their services. Nothing that follows is intended to be any criticism of them. I will pick up on an issue that has not yet been highlighted, relating to the situation in which there is a long and winding road from the hospital to a patient's place of residence. I am referring to the Dee valley, which runs from the south of Aberdeen westwards into the Grampians. On the way, the road passes through Banchory, Aboyne, Ballater and, eventually, Braemar. The distance from each place to the next is roughly 15 miles, so the total distance between Aberdeen and Braemar is roughly 60 miles. Once upon a time, there was an ambulance in Braemar. There is still a fire station there. Recently, the ambulance was moved to Aboyne, which is 30 miles nearer to Aberdeen, and it is now a 24-hour single-manned rapid response vehicle. I am pretty sure that the Ambulance Service managers who decided to move the ambulance to Aboyne applied their model correctly. I am not accusing anybody of incompetence, carelessness or indifference to the needs of the patients. I suspect that they applied the model perfectly correctly and came up with what they thought was the right answer. However, Braemar is now not just 60 miles from the hospital but 30 miles from the ambulance. That means that an arrival time of seven minutes is simply inconceivable; in fact, if the ambulance has to come from Aboyne to Braemar to take a patient to  Aberdeen, the golden hour will already have passed before the ambulance goes back past the ambulance station. My concern is not that those who have designed the service have got their thinking and calculations wrong but that they are working with the wrong model in that particular circumstance. In Braemar, there is a fire station and, in or very close to Braemar, there are folk who know how to drive big vehicles with blue flashing lights. There is also a doctor in Braemar and there are other folk who know how to attend medical emergencies—there is a mountain rescue team in the area. Therefore, I suggest that the cabinet secretary ask the Ambulance Service and her officials to consider an alternative model, which would allow the stationing of a vehicle in Braemar that could be crewed by a fireman and sent to wherever the patient was. It could meet somebody else who had the appropriate medical qualifications and who could be otherwise mobilised. Such a model could hugely improve the response time at the Braemar end of the valley. It would not involve a huge cost, although I acknowledge that it might involve having one vehicle more. I am conscious that the fire and rescue service is not within the cabinet secretary's portfolio but, nevertheless, my plea to her is that she get the two services to talk to each other and consider whether alternative models could be used in places where the road runs out at the head of the valley or at the sea. I ask her to consider whether alternative models could be used to improve the ambulance service in such areas.

I intend to sweep up some remaining issues; necessarily, I will be brief. First, section 1 of the bill relates to the common-law offence of interfering with the judiciary. Eminent people have given plenty of evidence that what we include in the new statute will not affect the common-law offence, but I still wonder whether we should not say what we mean. I have not yet been persuaded that there is any reason for us not to do so, given that we will not revisit the issue for a few centuries. Secondly, I draw members' and the Government's attention to Lord McCluskey's comments in paragraph 25 of the Justice Committee's report on the various other ways in which ministers might interfere with the judiciary and affect judicial independence. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for indicating that he will revisit the point, but there is a substantial issue that needs to be considered. It is not clear to me whether that should be done through the ministerial code or by changing the text of the bill. Thirdly, on whether the Parliament should be bound by section 1, it is difficult to write a statute that binds Parliament, but it is not difficult to include a provision that binds individual MSPs, and that would be a good thing to do. We are sometimes tempted to rush to criticise because we think that that is what we should do, but telling members that they should reflect on what they want to say and comment only very much later would be a good idea. I am grateful to Margaret Smith for talking about training in more detail than other members have done, which means that there is no need for me to comment on that matter. On the confidentiality of the information that is received by the Judicial Appointments Board, I point the cabinet secretary and members in the direction of information received from the Law Society of Scotland, which is concerned that making the misuse of such information only a civil matter is probably not the way forward. It wonders whether there should be a criminal offence in relation to the misuse of such information, which would seem to be rather more effective. There is some slight difficulty around the issue of the complaints reviewers. We need to be clear that the Lord President will be doing the reviewing of complaints and that all we are asking the other reviewer to do is to ensure that the Lord President has used the right procedure. In essence, that is  the kind of appeal on law of process that the legal system itself understands. Provided that that reviewer is seen to be independent and well qualified, the proposal should not cause us any trouble.

Like my colleague William Coffey, I would like to take the opportunity to consider specific opportunities within the influence of local authorities to deliver better public services. I am a new resident of the city of Aberdeen, and I would like to list some of the things that Aberdeen City Council has been up to in recent years. In particular, it has undertaken to transform the delivery of its services to the public. In recent months, it has approved a number of transformation strategies covering a range of areas including adult services, children's services, sport and leisure, and waste and the environment. With regard to social care, the council is taking steps to move towards the in control system of social care delivery, in which people with care needs are given direct control over the services that they receive and are provided with funding to ensure that they are able to choose their own  service providers and service. That is a step beyond the concept of direct payments. The key principles behind the in control system are that people have a right to independent living, a right to an individual and flexible budget and a right to self-determination. The approach means that decision making will be made as close to the person as possible, to reflect their individual interests and preferences. In children's services, the council is committed to active promotion of the placement of looked-after children within the local authority area. That has tangible benefits for the child and their family, as they are located close to each other. It also has benefits for the council in reducing the costs of placing children outside the city. At the same time, the transformation programme is placing a particular emphasis on the principle of early intervention, which the Scottish Government is keen to promote. Early intervention, through partnership working, would undoubtedly help to reduce the numbers of looked-after children in the city. The council is now taking steps to modernise and improve the sports and leisure service as a whole. It is moving towards trust status, which has proven successful in other local authorities. However, it is also important to focus on an improvement that highlights some of the long-standing problems faced by the city since 1996. Believe it or not, the council's booking system is a throwback to the days before the creation of the unitary authorities—it harks back to the days of the regional and district councils. There are in effect two unsynchronised facilities booking systems, which leads to what can only be described as a bureaucratic mess, resulting in a poorer service to the public and impeding the council's efforts to modernise its working practices. That anomaly, which has existed since the council's formation in 1996, is just one of many that have had to be rectified. I welcome the fact that the council has finally recognised the problem and is seeking to rectify it through the transformation strategies. Incidentally, I should point out that a computerised leisure booking system will automatically capture some of the data that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth will need if he is to find out how things have changed. On waste and the environment, the council's commitment to ambitious recycling targets, which will run in tandem with our ambitious national policies on reduced landfill and increased recycling, is excellent news. Moreover, the recent news that kerbside recycling schemes are to be rolled out to tenement properties and multistorey properties is an extremely positive development  and will undoubtedly help to improve recycling rates across the city. Moves to introduce commingled garden and food waste recycling will also boost recycling rates and reduce the amount of waste being sent to landfill. We have to bear in mind the implications of the landfill tax, which will severely punish councils that do not actively reduce the amount of waste going to landfill. As a result, we must surely welcome the steps that Aberdeen City Council is taking in that respect.

I will, but I should first make the point that refusing to recycle is a classic case of pouring money into a hole in the ground.

With respect, it is not my job to answer for the Government, particularly on an issue that I know nothing about. I am sure that the ministers will be willing to answer the member's question.

On Tuesday, Aberdeen City Council and the maritime and environmental organisation KIMO International launched a scheme to promote reusable bags as an alternative to plastic carrier bags. I know that people are concerned about the issue, but the scheme shows that it can be dealt with locally simply by encouraging the right people to do the right things. I clearly have no time to expand on other issues that are set out in the draft single outcome agreement. However, I must point out the Aberdeen renewable energy group, in which the council has a stake, and its promotion of offshore wind power; plans to invest in healthy weight initiatives for seven to 13-year-olds—as convener of the cross-party group on obesity, I know that that is when such issues must be tackled; plans to increase the number of foster carers; and, finally, better controlled access to multistorey flats. It will be obvious to members how such moves will improve the safety, security, health and wellbeing of Aberdeen's residents.

Will the member explain to me, from the perspective of someone who, like me, has a council background, why the Government's elimination of most of the ring-fenced funding somehow fetters what a local authority is required to do?

rose  —

My question is about the assessment of people's needs. The cabinet secretary was right to say that people should have their needs determined professionally. I cannot expect her to know how fast that is done in every local authority in Scotland, but my experience is that sometimes it is not done very fast. Does she agree that the lead time for assessment is crucial to the process? Will she ensure that councils have enough staff to enable them to take that first step?

Does the member agree that anything that helps small businesses to flourish is good for employment? I am thinking in particular of those who are seeking employment. Surely anything that helps in that regard is of benefit to those who are unemployed or low paid.

My recollection is that Mike Rumbles asked me whether 10 per cent should equal 10 per cent. My answer was no. I did not argue that the amount should not be 12 per cent, 15 per cent or—

I, too, begin with a few thanks. The convener mentioned the fact that I was one of the newcomers to the team, and I express my thanks to the other members of the Justice Committee for the courteous way in which they handled the discussions. That was much appreciated by those of us who were, to start with, decidedly wet behind the ears. I also thank the convener; I do not think that anyone has specifically done so yet. Frankly,  the way in which a committee works depends entirely upon how it is convened, and I have no difficulty in recognising the convener's significant contribution to our task. I thank him very much. I was as amazed as everyone else to discover that for 40 years no one had seriously considered the subject of the police and what they were about, and the task has been interesting. I do not want to rehearse the issues that have been picked up on. One of the issues that emerged is the fact that public expectations are high and, realistically, not achievable. We might have to acknowledge the fact that, whatever we can do to improve the police service, it will probably never be good enough for some. We have spoken about the SPSA, and the fact that it is relatively new and still evolving. I wonder whether a lesson could be learned from recent events at a large airport a little bit south of here. Perhaps if British Airways had taken the opportunity to commission terminal 5 slowly by having a few flights on the first day and a few flights more the next day, the problems might have been discovered at a rate at which they could have been solved. British Airways will no doubt pay the price for what happened at terminal 5, but that is not my problem. However, we need to be careful that we do not ask institutions such as the SPSA to do too much too quickly. The tendency for young things, when they run too fast, is to fall over. Although the people who manage the SPSA may not be young, I think that we need to give the authority some room to work out what it is about. On the pledge to provide 1,000 extra police, I do not mind putting on record that, if I had knocked on the door of anyone here during the campaign—they would have had to be living in Dundee for that to happen—and they had asked me what that pledge meant, I would have said then that it meant 1,000 extra police on our streets. When I asked one of my local inspectors what 1,000 extra police would mean, he did a little calculation and reckoned that it would mean one extra officer per shift per section of the police across the country. I think that that is what it means. I still think that that is achievable and will be done by improving the general efficiency of everything that goes on. Recently I took the opportunity of accompanying the Grampian Police section that is responsible for policing Aberdeen city centre. I made the mistake—or took the opportunity, depending on one's point of view—of accompanying the officers between about 11 o'clock on a Saturday night and 4 o'clock on a Sunday morning. It was a very interesting experience, from which I drew two conclusions. First, a great deal of what our police do is not widely appreciated by the public because they are not there to see it—and it is a pretty tough task on occasions. Secondly, there is always more  to do than there are folk to do it. That is not meant as a criticism.

No, not quite; I do not accept that the numbers are that simple. I accept that we have an inherited distribution but, quite honestly, I do not know where the distribution came from or how long ago it was calculated. As with the general distribution formula for local authorities—which is another thing that we might have a scrap about at some stage—the distribution needs to be looked at periodically to see whether it is appropriate. I do not know what the answer is, but I certainly would not say that, because a force deals with 10 per cent of the population, it should have 10 per cent of the funding. To say that, for example, because a force deals with 14 per cent of the population, it should get 14 per cent of the funding is not good enough. However, I am sure that the issue needs to be addressed. We have been told that, because about 85 per cent of the police budget is spent on salaries, achieving cash efficiencies of 2 per cent will be difficult because they will somehow need to come from the other 15 per cent. That seems to me wrong, quite frankly, so I want to nail that argument. The 85 per cent that is spent on salaries covers not only police officers but the civilians who work in the service, who will include folk who could improve their efficiency and effectiveness. Over time, fewer civilian employees could well deliver the same result. Therefore, the argument about where those 2 per cent efficiency savings will come from is not quite as simple as some would have us believe. My last point—although I would like to make many others—is about community policing. We had the opportunity of seeing that yesterday in Dundee and, like the convener, I am grateful for the way in which we were received and for what we were able to see. I draw from that one simple conclusion, which is that I am not convinced that we will be able to come up with a watertight definition of community policing. As an engineer, I hesitate to say that we should not use numbers, but we need to be careful that we use the right numbers. What might do as a model for community policing in Dundee or Strathclyde might be inappropriate in rural parts of Perthshire. We need to be very careful that we do not go for a definition that does not achieve much.

I will address my remarks—as usual, very late in the debate—to one particular issue that is expected to be considered during the review: the status of recommendations made by a sheriff. I looked at the Government website and was interested to find statistics for 2005 that suggest that there were only 40 fatal accident inquiries in that year—I do not know whether they were all reported on that site—of which only five had recommendations that were reported on the site. If those statistics reflect reality—or, indeed, even if they are indicative—the number of specific recommendations that are made is not huge and, therefore, they could be dealt with through a system without huge expense or great difficulty. We should consider what that system might be. I am sure that fatal accident inquiries are like every other inquiry that we make in life. We discover that there is a specific issue that relates to the particular event that we are investigating. As sensible human beings, we decide quickly that the event was one of a set of other, wider events and we consider whether a general conclusion can be drawn. It should not be beyond the wit of Government to make it somebody's responsibility to look though the cases—of which there is not a huge number—and decide where there are specific recommendations. They might be recommendations to an industry or even recommendations to a specific business, in the case of a death at work. They might be recommendations to a local roads authority to do something simple such as changing its signage. It might also be possible for the person to draw a general conclusion, which might be sent to the appropriate industry bodies and circulated to every local authority for consideration by—for example—its roads department. Given the relatively small number of inquiries and recommendations, it should not be terribly difficult to do that. My suggestion does not address the status of recommendations but it is a simple method of dealing with them in such a way that there is a pretty good chance that they will reach the right people. As the Solicitor General said, Lord Cullen led the Piper Alpha inquiry, which was held as far back as 1988. I was surprised to discover how long ago it was. The Piper Alpha disaster was a dreadful event in the chemical industry. I guess that I have to declare an interest as I represent the area. One hundred and sixty-seven people died. There were numerous recommendations, one of which was that responsibility for safety should be moved from  the Department of Energy, which was clearly underresourced, to the Health and Safety Executive. I have no doubt that that kind of recommendation is entirely appropriate. I pay tribute to the industry body Oil and Gas UK, which recently arranged presentations to about 180 young technicians to repeat the lessons that were learned from the Piper Alpha disaster. The body understands the important point that corporate memory fades fast. I remember, in the days when I was a chemical engineer, reading an article by Professor Trevor Kletz, who worked for ICI, as it was in those days, and wrote for our institution's magazine. He pointed out that corporate memory turns over in about 10 years. By and large, the people who are there when something goes bang have moved on 10 years later. We need to find ways to enshrine the lessons that have been learned from things such as Piper Alpha in such a way that they transcend the failures of corporate memory. I do not have a particular suggestion as to how that might be done, and I acknowledge that it is not easy, but it is one of the big issues. To avoid the major problems that occur in certain areas of industry, we need to ensure that things get into the collective memory, education and conscience. That is important, because otherwise things such as Piper Alpha will be repeated in each generation.

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions ministers have had regarding alternative approaches to social care. (S3O-2681) [ Interruption. ]

As the minister knows, Aberdeen City Council aims to adopt the in control approach and hopes to have a team in place by June. What support can the Scottish Government provide the council for that programme? Please will the minister meet me to discuss the social care situation in Aberdeen?

We probably agree that it is time to review where we are with the national parks. However, I will start with a quote from some wonderful spin that I found on the web. "For the visitor interested in wildlife, Braemar has long held great attractions. There must be few villages where one can take an early morning walk along the village main street and have a good chance of meeting, one after the other, a magnificent 13 pointer stag, a shy Roe Deer, Red Squirrels stealing nuts put out for the birds, a cock pheasant strutting in all his finery, and a big brown hare timidly exploring the possibility of access to some of the gardens, while overhead Golden Eagles and buzzards sail silent, missing nothing." The interesting thing about the quote is not its excess, which is obvious to us all, but that it mentions the wildlife that we seek to preserve in our countryside. The chances of meeting them on an early morning walk in Braemar might be pretty  low, but they are there and they are one of the good reasons for preserving our parks. If members have any doubts at all about the landscape that we are trying to preserve, I simply point them to the "Cairgorms National Park Plan 2007", to which I will refer later. It contains all sorts of wonderful small pictures that remind one of places that one has been to and how magnificent they are. The issue that we are discussing is whether the structures for the governance and management of the parks should be reviewed. I remind members that if we go to the professionals, we will find that a management consultant is someone who borrows our watch to tell us the time and then walks off with it. During the review process, we need to be extremely careful about keeping our eyes on what we are doing. I turn to the "Cairgorms National Park Plan 2007" and some of the action points that it contains, in an effort to find out whether we can derive some ideas about the review. There are, I think, eight priorities for action in the plan. They are about "Conserving and Enhancing Biodiversity ... Integrating Public Support for Land Management ... Supporting Sustainable Deer Management ... Providing High Quality Opportunities for Outdoor Access ... Making Tourism and Business More Sustainable ... Making Housing More Affordable and Sustainable ... Raising Awareness and Understanding of the Park". One would have thought that that was a pretty wide canvas to start with. If we look at the strategic objectives, we find phrases such as "Conserve and enhance ... Engage all sectors ... Promote access to appropriate policy and funding mechanisms ... Develop awareness ... Prevent degradation and erosion of soils ... Develop a sound knowledge and understanding of the cultural traditions"— I might question that particular objective— "Help communities, businesses and households ... Promote sustainable flood management ... Adopt a catchment-scale approach to water ... Develop ... Encourage ... Maintain ... Promote". It seems to me that the activities that the plan covers, which I am sure are highly laudable and which I am not trying to denigrate, are extremely wide ranging. That point is emphasised when one turns to the priorities for action—it is good that the plan contains priorities for action. Some of the acronyms that are listed on page 102 are "ADMG, CNPA ... DCS ... NGOs ... SGA ... LECs". The acronyms "ACCC" and "RA" are two of the many others mentioned on page 107. In fact, there  are 25 other acronyms, which account for considerably more organisations. I say all that not to be disparaging about anyone, but merely to emphasise to members that the parks have an extraordinarily complicated function. If we acknowledge that, we will recognise that the simple solution of taking two bodies and merging them with another one is perhaps a little too simple. I encourage the ministers to put all the organisations' connections on one piece of paper—perhaps we should borrow Jim Mather for that—to determine whether we can identify the real lines of communication and the real points of action that underlie the overall structure. That is a slightly bigger exercise than is currently being talked about. If we do that, I suggest that there is a pretty good chance that we will come up with a good answer, whereas if we do not do that, I fear that there is a real chance that we will come up with a rather theoretical answer. That would be a pity, because we are hearing that the current system is working pretty well. If it ain't broke, don't fix it is a pretty good rule in most walks of life, so I encourage us to have a review that is consistent with what is actually going on. That is my point.

To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government has had with United Kingdom ministers regarding firearms legislation. (S3F-575)

Between 2003 and 2007, the number of air gun incidents that were handled by Grampian police increased fivefold. In Scotland, the number of cases in which air weapons were fired at a person and caused injury has jumped 20 per cent in the past two years. That contrasts with the situation in England and Wales, where the number of crimes involving air guns has dropped by 10 per cent during the past two years. Taking those figures into account, does the First Minister  agree that, contrary to the views apparently expressed by the Home Secretary, Scotland has a more acute problem with air guns that must be addressed urgently?

Members will forgive me for saying again that as I am speaking late in the debate I will resist the temptation to repeat what others have said and instead try to address, or expand on, issues that have not been covered as they might have been. I will make two points. The first, fundamental, point, which I do not think has been mentioned, is that we should be trying to create a legal  framework that will minimise the number of violations—the number of acts that we will subsequently decide are offences. We need to be careful when we talk about maximising the number of reports of offences and maximising convictions, although such outcomes are important and will derive from the legal framework that we create. We must bear it in mind that we need a society—and a legal framework within which society operates—in which the number of violations of a sexual nature is minimised. I know that this cannot happen, but in Utopia we would develop a legal system in which there were no violations and therefore no prosecutions or convictions. We could reduce offending by moving the goalposts; for example, we could quickly reduce the number of speeding offences on our roads, not by eliminating the speed limit but by increasing it to 250mph. Shifting the goalposts does not help, however. If we want to slow people down we must ensure that the speed limit that we set is enforced and that people understand why it exists. The appropriate legal framework will minimise the number of violations and it will maximise the tendency for victims to report offences and minimise the procedural impediments to achieving justice. It might help our thinking on the matter if we kept in mind that hierarchy. The Scottish Law Commission's report contains a radical proposal, which would in effect change the balance of proof, so that the law required the accused to demonstrate consent instead of requiring the defendant to prove the absence of consent. I accept that that is a slight overstatement of the case and I am not trying to be too legalistic, but in effect the commission suggests that consent needs to be demonstrated. My second point is about the definition of consent. The proposed term, "free agreement", does not offer the right way forward. Members will realise that I did my training on the other side of Hadrian's wall. I can still pretty much recite section 1 of the Theft Act 1968, which says: "A person is guilty of theft if he dishonestly appropriates property belonging to another with the intention of permanently depriving the other of it". That definition of theft served pretty well until some folk nicked a painting from a church and subsequently managed to demonstrate to the court that they were only borrowing it. However, the definition would be useful if we had to teach our children the law of theft. Mercifully, we do not have to do so, because by and large people understand the law of theft, so we do not use the legal definition to teach children. I mention that matter because society must find a way of teaching young people what is and is not  sexually acceptable. I do not in any way suggest that such an approach will help in the dreadful cases of serial offenders who have no interest in being taught anything—we know about those people, so that is not my point. However, if we—as parents, lawyers and, in particular, as teachers—are to guide our youngsters and teenagers to an understanding of what is acceptable and, therefore, of what the law on sexual offences says, it would be useful to have a working definition of consent that had value in that context. The alternative definition of consent that the commission proposed is: "positive co-operation in act or attitude pursuant to an exercise of free will, involving persons acting freely and voluntarily and with knowledge of the nature of the act in question". Such a definition might make sense to members and I am sure that it makes sense to lawyers, but I respectfully suggest that it has no street credibility. The definition would not be much use to teachers or parents and would need to be refined. The important point is that it would not be much use to juries, either. We need a framework of law that minimises the tendency for violations, maximises the tendency to report offences and minimises the impediments to achieving justice in court. To achieve those outcomes the law must be clear, enforceable and—crucially—well understood by the general public.

My speech will have to be very short. I hope that what I say is entirely accurate, because I have no desire to mislead Parliament, bearing in mind what was said earlier. I will consider briefly how DNA is tested and what that tells us, which is the important bit. We all recognise that it is something to do with biochemistry, and one does not have to be a technophobe to want to run away from that. As far as I can see, our DNA sequence is a very, very long number, 90-something per cent of which is exactly the same for us—because we are human—and for the apes, which share the same origins. As I understand it, the test looks at five areas in that sequence where we know that the changes between us show up. The clever bit—the reason why the test works—is that it looks at those areas of the sequence where little bits of code repeat: in other words, where the same telephone number appears over and over. That is what enables DNA analysis to distinguish between people. My understanding is that if one has a good sample A and a good sample B and one gets a match, the chance of sample B coming from another member of the population is about one in a thousand million. That is probably enough to distinguish most of us clearly and to provide convincing evidence. However, members will appreciate that if the sample is not complete, that statistic rapidly declines. The fact that the person who is most likely to have the same DNA match as me is my brother causes a problem, given what we know about who  sex offenders are most likely to be. If that person happens to be an identical twin, they should have the same DNA and if there is any incestuous tendency further back in the population, it is apparent that the possibility of identifying someone disappears. In other words, DNA has limited applicability, although it does provide a pointer.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made on establishing the Aberdeen dental school. (S3O-2276)

The minister is well aware that the shortage of national health service dentists is nowhere more acute than in the north-east of Scotland. Will the Government consider incentives to encourage graduates of the Aberdeen dental school to practice in the north-east?

Will the member take an intervention?

Once again, I find myself coming relatively low down the batting order in a very interesting debate and wondering what is left to say. I will start with some  basic principles that have not yet been articulated but which underpin much of what has been said. When I studied the subject, I found three reasons why we punish offenders. The first was stated to be retribution. It gives us a sense of justice, or an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. If someone thinks something is good for me, I want them to find out what it feels like. That leads to the second reason, which is deterrence. At this point, I dive into the prison debate and ask whether there is any evidence that the possibility of going to prison deters people from doing criminal things. For the people who are in the chamber at the moment, it might, but I respectfully suggest that, for the people who end up in prison, it is not an issue. Prison as a deterrent is not worth any further discussion. The third reason for punishment, and for imprisonment in particular, is that it should protect the public. We have said quite a lot about that point. Surely the most convincing reason for locking anyone up is that there is no safe place other than prison for the offender to be, given their history of interaction with the public. If we could hold on to that idea, we could halve our prison population. It is the other half that we should consider—what happens when somebody goes into prison when they do not need to? It costs us a great deal of money. I suspect that the sum is dropping slightly; the walls are not getting any more expensive and more people are going in, so I guess that the figure of £40,000 is coming down, for all the wrong reasons. When someone goes into prison, it must harm their children and their dependants. Prisoners are very likely to lose their accommodation, their job and contact with family. We know all that, so I will not rehearse it. They also suffer deterioration in mental and physical health and they are likely to be introduced to drugs, if they have not met them before, and the criminal culture, if they were not already part of it. Who is in prison? We have many more folk in prison than certain European countries, and we must ask ourselves why. I am sure that Henry McLeish and his colleagues are doing so. I will pick up on various points made by members. I must agree with Pauline McNeill that people are in prison because judges and sheriffs think that they should be there. We in Parliament should not challenge what justices, judges and sheriffs are doing. If they feel that people should go to prison, that is because they do not see a credible alternative. I am with all those who say that we must work to ensure that there are credible alternatives. Until those who give the  sentences believe in the credibility of the alternatives, nothing will change. Having said that, I also agree that people should not be imprisoned for defaulting on a fine. That costs us a huge amount of money. There is no value in sending someone to prison for fine default.

No, I cannot. I would rather stick to principles than facts. I accept that the number is not huge, but the point is that if someone is not going to pay their fine, they should not have been given it in the first place. The basic principle is that we need to have alternative disposals, so that sheriffs and judges can hand down disposals that are credible, effective and enforceable and which will keep people for whom prison is wrong out of prison.

Will the member give way?

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to ensure that Scotland plays its part in tackling climate change. (S3F-487)

What steps will the Government be taking to ensure that we capitalise on the huge potential that the north-east has to contribute to Scotland's carbon reduction targets?

The First Minister made comments about merging the organisations that are responsible for the marine environment. Is that action preliminary to a future marine bill? Will the mergers improve the sustainable future of our seas and, in particular, our fishings?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that it has been  suggested that Scotland should have a national transport police service, covering ports, airports and train services. I, along with many in the business, regard that as a good idea. What are the cabinet secretary's thoughts on the subject?

I want briefly to address issues relating to the justice portfolio and to cover some areas that have not yet been covered. There is additional funding in the budget for community penalties. I encourage the Government to consider going further down that line as time goes by. Community penalties are an important part of the strategy to keep out of prison, where they incur considerable costs for the state, those who are unfortunate enough to find themselves in the criminal system but who are not really criminals. The additional funding for community penalties is therefore welcome, but it should be increased as time goes by. There is also additional funding to tackle the backlog in the appeal court. We are all aware of the old maxim that justice delayed is justice denied. The civil litigation timescales are simply daft. The position has, of course, been inherited, and I welcome the additional funding to speed things up. I also welcome Lord Gill's review, and hope that the publication of his report on how we can improve the criminal system will not be far away and that the Government will make the best of that report. I have no desire to raise police issues that have already been raised. The Justice Committee has been conducting an inquiry into policing in which, it would be fair to say, we have heard a wide range of views. I have no intention of pre-empting the report that will be published tomorrow, but anybody who has taken any notice of the evidence that we have received will know that a general view exists that our police are stretched. Therefore, I understand why the Labour Party might have wanted to lodge an amendment that would have simply increased police numbers, but it is incomprehensible that it came up with the sums—quite arbitrarily, it would appear—of £10 million from the police support services line in 2009-10 and £5 million from the police information and communications line in 2010-11. It came up with those sums without the slightest notion of the implications of its proposals—Labour members knew that at the time. Police support services are not about bureaucracy—they involve the Scottish Police College, which trains our policemen, and the forensic science service, without which many  of our criminals, including our serious criminals, would not be convicted. They include the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency and positive interventions to eliminate the risks of terrorism. The information and communications budget includes funding for all manner of communications that are essential for police officers to do their jobs. My point, which I think Christine Grahame has made before, is that in the future we must find a mechanism that interrogates the damage that is done to a budget when money is moved from it to another budget, however commendable moving that money might be. We had the opportunity to do that in our police inquiry, and committee support might have been found to address those issues if they had been raised soon enough. I am not impressed that they were not. Prisons account for another large section of the justice budget. We have not yet seriously investigated prisons, but it is clear to us that we have inherited problems from the previous Administration that will take large sums of money to address. Slopping out—although perhaps not much of it—still takes place, and there is a large prison population. The budget is fundamentally about money and addressing problems over the next year or two, but we must recognise that the money that is available to address the prison population problem will represent a significant aspect of the future budget. I welcome Fergus Ewing's decision to accept the current situation with our fire service control rooms. His decision was an important step after many years of indecision. Additional funding will be made available to provide the firelink communications system, which will be welcome and will bring general communications within our services up to date. I want to mention a couple of issues that are not covered by the figures. It is clear that if we can prevent folk from getting anywhere near a court, we will not only do them some good but save money in the budget. I therefore think that, one way or another, we must encourage widespread consideration of alternative dispute resolution. I had a meeting this morning on an issue of family law; the break-up of families happens but, by and large, such folk should be nowhere near a court. I encourage the Government to do what it can—perhaps even outside the budget debate—to keep people out of court. Of course, we would all like to have more money. Every budget line could productively be increased—that is certainly true in the area of justice. I commend the budget, as the compromise that it inevitably is, to the chamber.

I suggest that we should distinguish clearly between three kinds of weapons: the first are air-guns, the second I will call handguns, and an adequate description of the third would be shotguns. I liked Pauline McNeill's phrase: a "presumption against" possession. That would be a good way in which to tackle the problem of guns. We can do without them—people who have good reason for needing them could be subject to licence, but everyone else should be unable to get them. That would be the first step on the path. I listened to the previous speeches and have no intention of repeating what was said. Seven million air-guns are thought to be in circulation in the UK and I am told that half a million of them are in Scotland, which seems a reasonable assumption. Clearly, the numbers are far too high. Air-guns are not toys. A majority of the offences involving air weapons are attributed to people  under the age of 21, and many of those are attributed to people under the age of 15, which suggests that we have no control over where these weapons are going. As a youngster under the age of 15, I fired an air-gun in the back yard of a friend's home, but I am not sure that we were under a great deal of supervision at the time. It occurred to me that it was rather obvious that I should not point it at people, although that seems to escape others. I come to the real point, which we all know. If we have dangerous things, occasionally they will get into the wrong hands and occasionally those wrong hands will do something very silly with them. Every now and again, such a silly event will have serious consequences. We should not be surprised if someone is killed by an air rifle every now and again, sad though the event must be. If air guns are out there, they will be abused—every now and then, things will go wrong and someone will get seriously hurt. The only solution is to ensure that air-guns are simply not out there, other than in responsible hands. I note in passing that air-guns are also used to attack animals. That is quite sickening behaviour that I do not understand. The same thing applies: if air-guns are not out there, the animals will be that bit safer. I turn to handguns, which by and large have no place in civilised society, outside gun clubs. I applaud Bill Aitken's comment that criminals do not worry about the paperwork. We need to keep that thought firmly in mind in any licensing regime. We also need to be careful not to outlaw everything that may be dangerous. Some of my friends are archers; once upon a time, the bow and arrow was the principal weapon of long-range attack. Should we ban motor racing on the ground that it is plainly dangerous? Come to think of it, we should probably not climb Munros. There is a place for everything and everything in its place. I turn to the statistics on incidents of handgun use. Principally, such usage happens in our major cities, particularly in the Strathclyde, Lothian and Borders and Tayside police areas. It may surprise some people that not many incidents have happened in the Grampian Police area, and therefore not in Aberdeen. I commend Grampian Police for its approach and I would illuminate the force's approach. Police in Aberdeen have concluded that, although they are fortunate that there are not many guns around, that is unlikely to remain the case. The force notes that the use of handguns is associated in large part with drug supply and by gangs to defend their territory, and has no intention of letting anything like that happen in Aberdeen. Officers from Grampian Police have visited colleagues in the West Midlands and London to  learn from them. According to Detective Superintendent Alan Smith, the plan is "to create a hostile and unproductive environment for England-based drug dealing syndicates to operate in." Such an attitude is very commendable and is clearly appropriate for an environment in which guns are not yet available. One must commend the force's efforts and encourage police in other cities to find other approaches to reducing gun crime, which seems to be associated largely with criminal gangs. I endorse the presumption that guns should not be available, except where there is demonstrable need. I also share the widely expressed view that it does not matter how we tidy up the mess that is Scottish law on this issue. If Westminster wants to do so, that is all well and good—and the sooner, the better, please. I welcome all parties' support in achieving that aim.

I will stick with cod. I am conscious that cod mortality is falling, but it is still too high. That drives Commission thinking on a range of policy issues. What plans does the Government have to tackle the vital issue of cod mortality in 2008?

This is one of those interesting debates in which I find myself batting at number 11. In another format, that would suggest that I might be going to bowl the new ball, but on this occasion it means that I must find an issue that has not already been covered to speak about. I find such an issue in the subject of bail. The act that we are talking about—the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007—sets out the law on bail properly for the first time. It sets out that there is a general entitlement to bail and sets out the grounds for bail being refused when serious offences are involved. It streamlines the appeals procedure, provides extra protection for witnesses and, we hope, deters people from offending while they are on bail. Bail is essential—we simply could not operate without it—but, as many members have said, it is an area on which we need to keep an open watch. I am sure that, as time goes by, the Justice Committee will want to see how all the provisions are working. The act puts into primary legislation the grounds on which bail can be refused, thereby making the position clear for the first time. Such changes were essential. In 2005, the Sentencing Commission for Scotland said: "We found that in some instances the law itself was unclear; that reasons for bail decisions were not always apparent; and that sanctions for breach of bail were not always applied or were applied inconsistently." In a recent communication to several members,  the Law Society of Scotland said: "the system should be just and fair, certain and predictable and effective and efficient." That is quite a neat way of summing up what we are trying to achieve. I note that there are grounds for bail being refused when serious offences are involved. Bail can be refused when someone who has a previous conviction for a sexual or a violent offence, or for drug trafficking, is charged with such an offence. Those provisions are clearly designed to improve the safety of the public and to remove from the public sphere people who pose a serious risk to the public. If the accused is denied bail, the reasons for bail being denied must be given. Equally, if the accused is granted bail, the reasons why bail is being granted must be given. In particular, the accused must be left in no doubt about their responsibilities under those circumstances. That brings me to my first concern. As practical politicians, we issue a lot of leaflets, which a sizeable fraction of the population do not read. My advice from teachers is that at least 10 per cent, and perhaps as many as 20 per cent, of the population are functionally illiterate—in other words, they tend not to read. I hope that it is not unkind to suggest that those people are slightly more likely to finish up in front of the bench. I am concerned that written documents should not be our only way of communicating with folk in that position. If the accused is to be left in no doubt about what is going on, we might have to ensure that they are told what is going on rather than merely being given something that is written down. Remand is another issue that I would like to discuss. At present, there are approximately 1,200 prisoners on remand in Scotland; they account for about 18 per cent of the total prison population and almost 50 per cent of the total number of prison receptions. Given that 50 per cent of prisoners who are held on remand are cleared anyway, a significant amount of time is spent in dealing with people who will subsequently be found to be innocent. One of the bodies that is concerned about the number of people who are held on remand, Sacro, has estimated that the current process costs about £35 million a year. Perhaps we should give serious consideration to that aspect of our system and look at an alternative to remanding people who will not be granted bail, such as home detention. I encourage the cabinet secretary to consider whether that issue should be examined. Time is against me, so I will not talk about the streamlined appeals procedure other than to say that it will be welcomed.  Victim Support Scotland, which covers all courts in Scotland and offers free services to witnesses, has broadly welcomed the changes that will be brought about by the 2007 act. However, the organisation has raised issues. First, when a court decides whether to grant bail the accused's solicitor can put across an argument, but the victim has no say unless an argument is made via the police or the PF. There is perhaps an issue to do with balance in that regard. Secondly, victims who do not attend court are given no notice that an accused has been granted bail. The courts could provide better information to victims via the police. We all acknowledge that bail is a necessary part of the process and that every now and again the courts will get it wrong and the tabloids will have their day. It is always a matter of balance. I welcome the changes, which I am sure will significantly improve the system.

Can the minister please outline any plans that there may be to develop a school-based dental service and tell us which communities will benefit first?

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to ensure that the opportunity presented by the Trump international golf links project is not lost to Scotland. (S3F-344)

Although I understand that the First Minister is restricted in what he can say, those restrictions do not apply to back benchers such as me. Will the First Minister ensure that his ministers give speedy consideration to this project, which could be positive for the north-east region and the country as a whole?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to increase the number of sign language interpreters for deaf people. (S3O-1446)

I thank the minister for his comprehensive reply. However, organisations such as the Royal National Institute for Deaf People and the Scottish Council on Deafness say that health care providers often have to book  interpreters months in advance, depending on where the services are provided. Is the minister willing to review the placement of sign language interpreters throughout the country to ensure that we are providing effective national coverage for the deaf community?

I too congratulate Des McNulty on securing this enormously important debate. I sympathise with Liam McArthur—I was one of those small boys who did the chemistry thing. Anybody who knows the smell of sulphur dioxide—and a few people here will—understands why I rapidly got out of my bedroom when I managed to fill the room with it. When I realised that the smell would stick around, I went back in, holding my breath, opened the window, and came back out again. That may explain why, in later life, I stopped being a chemist and became a chemical engineer. Other people worried about the chemistry; I just worried about the big pots and pans that made it all happen—it was actually much more fun. I want to touch on a couple of issues, starting with the hydrogen economy. We all recognise that our generation and that of our children will have to worry about carbon. Our children and grandchildren may worry about nuclear power, although I hope that they will not have to. In the long term, when the carbon runs out, even nuclear will give us a problem. The balance of what we know—which perhaps ignores fusion, which may yet come as our salvation—is that wind, wave and other renewable sources can be converted into hydrogen by a simple process of electrolysis. Heaven knows, Scotland is not short of water to electrolyse. However, we need to solve the problem of moving that hydrogen around—I am very aware that there are real technical problems, given its boiling point. I make a serious plea that we should not forget the hydrogen economy. It will probably not save us or our children, but that it is where I think the planet needs to go.

I absolutely agree, but surely the thrust of the move to renewables should be that we power—and power in more than one sense— what needs to be powered from the right sources rather than the wrong or outdated sources. My second plea returns me to my background. I did half a chemistry degree, then half an engineering degree. A chemical engineer is someone who belongs to the Institution of Chemical Engineers, as I once did. A better definition is that a chemical engineer is someone who talks engineering when there are chemists around, talks chemistry when there are engineers around and talks golf when both are around. An even better definition, which I got from my first boss, is that a chemical engineer is someone who can do for half a crown what any fool can do for a pound. Somewhere in between those definitions, we get the right answer. My plea is that we do not do too much to differentiate too early on in our education system between science, engineering and maths. I would call them all "hard science", although they are largely called maths, physics and chemistry at school—I am not trying to ignore the biosubjects. I had the benefit of doing a degree in which it took a long time to sort out precisely which discipline I was going to train in. That approach has merits, and I encourage all those who have anything to do with secondary and tertiary education to try to ensure that those who go through it have a good grounding in hard science—in particular, a good grasp of maths, and, if remotely possible, a grasp of thermodynamics—so that when they later take a particular discipline, they come with a good background. We need more professional advisers. We need people who can do the work, people who can manage that work and people who can teach. We also need as many folk as possible in places such as the Parliament who understand what is going on. We cannot have too many technically qualified people. I applaud the Royal Society of Chemistry for today's event. Unfortunately, I have not visited it, but I may follow Elaine Murray over for a glass of wine.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to redeploy existing police officers in north-east communities. (S3O-1324)

The cabinet secretary and, indeed, every member will be well aware of the large number of police who are deployed on our city streets on Friday and Saturday nights. Is he seeking to explore the opportunities to recover the costs of policing of late-night, city-centre, alcohol-induced behaviour from those who benefit from it?

In the context of an extensive debate, I will address one specific issue that has not been mentioned much—advocates. The argument is made that it is uneconomic for advocates to be self-employed. I struggle to see why that should be the case, and so do advocates. The argument goes that if they worked in partnership, either with each other or with solicitors, it would be more economical. I do not see the logic in that, and neither do they. I am not an advocate, as members will appreciate. It appears to be the case that advocates' overheads are very small, because of the highly specialised nature of what they do. Essentially, all that an advocate needs is a good clerk, an office and time in court. I have been told that the overheads amount to less than 10 per cent of the total fees and contribute to collective activities that might comprise 15 per cent of their costs. I am also told that solicitors have to run an overhead of about 66 per cent—they are doing very well if they can beat that. Given such numbers, it is extremely difficult to see how advocates could possibly benefit by merging with each other, or how the legal profession in general would benefit if they were to join solicitors in partnerships. Although the OFT might take the view that there are economies to be made, I get the impression that it has simply not looked at the numbers. It would be useful if someone looked at the numbers and demonstrated what has not yet been demonstrated—that there are indeed efficiencies to be made. My analysis suggests that there is no such scope for efficiencies. Advocates are not barristers not simply because they work in different jurisdictions, as we all know, but because the Scottish and English legal systems have different histories. Historically, in England solicitors never had a right of audience, although they have acquired some such rights; only barristers had a right of access to courts. Proportionately, there are far more barristers in England than there are advocates in Scotland. We have somewhere between 400 and 500 advocates in Scotland. The cabinet secretary suggested that the figure is 470. I will not argue with that. The precise figure depends on how many of the people on the list are retired, and we are not sure about that.  Advocates are specialists. The huge advantage of having a referral bar of specialists is that they can take part in proceedings from different sides of the argument: one week they can appear for the defence, and the next they can appear in a different case for the prosecution. Their specialist skills can be deployed by either party in a case, depending on the circumstances. If advocates were to join a firm of solicitors or were contracted to a public body, they would necessarily always be on one side of a case. It is difficult to see how that would benefit the profession, the development of law or justice. On the basis of my analysis over the past few days of what advocates do, how they see themselves and how the system works, it does not seem that their being able to form partnerships with each other or with solicitors would bring much benefit. Although it might be fair that they should be able to form such partnerships, it seems that their doing so would not help much. The only effect of the proposal would be to restrict the number of advocates who were available for referral, which, on balance, is probably not a good thing, given how few advocates we have. However, it seems that a few restrictions might need to be eased, or perhaps even removed. The restrictions that prevent movements by qualified advocates and qualified solicitors between different branches of the profession could and should be removed. I appreciate that the debate is about what the issues might be, and that we are not really looking for answers, but I am an awkward soul, and I will bung in one of the possible answers: the restrictions—in both directions—should be removed as rapidly as possible. I also suggest that it is probably no longer appropriate for advocates to say that they should not be on the same team as solicitor advocates. Quite frankly, that seems to be restrictive and a tad difficult to defend, so it might be better if the advocates simply get rid of that rule before someone forces them to do so. Leaving aside the restrictions on drift between the solicitor and advocate sides of the profession, which should be lifted, the existing system works well. It has been argued that citizens should have direct access to advocates. In principle, the present arrangement for relationships with advocates seems to be restrictive but, again, I am struggling to see where there is a difficulty. Advocates are good at taking the legal issues and facts that have been teased out by solicitors and applying their skills and experience to what are often specialist cases. They can provide advice and, if necessary, appear in court. If everyone were to have direct access to advocates, advocates would simply have to develop the wide- ranging skills that solicitors already have, which would dilute their specialisation. The result would be that we would simply have one amorphous profession, and it is difficult to see how that would benefit anyone. I understand that professionals such as surveyors have direct access to advocates, which is perfectly reasonable. It is not obvious why any professional who can work out precisely what the issues are should not have direct access to advocates. I hope that there are no restrictions on that but, if there are, I suggest that they be removed promptly. However, the suggestion that the public—even those of us who have law degrees or similar qualifications—should have direct access to advocates does not make much sense. Of course, it is incumbent on solicitors to ensure that if the teasing-out process is short and sweet, it should be undertaken swiftly and at little expense. The problem with multidisciplinary partnerships is regulation. Conceptually, there seems to be no problem in having a regulator for the individual professionals in a partnership. For example, chartered accountants have a regulatory body and surveyors have a regulatory body. If, in some specialised markets, the relevant professional happens to be an engineer like me, they have a professional body. The Law Society regulates solicitors. Any amalgamation of the professions in a multidisciplinary partnership would not incur a problem with regulating individual partners, but it is plain that the difficulty would be in regulating the total firm if its partners were not all lawyers. That question must be addressed. It does not have a simple answer, but we need to sort it out. A legal services board to cover everything might be the only way to go, but I am not sure whether that would be a good answer. Making the Law Society responsible for all the other professionals might be better—they would just have to sign up to the same confidentiality rules. That might be the way to go, but I offer no suggestion. Regulating whole firms would be the issue, as individual professionals would not be difficult to regulate. I toss in the fact that lawyers currently have personal responsibility for their staff. Confidentiality applies not merely to lawyers but to everybody who is involved in the business train that deals with legal information, so, conceptually, it is difficult to see why other members of staff should not be bound by similar rules. I have covered the two issues that I wanted to deal with, so I will stop there.

Unlike some of the more seasoned practitioners in this sphere, I do not propose to compete on length of speech. Because we have considered the subject widely, I am looking through my notes to see how I can avoid repetition. I will start with the structural issue. Several words have been used today that I would like to pin down. It seems that the matter is as simple as A, B, C. Arbitration, A, is different from mediation, which is B for reasons that I will explain in half a moment, which is different from counselling, C. As has been pointed out, arbitration is about a voluntary agreement to put a dispute in front of an arbiter who will come to a decision that the parties will stick to. Mediation is a voluntary agreement to see whether the parties can sort out the mess. I have called that B because it happens at and after the point of breakdown. The C stands for counselling, which is a voluntary agreement to see whether the parties can sort out the mess before it gets to the point of breakdown. If I am right in saying that it is sensible to use those words in that way, I ask for consistency in the way in which we use them.  In my previous employment, I had to talk about risk, which is a correct technical term that insurers use. Sometimes we use it for hazards, sometimes we use it for probability and sometimes we use it for one multiplied by the other. In talking about risk, it is very much better not to use one of the other terms. I suggest that, in talking about arbitration, mediation and counselling—if we are happy with those terms, and I stand to be corrected—we would do well to use the terms correctly. I also make the point that those three terms are used for the willing, whereas the courts are, by and large, for the unwilling—those who have not found another way of resolving their dispute. The courts are available for those who have reached the point of breakdown, regardless of the value in dispute. Someone could go to court over a fiver—although that would be unwise—because they had not sorted out what they were going to do with it. If they had already worked out that they needed to sort out the fiver, they could probably go through mediation. The distinction between the courts and alternatives is more to do with a willingness to think about the process than it is to do with the value in dispute.

My point is that the person was willing at the point of contract, having thought about the matter beforehand. I turn to family law issues, although I do not pretend to be a practitioner in the area and I will not cover issues that other members have already considered extensively. From my experience of dealing with a constituency case, I am aware that there is a real issue with cross-border jurisdiction. It may be a technical issue, but I raise it in the context of possible European mediation. I am dealing with the case of a child who was removed from Scotland to England—I hesitate to use the word "abducted", as that would presume that the answers were known. The case has been the subject of legal proceedings north and south of the border for years, at huge expense, as members will understand. It is a classic case of something that could have been sorted out had there been a pan-European mediation process for such cases. Given the mobility of labour and people in the European Union, that may be a deficiency. I am not sure that the Scottish Government can resolve the issue instantly, but it might use its good offices to push for a resolution.  On counselling, I will pick up where I left off yesterday evening. I was at a dinner, and an experienced and eminent doctor pointed out to me that most cancer cases are admitted to accident and emergency units, because only when the patients have an acute problem do they go to hospital and find that they have an undiagnosed chronic problem. That is relevant to the issue of counselling, in particular to counselling for family issues. We like to think that the situation was better in the good old days. I am old enough to remember when London had smog, although it was probably 30 years before I realised what it was. That goes back to the late 1950s. Were those the good old days? Probably not. However, in the aftermath of the second world war, families tended to talk to each other more—we had natural family communities and neighbours. I get the impression that, in the intervening years, such things have tended to break down, and one of the reasons that we now have more family disputes is that they are no longer easily resolved internally. That leads me to the point on which I will end. It would be good if families that were breaking up recognised that they had a problem and could find counselling. Such services exist, but I get the impression that they do not exist as widely as they could. I am sure that if there were more family counselling services, a lot of what follows from breakdowns could be nipped in the bud. I am interested to know where the Government is thinking of going on that and, in particular, where it is going to put its funding to try to break the cycle of family break-up. I am sure that that is part of the Minister for Communities and Sport's planning.

I would like to address three issues. The first is the size of the problem. The second is the existing recommendations for maximum consumption. The third is the vexed issue of discounting. All members have alluded to the size of the problem. I have heard a lot of statistics but not the figure that I am about to give to the chamber, which may put the issue on a sensible footing. The average intake of alcohol in the UK, as calculated by HM Revenue and Customs, is around 19g per day. If we assume that only adults over 16 drink alcohol—clearly a doubtful assumption, but it will get us a number—that equates to 23g per day, which is almost 3 units per day. Even though the figure makes no allowance for any alcohol that may be imported from the continent or for anything that may find its way into the system illegally, that means that every man and woman over the age of 16 in the UK population drinks the equivalent of a pint and a half every day of every week of every year of their lives. That number gives members some idea of the problem that exists, because it is an average—we all know folk who drink nothing like that much. The recommendations to which Kenneth Gibson referred have been criticised recently for being no  more than guesswork. We would really like science and epidemiologists to tell us something like the following: every member of the population who consumes more than 1,000mg per week of vitamin G17 will be fine, but every member of the population who does not will get fungiitis after 20 years. The example is completely made up, so members should not quote me on it. The point is that the statistics do not come out like that. The statistics lean in one direction or another, and that will always be the case. The best answer that we can get is that the relative risk of liver disease is twice as great in men and women who drink between two and three units of alcohol per day as it is in those who drink one unit or less. If people drink four or more units per day, the risk is about five to seven times as great. That is a real figure. The nature of the available science is such that we can do no more than say that four units sounds like a sensible norm. I ask folk to recognise that all recommendations are based on that kind of science and not to expect the science to be more accurate than that—frankly, it is not going to be. Bill Aitken, who is no longer in the chamber, argued against measures to prevent discounting. From my experience of working in a soap business, I know that there are good reasons for putting bars of soap in packs of four. It makes life a great deal easier in the factory and in the transport system. The product is also much easier to handle in the shop, and it is much easier for people to put into their bags and troll off home with. There is real value in bundling that works its way right the way through the system and reduces costs for all concerned. There must be a similar effect with cans and bottles of alcoholic drinks, although I suspect that it is rather smaller. However, I have no problem in recognising that alcohol is different; in large quantities, it is dangerous stuff. I would have no problem in saying that the unit price of my can or bottle must be the same, regardless of whether I buy one or 20. If that causes other people a problem, perhaps they should think about why that is the case. Given that many folk are not very good at resisting what they think is a bargain, and those are probably the kind of people who will suffer from an alcohol problem, we owe it to them to eliminate the kind of bargains that are doing them no good at all. We should have the courage of our convictions on the issue. Discounting is not allowed in pubs, and it is not obvious to me why it should be permitted in shops or supermarkets.

As a member of the Justice Committee, I am glad that our committee is holding an inquiry into police numbers. That is enormously useful in the context of today's debate and I know that my committee colleagues will enjoy the process of learning a great deal more about what the police do and what we could do with them in the future. I will register what I think are the crucial points for the next four years. At the moment, we have approximately 16,000 police officers—the detail does not matter at this stage. I gather that about 3,000 of those good folk will retire over the next three years, which means that we face a time of unprecedented turnover and change that we will have to manage anyway. The cabinet secretary has said that he sees the numbers increasing through recruitment, improved retention and redeployment. I would like us to accept that we want police officers to become a greater part of the fabric of our communities, so I would be grateful for front-bench confirmation of that in the winding-up speech because it will be a crucial part of what needs to go on. It is already happening, but it will need to happen to a greater extent and, for that to be the case, police officers will have to spend more time in communities, which means that they will have to have longer assignments in communities. That requires some serious thinking about how police officers will be deployed. We must be careful about the concept of visibility. The point has been made that police officers are at their most visible when they are walking around, but unless incidents to which they must respond happen in front of them—sometimes they will—they will find it difficult to respond to the call. If they are walking about, they need to be very near transport, by which I mean their own cars. There is a difficult balance to strike between police officers being visible on the hoof and their being near the transport that enables them to get to the next call.

I readily agree that it is incumbent on the Government to deliver on the promise in the manifesto. I am a member of the Scottish National Party and I fought on that manifesto. Regardless of numbers, it is also important that our police are able to respond to calls. It is emerging from the Justice Committee's work that an important part of policing is the need for the police to have a greater ability to respond more effectively to the general public when they ring up and the call has been answered. It is only when those crucial parts of policing are as good as they can be that the number of police officers that we have will be able to provide the best response and deliver the best service to our community. I turn briefly to the role of police boards, whose scrutiny of how local police services work has been heard at the Justice Committee. There is a strong case to be made for examining that scrutiny because it is not clear that the boards are performing that function effectively because it seems that it might be incompatible for a police board to be both a provider of funds and a scrutinising body. I hope that that issue will be also be examined.

I congratulate Cathie Craigie on securing yet another debate on behalf of the deaf community. She has a history of doing so, and I am glad to support her on this occasion. We all recognise that education is vital to the Government's plans. I do not want to take on the minister's role, but I point out that measures such as reducing class sizes and providing free, nutritious meals for youngsters in primary 1 to primary 3, which we have just debated, are all about improving the life chances of people in our communities by acting very early on in their lives. I hope that reducing class sizes will make it easier for teachers to pick up any issues that children might have, including deafness. We have to keep everything moving in that direction. The consultation is greatly to be commended, as it is enormously important to find out what deaf children think. I hope that parents and teachers will also be consulted, because they will bring other issues to the debate. I have received an e-mail from Scotland's commissioner for children and young people, Kathleen Marshall, in which she welcomes the debate, expresses her support for our attempts to highlight the consultation and wishes it well. I pass on apologies from Sandra White, who, as Cathie Craigie will acknowledge, has been a stalwart supporter of these issues; however, she has another engagement this evening. I also apologise to those who organised the sign language demonstration. It was in my diary, but I am afraid that Parliament does not always work the way that it is supposed to and I simply never made it. Anne McGuire MP, the parliamentary under-secretary with responsibility for disabled people, said: "The Government's aim is that by 2025 disabled people should have full opportunities and choices to improve their quality of life, and be respected and included as equal members of society." Of course, in this context, we are talking about deafness as a disability. The minister went on to say: "We can only realise that vision if we listen to the aspirations and voices of young disabled people—including people with hearing impairments—as they represent the future."  We cannot legislate away hearing disability—or, indeed, any other disability. Instead, we must recognise that we will improve the life chances of these youngsters and give them opportunities only by minimising the impact of their disability on their education. As a result, any approach that we take cannot be based on protocols of legislation or on telling people what to do. Instead, we must ensure that youngsters are put in an environment in which—in this case—their deafness problem does not limit their abilities and opportunities. Indeed, we must do everything that we can to allow these youngsters to develop as fully as they can, because only by doing so will we eliminate discrimination in later life. I am afraid that, unless they enter the job market as able as they can be to contribute, it will be inevitable that they will meet discrimination later on. I welcome the debate and I hope that the minister will take the matter forward. I am sure that the Government will pay very close attention to the findings of the change your world consultation and I hope that it will do its best to meet the aspirations that the consultation reveals.

Many people have waited for what has been proposed for quite a time, and promoters of previous school meals bills—professionals and politicians—will be delighted that we seem to be making progress. There is background to consider. An extensive evaluation has been carried out very professionally in Hull, which I think confirmed that the uptake of school meals will increase. If members wish to hear about that, a half-day conference in Dundee next Tuesday will deal with it; I thought that I would plug that conference in the short space of time that is available to me. What has been proposed is part of the Government's overall programme to improve the life chances of our youngsters. In particular, the stigma of means testing for school meals will be removed. There is an opportunity to improve the quality of children's diets, and the motion should be welcomed on all sides.

As is usual at the end of a long and winding debate, there are not many things still to cover. I will, however, address two issues, both of which come under the title of risk. The first risk is simply that which is inherent in any construction operation as large as EARL would have been. It is a simple fact—I say this as a professional engineer—that a project's cost is not known until the work gets above ground. All the inherent uncertainties are beneath the contractors' feet, where they have not been until they dig, and they do not really know what they are doing until they have finished doing that. A tunnel under a live airport runway is, purely in engineering terms, a very risky place to be. Any Government that shies away from doing that is, in general engineering terms, being pretty sensible.  The second risk, if the decision is made to go ahead with the tunnelling, is the risk to the operation above the tunnel.

I would rather make my second point before giving way. Anything as small as a crack in the runway will be sufficient for the airport operator to say that airport operations ought to be stopped. Who, then, will bear the risk of the millions of pounds per week—possibly per day—that such an interruption would cause? I do not know the answer to that question, but I suspect that the risk will be borne by the public purse. Under freedom of information legislation, we were given sight of the contract that was entered into between TIE and the airport operator to push the project forward, but the contents of the guarantee clause had to be blanked out. I suspect that the clause—had we been able to see it—would have informed us that the risks of any interruption to the airport's operation would be borne by the public purse. In effect, that would be an open cheque.

I rest my case, Lord Foulkes. London is built on chalk. The chalk is pretty extensive and we know where it is. Under those circumstances, we have a fair idea of the costs involved in tunnelling. Going through absolutely solid rock is also dead easy; the problem is the stuff that is mucky on the way through. If we are also trying to divert rivers and need to deal with water, that is the worst of the lot. For both those reasons of risk, I congratulate the Government on simply steering clear of what could have been a horrible mess.

I will address some of the issues that have not been touched on, because there is no point going round the houses. I will first present my position on the Edinburgh ring road. It seems to me that a road that runs from the Forth road bridge to the top of the A1  covers most of the ground that a ring road would cover. If Patrick Harvie requires us to have something on stilts running down the river, that would be an interesting project, but I do not think that there would be much support for it. Surely, what we have around Edinburgh is a ring road. It seems to me that the consultation process about the AWPR has been less than perfect. However, we are going to have a public local inquiry. I encourage everybody who is listening or who will respond to ensure that the issues are properly aired in the PLI. If that is done once and for all on the record, people can then consider properly what has been said. There are environmental issues. We need to be aware of them and ensure that they have been properly heard. I endorse the view that the scheme will enable good park-and-ride facilities around Aberdeen; it will be of huge benefit to the centre of Aberdeen to get cars and large vehicles to the right places. I draw to the minister's attention some of the issues that will follow. There is a large procurement issue in building 46km of road—somebody will have to think carefully about how the contract will be put out and divided up. The minister is nodding; I know that he appreciates the point, but it is worth recording that we need to explore the opportunities. We need to ensure that the contractors know what they are being asked to bid for. They need to know fairly soon, given that we are talking about a large project that has to fit with all the other projects that are going on throughout the country. Our contractors cannot just drop other things to make the project happen. I turn to cost control. This hardly needs to be said in these days of the Alloa railway, trams in Edinburgh and pretty much every other project that one cares to mention, but I would like assurances from the minister that the lessons from previous projects throughout the country have been learned and that we will keep the project under control once it has been started.

I echo Bill Aitken's comments about our visit to Cornton Vale. I put on record the appreciation of all the members who went on the visit for the time and effort that the staff put in to show us round and to educate us considerably.  As a regional MSP for North East Scotland, I welcome the investment in a new Peterhead prison, which not only reflects the good work that is done by the staff in Peterhead and Aberdeen but has been widely welcomed by folk in the Scottish Prison Service. That is an extremely important point. Before I get on to the substance of my speech, which is the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, I will pick up on an aspect of Pauline McNeill's speech, in which she seemed to talk about knife crime and six-month sentences at the same time. I hope that those two do not go together because, in my view, the only people who are qualified to use a knife are surgeons and that is not what we are talking about. I would like those people who carry knives and, in particular, those who use them not to be looking at anything resembling a six-month sentence. I turn to the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, which was introduced by the previous Executive. Over the summer, I took the opportunity to do some qualitative research on the issue. I am grateful to those local authority officers who responded to my inquiries. I will pass on to members some of their general observations about how the act has been working, many of which were highly encouraging. I must be specific because time is against me. We need to encourage sheriffs, in particular, to make use of exclusion orders. Under the act, an antisocial behaviour order can, in effect, be a prohibition of almost anything. Local authorities and police warmly welcomed sheriffs preventing people from going to particular places in their communities where they would cause trouble. The fact that they could not go to those places meant that trouble did not happen. Another issue that I want to raise is the youth justice system. I will quote from the Audit Scotland report "Dealing with offending by young people", which came out in August, because it deals with a matter of wide concern. It says: "We found that the introduction of ASBOs for 12 to 15-year-olds has created tensions with approaches to dealing with offending by young people through the children's hearings system. Most councils have found it difficult, both strategically and operationally, to overcome the differences between the child-centred focus of youth justice under the children's hearings system and the community-focused design of the antisocial behaviour legislation. In essence, there is a tension between the approach which underpins the children's hearings system (and places the young person who has offended at the centre of the decision-making process) and the ASBO/community safety approach (which may place greater emphasis on the needs of the community within which the offending behaviour has taken place)." There is a widespread feeling that that tension, which some have described as a philosophical  problem, is a significant issue. It needs to be addressed because I am not convinced that social work departments know how to handle it. I rush on to what are known in the trade as CRASBOs, which are ASBOs that are imposed—under section 120, I think, of the 2004 act—after someone has been found guilty of an offence. When they have been used, they have been widely welcomed across the judicial process, but I note that only 40 criminal ASBOs were issued in 2005-06—the only period for which we have figures—and that 24 of those were issued in the Scottish Borders. That suggests that in one or two places sheriffs have got their minds around CRASBOs but—more important for this debate—in most places, they have not. I think that CRASBOs have been well received where they have been made to work, but we must encourage sheriffs elsewhere to use them and the Government to use its good offices to make that happen. I have two other thoughts to share. First, I understand that there was a lot of discussion about whether the proposals on graffiti in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill should cover flyposting. Obviously, I was not a member at the time, but I understand that, after debate, flyposting was removed. However, local authority officers think that that was a mistake. I appreciate that there are legal issues relating to who is responsible for flyposting, but the outside world would be grateful if we got the legislation to cover it. My final thought is on funding, on which the process depends. A great deal of local authority staff who work on antisocial behaviour receive short-term funding. In such circumstances, those who can see the end of the line coming and are capable of getting out are the first to do so. It is important to maintain rolling funding and to ensure as soon as possible that it is seen that funding will continue.

Continuing on the issue of a right of appeal, I  recognise that the Lord Advocate does not currently have that right, although such a right is available in other circumstances in summary cases. If such a right had existed in this case, would she have invoked it?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has to strengthen the legislation on antisocial behaviour. (S3O-257)

Does the minister agree that it takes far too long to remove offenders whose behaviour is loutish, persistent and protracted? Does he agree that we should be able to speed up the processes of dealing with those who knowingly and willingly act in defiance of the reasonable expectations of those who live around them?

This debate gives me an opportunity to speak about measurement. In the end, it is all about how we use numbers, and our numbers are only as good as our measurements. There is a certain amount of kudos attached to the phrase "thinking outside the box". I suggest that, to get good measurements, we have to stand outside the box. If we want to know whether the planet is warming up, we need to go out into space and look. We need to measure the heat coming off the planet and the heat going into the planet. That can be done quite simply and, although there are statistical problems with measuring a large sphere, that will tell us whether or not the planet is warming up. It cannot be measured down here. If we want to know, for example, whether a nuclear power station emits a lot of carbon—we will no doubt come back to that example—we do not need to consider the process whereby the uranium degrades, which has nothing to do with carbon, but to consider the amount of carbon that is involved in constructing the power station, in maintaining it, in decommissioning it and, critically, in refining the uranium fuel. Those amounts will change over time.

I absolutely agree. If I had time, I would move on to the subject of the foundations that we seem to insist on putting underneath wind turbines and other structures. However, time does not permit. In considering transport systems, we must do exactly the same thing. It is no good telling me how much carbon my car uses; I have to know what speed it is travelling at and how far it is going. If it is possible to eliminate congestion, it will be possible to eliminate my car going slowly or going nowhere and emitting a great deal of carbon for no benefit. In addressing the issues about transport systems, we need to ask ourselves how we minimise the impact of getting from A to B and back to A. We must ask ourselves whether people  can park at their local station and whether their local train runs often enough and has enough carriages to transport them to where they want to go. It is not enough to blame everything on the car. It is not enough to examine individual schemes in isolation. We have to build a big box, look at it from the outside and measure absolutely everything. I ventured into the subject of measurement because we tend not to discuss it, and that is because it is quite difficult. If we do not venture there, however, our numbers will be wrong, our calculations will be wrong and our conclusions will be wrong.

I find myself uniquely in the position of being not only a member of the Parliament but a Dundee City councillor and, perhaps even more surprisingly, a past and continuing member of the Tay Road Bridge Joint Board. Under those circumstances, I hope that members will forgive me if I address solely the matters that relate to the Tay bridge. I would like to put one or two things on record and correct one or two earlier misstatements. As far as I can see, nothing whatever will be gained by delaying the removal of the tolls on the Tay. The benefit will be better traffic flow, principally in Dundee where the evening traffic trying to get around the city centre will be vastly improved. I saw it again only on Tuesday as I drove along Riverside Drive. For those who know the waterfront in Dundee, I found a tailback halfway between Tesco and the railway bridge, and it was going nowhere very slowly. Not only will the traffic move, but fumes will be significantly reduced as a result. It is a win-win situation for Dundee, and I hope that we will make progress as fast as possible. As a member of the joint board, I was surprised by the comments about not knowing what the numbers would be. The board's capital and revenue budgets have been published regularly and are updated. Anybody who wants to know what it would cost to remove the tolls from the bridge need look no further than pieces of paper that already exist. I draw members' attention to the fact that bridges are strange structures; in fact, when they are on the scale of the Tay bridge, they are unique structures. The Tay bridge is unique and is maintained by a group of people who know it inside out—I say that advisedly, as I have been inside the bridge. However the minister proceeds to eliminate the tolls, I encourage him to ensure that the staff who maintain and inspect the bridge are kept in place. They know it and they are the stars of the show, so we need to keep them in orbit. As has been mentioned, a group of employees are clearly at risk. As I understand it, there are  currently about 20 toll collectors and one or two other folk who are involved in the banking and administration of the money. Today's conversations with the management of the Tay bridge led me to believe that, in their best estimate, about 13 folk might genuinely be surplus to requirements, given that the collectors currently undertake other activities, such as inspection. I stress that the Tay bridge board is a unique structure. Unlike FETA, it has no other purpose or activity. Therefore, any employee who finds themselves redundant, in the sense of no longer having their current job, will genuinely be redundant and will not be likely to be redeployed. Some time ago—it feels like last week, but it was probably about a year ago—the councillors from Dundee, Fife and Angus who make up the board discussed what we would like to do if the situation were to arise. As councillors, we agreed that we would like to find spaces for any surplus employees, but we had to acknowledge that we have no power to do so and that it is not our responsibility to do so. Therefore, I impress upon the Parliament and the minister that we have a unique—I use the word for the fourth or fifth time—situation that must be addressed. The folk who are involved need the very best that we can give them, please.

The Peterhead carbon capture project is a sad reminder that—if I may borrow a legal phrase from down south—delay defeats enterprise. It seems that we are too often beholden to Westminster. What plans does the Executive have to speed up the development of technologies and processes in Scotland in such a way that, when we know what we want to do, our colleagues down south cannot slow down that development?